K.1   Introduction                                                        K-2
K.2   A Survey of RISC Architectures for Desktop, Server, and Embedded
           Computers                                                      K-3
K.3   The Intel 80x86                                                    K-30
K.4   The VAX Architecture                                               K-50
K.5   The IBM 360/370 Architecture for Mainframe Computers               K-69
K.6   Historical Perspective and References                              K-75
K
    Survey of Instruction
    Set Architectures

    RISC: any computer announced after 1985.
                                                 Steven Przybylski
                                    A Designer of the Stanford MIPS

                K.1       Introduction
                          This appendix covers 10 instruction set architectures, some of which remain a vital
                          part of the IT industry and some of which have retired to greener pastures. We keep
                          them all in part to show the changes in fashion of instruction set architecture
                          over time.
                               We start with eight RISC architectures, using RISC V as our basis for compar-
                          ison. There are billions of dollars of computers shipped each year for ARM (includ-
                          ing Thumb-2), MIPS (including microMIPS), Power, and SPARC. ARM
                          dominates in both the PMD (including both smart phones and tablets) and the
                          embedded markets.
                               The 80x86 remains the highest dollar-volume ISA, dominating the desktop and
                          the much of the server market. The 80x86 did not get traction in either the embed-
                          ded or PMD markets, and has started to lose ground in the server market. It has
                          been extended more than any other ISA in this book, and there are no plans to stop
                          it soon. Now that it has made the transition to 64-bit addressing, we expect this
                          architecture to be around, although it may play a smaller role in the future then
                          it did in the past 30 years.
                               The VAX typifies an ISA where the emphasis was on code size and offering a
                          higher level machine language in the hopes of being a better match to programming
                          languages. The architects clearly expected it to be implemented with large amounts
                          of microcode, which made single chip and pipelined implementations more chal-
                          lenging. Its successor was the Alpha, a RISC architecture similar to MIPS and
                          RISC V, but which had a short life.
                               The vulnerable IBM 360/370 remains a classic that set the standard for many
                          instruction sets to follow. Among the decisions the architects made in the early
                          1960s were:

                          ■   8-bit byte
                          ■   Byte addressing
                          ■   32-bit words
                          ■   32-bit single precision floating-point format + 64-bit double precision floating-
                              point format
                          ■   32-bit general-purpose registers, separate 64-bit floating-point registers
                          ■   Binary compatibility across a family of computers with different cost-
                              performance
                          ■   Separation of architecture from implementation

                              As mentioned in Chapter 2, the IBM 370 was extended to be virtualizable, so it
                          had the lowest overhead for a virtual machine of any ISA. The IBM 360/370
                          remains the foundation of the IBM mainframe business in a version that has
                          extended to 64 bits.

      K.2      A Survey of RISC Architectures for Desktop, Server,
               and Embedded Computers
               Introduction
               We cover two groups of Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) architectures in
               this section. The first group is the desktop, server RISCs, and PMD processors:

               ■   Advanced RISC Machines ARMv8, AArch64, the 64-bit ISA,
               ■   MIPS64, version 6, the most recent the 64-bit ISA,
               ■   Power version 3.0, which merges the earlier IBM Power architecture and the
                   PowerPC architecture.
               ■   RISC-V, specifically RV64G, the 64-bit extension of RISC-V.
               ■   SPARCv9, the 64-bit ISA.

               As Figure K.1 shows these architectures are remarkably similar.
                    There are two other important historical RISC processors that are almost iden-
               tical to those in the list above: the DEC Alpha processor, which was made by Dig-
               ital Equipment Corporation from 1992 to 2004 and is almost identical to MIPS64.
               Hewlett-Packard’s PA-RISC was produced by HP from about 1986 to 2005, when
               it was replaced by Itanium. PA-RISC is most closely related to the Power ISA,
               which emerged from the IBM Power design, itself a descendant of IBM 801.
                    The second group is the embedded RISCs designed for lower-end applications:

               ■   Advanced RISC Machines, Thumb-2: an 32-bit instruction set with 16-bit and
                   32-bit instructions. The architecture includes features from both ARMv7
                   and ARMv8.
               ■   microMIPS64: a version of the MIPS64 instruction set with 16-it
                   instructions, and
               ■   RISC-V Compressed extension (RV64GC), a set of 16-bit instructions added
                   to RV64G

               Both RV64GC and microMIPS64 have corresponding 32-bit versions: RV32GC
               and microMIPS32.
                   Since the comparison of the base 32-bit or 64-bit desktop and server architec-
               ture will examine the differences among those ISAs, our discussion of the embed-
               ded architectures focuses on the 16-bit instructions. Figure K.2 shows that these
               embedded architectures are also similar. In all three, the 16-bit instructions are ver-
               sions of 32-bit instructions, typically with a restricted set of registers.The idea is to
               reduce the code size by replacing common 32-bit instructions with 16-bit versions.
               For RV32GC or Thumb-2, including the 16-bit instructions yields a reduction in
               code size to about 0.73 of the code size using only the 32-bit ISA (either RV32G
               or ARMv7).
Figure K.1 Summary of the most recent version of five architectures for desktop, server, and PMD use (all had
earlier versions). Except for the number of data address modes and some instruction set details, the integer instruc-
tion sets of these architectures are very similar. Contrast this with Figure K.29. In ARMv8, register 31 is a 0 (like register
0 in the other architectures), but when it is used in a load or store, it is the current stack pointer, a special purpose
register. We can either think of SP-based addressing as a different mode (which is how the assembly mnemonics
operate) or as simply a register + offset addressing mode (which is how the instruction is encoded).

Figure K.2 Summary of three recent architectures for embedded applications. All three use 16-bit extensions of a
base instruction set. Except for number of data address modes and a number of instruction set details, the integer
instruction sets of these architectures are similar. Contrast this with Figure K.29. An earlier 16-bit version of the MIPS
instruction set, called MIPS16, was created in 1995 and was replaced by microMIPS32 and microMIPS64. The first
Thumb architecture had only 16-bit instructions and was created in 1996. Thumb-2 is built primarily on ARMv7,
the 32-bit ARM instruction set; it offers 16 registers. RISC-V also defines RV32E, which has only 16 registers, includes
the 16-bit instructions, and cannot have floating point. It appears that most implementations for embedded appli-
cations opt for RV32C or RV64GC.

                   A key difference among these three architectures is the structure of the base
               32-bit ISA. In the case of RV64GC, the 32-bit instructions are exactly those of
               RV64G. This is possible because RISC V planned for the 16-it option from the
               beginning, and branch addresses and jump addresses are specified to 16-it
               boundaries. In the case of microMIPS64, the base ISA is MIPS64, with one
               change: branch and jump offsets are interpreted as 16-bit rather than 32-bit
               aligned. (microMIPS also uses the encoding space that was reserved in MIPS64
               for user-defined instruction set extensions; such extensions are not part of the
               base ISA.)
                   Thumb-2 uses a slightly different approach. The 32-bit instructions in Thumb-
               2 are mostly a subset of those in ARMv7; certain features that were dropped in
               ARMv8 are not included (e.g., conditional execution of most instructions and
               the ability to write the PC as a GPR). Thumb-2 also includes a few dozen instruc-
               tions introduced in ARMv8, specifically bit field manipulation, additional system
               instructions, and synchronization support. Thus, the 32-bit instructions in Thumb-
               2 constitute a unique ISA.
                   Earlier versions of the 16-bit instruction sets for MIPS (MIPS16) and ARM
               (Thumb), took the approach of creating a separate mode, invoked by a procedure
               call, to transfer control to a code segment that employed only 16-bit instructions.
                   The 16-bit instruction set was not complete and was only intended for user pro-
               grams that were code-size critical.
                   One complication of this description is that some of the older RISCs have been
               extended over the years. We decided to describe the most recent versions of the
               architectures: ARMv8 (the 64-bit architecture AArch64), MIPS64 R6, Power
               v3.0, RV64G, and SPARC v9 for the desktop/server/PMD, and the 16-bit subset
               of the ISAs for microMIPS64, RV64GC, and Thumb-2.
                   The remaining sections proceed as follows. After discussing the addressing
               modes and instruction formats of our RISC architectures, we present the survey
               of the instructions in five steps:

               ■   Instructions found in the RV64G core, described in Appendix A.
               ■   Instructions not found in the RV64G or RV64GC but found in two or more of
                   the other architectures. We describe and organize these by functionality, e.g.
                   instructions that support extended integer arithmetic.
               ■   Instruction groups unique to ARM, MIPS, Power, or SPARC, organized by
                   function.
               ■   Multimedia extensions of the desktop/server/PMD RISCs
               ■   Digital signal-processing extensions of the embedded RISCs

               Although the majority of the instructions in these architectures are included, we
               have not included every single instruction; this is especially true for the Power
               and ARM ISAs, which have many instructions.

                           Addressing Modes and Instruction Formats
                           Figure K.3 shows the data addressing modes supported by the desktop/server/
                           PMD architectures. Since all, but ARM, have one register that always has the value
                           0 when used in address modes, the absolute address mode with limited range can be
                           synthesized using register 0 as the base in displacement addressing. (This register
                           can be changed by arithmetic-logical unit (ALU) operations in PowerPC, but is
                           always zero when it is used in an address calculation.) Similarly, register indirect
                           addressing is synthesized by using displacement addressing with an offset of 0.
                           Simplified addressing modes is one distinguishing feature of RISC architectures.
                               As Figure K.4 shows, the embedded architectures restrict the registers that
                           can be accessed with the 16-bit instructions, typically to only 8 registers, for most
                           instructions, and a few special instructions that refer to other registers. Figure K.5
                           shows the data addressing modes supported by the embedded architectures in their
                           16-bit instruction mode. These versions of load/store instructions restrict the reg-
                           isters that can be used in address calculations, as well as significantly shorten the
                           immediate fields, used for displacements.
                               References to code are normally PC-relative, although jump register indirect is
                           supported for returning from procedures, for case statements, and for pointer func-
                           tion calls. One variation is that PC-relative branch addresses are often shifted left 2
                           bits before being added to the PC for the desktop RISCs, thereby increasing the
                           branch distance. This works because the length of all instructions for the desktop

Figure K.3 Summary of data addressing modes supported by the desktop architectures, where B, H, W, D indi-
cate what datatypes can use the addressing mode. Note that ARM includes two different types of address modes
with updates, one of which is included in Power.

Figure K.4 Register encodings for the 16-bit subsets of microMIPS64, RV64GC, and Thumb-2, including the core
general purpose registers, and special-purpose registers accessible by some instructions.

Figure K.5 Summary of data addressing modes supported by the embedded architectures. microMIPS64, RV64c,
and Thumb-2 show only the modes supported in 16-bit instruction formats. The stack pointer in RV64GC and micro-
MIPS64 is a designed GPR; it is another version of r31 is Thumb-2. In microMIPS64, the global pointer is register 30 and
is used by the linkage convention to point to the global variable data pool. Notice that typically only 8 registers are
accessible as base registers (and as we will see as ALU sources and destinations).

                              RISCs is 32 bits and instructions must be aligned on 32-bit words in memory.
                              Embedded architectures and RISC V (when extended) have 16-bit-long instruc-
                              tions and usually shift the PC-relative address by 1 for similar reasons.
                                   Figure K.6 shows the most important instruction formats of the desktop/server/
                              PMD RISC instructions. Each instruction set architecture uses four primary
                              instruction formats, which typically include 90–98% of the instructions. The
                              register-register format is used for register-register ALU instructions, while the
                              ALU immediate format is used for ALU instructions with an immediate operand
                              and also for loads and stores. The branch format is used for conditional branches,
                              and the jump/call format for unconditional branches (jumps) and procedures calls.
                                   There are a number of less frequently used instruction formats that Figure K.6
                              leaves out. Figure K.7 summarizes these for the desktop/server/PMD architectures.
                                   Unlike, their 32-bit base architectures, the 16-bit extensions (microMIPS64,
                              RV64GC, and Thumb-2) are focused on minimizing code. As a result, there are
                              a larger number of instruction formats, even though there are far fewer instructions.

                                              31                    25                     20              15                10                      4                 0

                                     ARM              Op6                 Opx5                   Rs15             Const5                Rs25                Rd5
                Register-register
                                     MIPS             Op6                 Rs15                   Rs25              Rd5              Const5                Opx6

                                     Power            Op6                     Rd5                Rs15             Rs25                            Opx11

                                     RISC-V    Opx2/Const7                     Rs25                Rs15          Opx3             Rd5                     Op7

                                     SPARC     Op2          Rd5                 Opx6                    Rs15        0               Opx8                    Rs25

                                              31     29                  24                       18               13 12                              4                0
                                              31                    25                     20              15                                                          0

                                     ARM              Op6                Opx4                             Const12                           Rs15            Rd5
                Register-immediate

                                     MIPS             Op6                 Rs15                   Rd5                                Const16

                                     Power            Op6                     Rd5                Rs15                               Const16

                                     RISC-V                       Const12                          Rs15          Opx3         Rd5                         Op7

                                     SPARC     Op2          Rd5                     Opx6                Rs15        1                          Const13

                                              31     29                  24                       18               13 12                                               0
                                              31                    25                     20              15                                                          0

                                     Arm              Op6                                                 Const21                                           Rs15

                                     MIPS             Op6                 Rs15              Opx5/Rs25                                   Const16
                Branch

                                     Power            Op6                 Opx6                   Rs15                              Const14                       Opx22

                                     RISC-V        Const7                      Rs25                Rs15          Opx3        Const5                   Op7

                                     SPARC     Op2                   Opx11                                                        Const19

                                              31     29                                           18                    12                                         1   0
                                              31                    25                     20                                                                          0

                                     ARM              Op6                                                         Const26

                                     MIPS             Op6                                                          Const26
                Jump/call

                                     Power            Op6                                                       Const24                                           Opx2

                                     RISC-V                                             Const21                                   Rd5                     Op7

                                     SPARC     Op2                                                        Const30

                                              31     29                                     20             15           12                                        1    0

                                                     Opcode                          Register                  Constant

Figure K.6 Instruction formats for desktop/server RISC architectures. These four formats are found in all five archi-
tectures. (The superscript notation in this figure means the width of a field in bits.) Although the register fields are
located in similar pieces of the instruction, be aware that the destination and two source fields are sometimes scram-
bled. Op ¼ the main opcode, Opx ¼ an opcode extension, Rd ¼ the destination register, Rs1 ¼ source register 1, Rs2
¼ source register 2, and Const ¼ a constant (used as an immediate, address, mask, or sift amount). Although the labels
on the instruction formats tell where various instructions are encoded, there are variations. For example, loads and
stores, both use the ALU immediate form in MIPS. In RISC-V, loads use the ALU immediate format, while stores use the
branch format.

Figure K.7 Other instruction formats beyond the four major formats of the previous figure. In some cases, there
are formats very similar to one of the four core formats, but where a register field is used for other purposes. The
Power architecture also includes a number of formats for vector operations.

                             microMIPs64 and RV64GC have eight and seven major formats, respectively, and
                             Thumb-2 has 15. As Figure K.8 shows, these involve varying number of register
                             operands (0 to 3), different immediate sizes, and even different size register spec-
                             ifiers, with a small number of registers accessible my most instructions, and fewer
                             instructions able to access all 32 registers.

                             Instructions
                             The similarities of each architecture allow simultaneous descriptions, starting with
                             the operations equivalent to the RISC-V 64-bit ISA.

                Opcode   Register    Immediate
                main:    specifiers x field
Architecture    extended length      length             Typical instructions
microMIPS64 6               none          10            Jumps
                6           1x5           5             Register-register operation (32 registers) and Load using SP
                                                        as base register; any destination
                6           1x3           7             Branches equal/not equal zero. Loads using GP. as base.
                6:4         2x3                         Register-register operation, rd/rs1, and rs2; 8 registers
                6:1         2x3           3             Register-register immediate, rd/rs1, and rs2; 8 registers
                6           2x3           4             Loads and stores; 8 registers
                6:4         2x3                         Register-register operation, rd, and rs1; 8 registers
                6           2x5                         Register-register operation; 32 registers.
RV64GC          2:3                       11            Jumps
                2:3         1x3           7             Branch
                2:3         1x3           8             Immediate one source register.
                2:3         1x5           6             Store using SP as base.
                2:3         1x5           6             ALU immediate and load using SP as base.
                2:4         2x5                         Register-register operation
                2:3         2x3           5             Loads and stores using 8 registers.
Thumb-2         3:2         2x3           5             Shift, move, load/store word/byte
                3:2         1x3           8             immediates: add, subtract, move, and compare
                4:1         1x3           8             Load/store with stack pointer as base, Add to SP or PC,
                                                        Load/store multiple
                4:3         3x3                         Load register indexed
                4:4                       8             Conditional branch, system instruction
                4:12                                    Miscellaneous: 22 different instructions with 12 formats
                                                        (includes compare and branch on zero, pop/push registers,
                                                        adjust stack pointer, reverse bytes, IF-THEN instruction).
                5           1x3           8             Load relative to PC
                5                         11            Unconditional branch
                6:1         3x3                         Add/subtract
                6:3         1x4, 1x3                    Special data processing
                6:4         2x3                         Logical data processing
                6:6         1x4                         Branch and change instruction set (ARM vs. Thumb)

Figure K.8 Instruction formats for the 16-bit instructions of microMIPS64, RV64GC, and Thumb-2. For instructions
with a destination and two sources, but only two register fields, the instruction uses one of the registers as both
source and destination. Note that the extended opcode field (or function field) and immediate field sometimes over-
lap or are identical. For RV64GC and microMIPS64, all the formats are shown; for Thumb-2, the Miscellaneous format
includes 22 instructions with 12 slightly different formats; we use the extended opcode field, but a few of these
instructions have immediate or register fields.

                RV64G Core Instructions
                Almost every instruction found in the RV64G is found in the other architectures, as
                Figures K.9 through K.19 show. (For reference, definitions of the RISC-V instruc-
                tions are found in Section A.9.) Instructions are listed under four categories: data
                transfer (Figure K.9); arithmetic, logical (Figure K.10); control (Figure K.11 and
                Figure K.12); and floating point (Figure K.13).
                    If a RV64G core instruction requires a short sequence of instructions in other
                architectures, these instructions are separated by semicolons in Figure K.9 through
                Figure K.13. (To avoid confusion, the destination register will always be the left-
                most operand in this appendix, independent of the notation normally used with
                each architecture.).

                Compare and Conditional Branch
                Every architecture must have a scheme for compare and conditional branch, but
                despite all the similarities, each of these architectures has found a different way
                to perform the operation! Figure K.11 summarizes the control instructions, while
                Figure K.12 shows details of how conditional branches are handled. SPARC uses
                the traditional four condition code bits stored in the program status word: negative,
                zero, carry, and overflow. They can be set on any arithmetic or logical instruction;
                unlike earlier architectures, this setting is optional on each instruction. An explicit
                option leads to fewer problems in pipelined implementation. Although condition
                codes can be set as a side effect of an operation, explicit compares are synthesized
                with a subtract using r0 as the destination. SPARC conditional branches test con-
                dition codes to determine all possible unsigned and signed relations. Floating point
                uses separate condition codes to encode the EEE 754 conditions, requiring a
                floating-point compare instruction. Version 9 expanded SPARC branches in four
                ways: a separate set of condition codes for 64-bit operations; a branch that tests the
                contents of a register and branches if the value is =, not =, <, <=, >=, or
                <= 0; three more sets of floating-point condition codes; and branch instructions
                that encode static branch prediction.
                    Power also uses four condition codes: less than, greater than, equal, and sum-
                mary overflow, but it has eight copies of them. This redundancy allows the Power
                instructions to use different condition codes without conflict, essentially giving
                Power eight extra 4-bit registers. Any of these eight condition codes can be the target
                of a compare instruction, and any can be the source of a conditional branch. The
                integer instructions have an option bit that behaves as if the integer is followed
                by a compare to zero that sets the first condition “register.” Power also lets the second
                “register” be optionally set by floating-point instructions. PowerPC provides logical
                operations among these eight 4-bit condition code registers (CRAND, CROR,
                CRXOR, CRNAND, CRNOR, CREQV), allowing more complex conditions to be
                tested by a single branch. Finally, Power includes a set of branch count registers,
                that are automatically decremented when tested, and can be used in a branch con-
                dition. There are also special instructions for moving from/to the condition register.

Figure K.9 Desktop RISC data transfer instructions equivalent to RV64G core. A sequence of instructions to syn-
thesize a RV64G instruction is shown separated by semicolons. The MIPS and Power instructions for atomic opera-
tions load and conditionally store a pair of registers and can be used to implement the RV64G atomic operations with
at most one intervening ALU instruction. The SPARC instructions: compare-and-swap, swap, LDSTUB provide atomic
updates to a memory location and can be used to build the RV64G instructions. The Power3 instructions provide all
the functionality, as the RV64G instructions, depending on a function field.

Figure K.10 Desktop RISC arithmetic/logical instructions equivalent to RISC-V integer ISA. MIPS also provides
instructions that trap on arithmetic overflow, which are synthesized in other architectures with multiple instructions.
Note that in the “Arithmetic/logical” category all machines but SPARC use separate instruction mnemonics to indicate
an immediate operand; SPARC offers immediate versions of these instructions but uses a single mnemonic. (Of
course, these are separate opcodes!)

Instruction name            ARMv8          MIPS64           PowerPC          RISC-V             SPARC v.9
Branch on integer           B.cond,        BEQ, BNE, BC                      BEQ, BNE,          BR_Z, BPcc
compare                     CBZ, CBNZ      B_Z (<,                           BLT, BGE,          (<, >,
                                           >,                                BLTU, BGEU         <=, >=, =,
                                           <=, >=)                                              not=)
                                           OR
                                           S***; BEZ
Branch on floating-point B.cond            BC1T,            BC               BEZ, BNZ           FBPfcc (<, >,
compare                                    BC1F                                                 <=,
                                                                                                >=, =,...)
Jump, jump register         B, BR          J, JR            B, BCLR,         JAL, JALR          BA, JMPL
                                                            BCCTR            (with x0)          r0,...
Call, call register         BL, BLR        JAL,             BL, BLA,         JAL, JALR          CALL, JMPL
                                           JALR             BCLRL,
                                                            BCCTRL
Trap                        SVC, HVC,      BREAK            TW, TWI          ECALL              Ticc, SIR
                            SMC
Return from interrupt       ERET           JR; ERET         RFI              EBREAK             DONE, RETRY,
                                                                                                RETURN

Figure K.11 Desktop RISC control instructions equivalent to RV64G.

                                    ARMv8         MIPS64            PowerPC              RISC-V           SPARC v.9
Number of condition code bits       16 (8 + the   none              8   4 both           none             2 4
(integer and FP)                    inverse)                                                              integer,
                                                                                                          4 2 FP
Basic compare instructions          1 integer; 1 1 integer, 1 FP    4 integer, 2 FP      2 integer; 3 FP 1 FP
(integer and FP)                    FP
Basic branch instructions           1             2 integer, 1 FP   1 both               4 integer (used 3 integer,
(integer and FP)                                                                         for FP as well) 1 FP
Compare register with register/     —             =, not=           —                    =, not =, >=, < —
constant and branch
Compare register to zero and        —             =, not=, <, <=,   —                    =, not=, <, <=, =, not=, <,
branch                                            >, >=                                  >, >=           <=, >, >=

Figure K.12 Summary of five desktop RISC approaches to conditional branches. Integer compare on SPARC is
synthesized with an arithmetic instruction that sets the condition codes using r0 as the destination.

                                    RISC-V and MIPS are most similar. RISC-V uses a compare and branch with a
                               full set of arithmetic comparisons. MIPS also uses compare and branch, but the
                               comparisons are limited to equality and tests against zero. This limited set of con-
                               ditions simplifies the branch determination (since an ALU operation is not required
                               to test the condition), at the cost of sometimes requiring the use of a set-on-less-than
                               instruction (SLT, SLTI, SLTU, SLTIU), which compares two operands and then
                               set the destination register to 1 if less and to 0 otherwise. Figure K.12 provides

Floating point (instruc-
tion formats)                R-R           R-R                      R-R             R-R                     R-R

Instruction name             ARMv8         MIPS64                   PowerPC         RISC-V                  SPARC v.9
Add single, double           FADD          ADD.*                    FADD*           FADD.*                  FADD*
Subtract single, double      FSUB          SUB.*                    FSUB*           FSUB.*                  FSUB*
Multiply single, double      FMUL          MUL.*                    FMUL*           FMUL.*                  FMUL*
Divide single, double        FDIV          DIV.*                    FDIV*           FDIV.*                  FDIV*
Square root single, double   FSQRT         SQRT.*                   FSQRT*          FSQRT.*                 FSQRT*
Multiply add; Negative       FMADD,        MADD.*                   FMADD*,         FMADD.*
multiply add: single,        FNMADD        NMAD.*                   FNMADD*         FNMADD.*
double
Multiply subtract single,    FMSUB,        MSUB.*,                  FMSUB*,         FMSUB.*,
double, Negative multiply    FNMSUB        NMSUB.*                  FNMSUB*         FNMSUB.*
subtract: single, double
Copy sign or negative sign FMOV,           FMOV.*, FNEG.*           FMOV*,          FSGNJ.*,                FMOV*,
double or single to another FNEG                                    FNEG*           FSGNJN.*                FNEG*
FP register
Replace sign bit with XOR FABS             FABS.*                   FABS*           FSGNJX.*                FABS*
of sign bits single double
Maximum or minimum           FMAX,         MAX.*, MIN.*                             FMAX.*, FMIN.*
single, double               FMIN
Classify floating point                    CLASS.*                                  FCLASS.*
value single double
Compare                      FCMP          CMP.*                    FCMP*           FCMP.*                  FCMP*
Convert between FP single FCVT             CVT, CEIL,                               FCVT                    F*TO*
or double and FP single or                 FLOO R
double, OR integer single
or double, signed and
unsigned with rounding

Figure K.13 Desktop RISC floating-point instructions equivalent to RV64G ISA with an empty entry meaning that
the instruction is unavailable. ARMv8 uses the same assembly mnemonic for single and double precision; the reg-
ister designator indicates the precision. “*” is used as an abbreviation for S or D. For floating point compares all con-
ditions: equal, not equal, less than, and less-then or equal are provided. Moves operate in both directions from/to
integer registers. Classify sets a register based on whether the floating point quantity is plus or minus infinity, denorm,
+/ ? 0, etc.). The sign-injection instructions take two operands, but are primarily used to form floating point move,
negate, and absolute value, which are separate instructions in the other ISAs.

                              additional details on conditional branch. RISC-V floating point comparisons sets an
                              integer register to 0 or 1, and then use conditional branches on that content.MIPS also
                              uses separate floating-point compare, which sets a floating point register to 0 or 1,
                              which is then tested by a floating-point conditional branch.

                                  ARM is similar to SPARC, in that it provides four traditional condition codes
                              that are optionally set. CMP subtracts one operand from the other and the difference
                              sets the condition codes. Compare negative (CMN) adds one operand to the other,
                              and the sum sets the condition codes. TST performs logical AND on the two oper-
                              ands to set all condition codes but overflow, while TEQ uses exclusive OR to set
                              the first three condition codes. Like SPARC, the conditional version of the ARM
                              branch instruction tests condition codes to determine all possible unsigned and
                              signed relations. ARMv8 added both bit-test instructions and also compare and
                              branch against zero. Floating point compares on ARM, set the integer condition
                              codes, which are used by the B.cond instruction.
                                  As Figure K.13 shows the floating point support is similar on all five
                              architectures.

                              RV64GC Core 16-bit Instructions
                              Figures K.14 through K.17 summarize the data transfer, ALU, and control instruc-
                              tions for our three embedded processors: microMIPS64, RV64GC, and Thumb-2.
                              Since these architectures are all based on 32-bit or 64-bit versions of the full archi-
                              tecture, we focus our attention on the functionality implemented by the 16-bit
                              instructions. Since floating point is optional, we do not include it. I

                                                         microMIPS64           RV64GC             Thumb-2
Instruction name                                         rs1;rs2/dst; offset    rs1;rs2/dst; offset rs1;rs2/dst; offset

Load word                                                       8;8;4                 8;8;5                  8;8;5
Load double word                                                                      8;8;5
Load word with stack pointer as base register                  1;32;5                1;32;6                  1;3;8
Load double word with stack pointer as base register                                 1;32;6
Store word                                                      8;8;4                 8;8;5                  8;8;5
Store double word                                                                     8;8;5
Store word with stack pointer as base register                 1;32;5                1;32;6                  1;3;8
Store double with stack pointer as base register                                     1;32;6

Figure K.14 Embedded RISC data transfer instructions equivalent to RV64GC 16-bit ISA; a blank indicates that the
instruction is not a 16-bit instruction. Rather than show the instruction name, where appropriate, we show the num-
ber of registers that can the base register for the address calculation, followed by the number of registers that can be
the destination for a load or the source for a store, and finally, the size of the immediate used for address calculation.
For example: 8; 8; 5 for a load means that there are 8 possible base registers, 8 possible destination registers for the
load, and a 5-bit offset for the address calculation. For a store, 8; 8; 5, specifies that the source of the value to store
comes from one of 8 registers. Remember that Thumb-2 also has 32-bit instructions (although not the full ARMv8 set)
and that RV64GC and microMIPS64 have the full set of 32-bit instructions in RV64I or MIPS64.

Instruction Name/Function                    microMIPS64                     RV64GC                    Thumb-2
Load immediate                               8;7                             32;6                      8;8
Load upper immediate                                                         32;6
add immediate                                32;4                            32;6                      8;8;3
add immediate word (32 bits) & sign                                          32;6
extend
add immediate to stack pointer               1;9                             1;6                       1;7
                                                                             (adds 16x imm.)
add immediate to stack pointer store         1;8;6                           1;8;6
in reg.                                                                      (adds 4x imm.)
shift left/right logical                     8;8;3 (shift amt.)              8;6(shift amt.)           8;8;5 (shift amt.)
shift right arithmetic                                                       8;6(shift amt.)           8;8;5 (shift amt.)
AND immediate                                8;8;4                           8;6                       8;8
move                                         32;32                           32;32                     16;16
add                                          8;8;8                           32;32                     8;8;8
                                                                                                       16;16
AND, OR, XOR                                 8;8                             8;8                       8;8
subtract                                     8;8;8                           8;8                       8;8;8
add word, subtract word (32 bits)                                            8;8
& sign extend

Figure K.15 ALU instructions provided in RV64GC and the equivalents, if any, in the 16-bit instructions of micro-
MIPS64 or Thumb-2. An entry shows the number of register sources/destinations, followed by the size of the imme-
diate field, if it exists for that instruction. The add to stack pointer with scaled immediate instructions are used for
adjusting the stack pointer and creating a pointer to a location on the stack. In Thumb, the add has two forms one
with three operands from the 8-register subset (Lo) and one with two operands but any of 16-registers.

                                                     microMIPS64               RV64GC                Thumb-2
Unconditional branch                                 10-bit offset             11-bit offset         11-bit offset
Unconditional branch and link                                                  11-bit offset         11-bit offset
Unconditional branch to register w/wo link           any of 32 registers       any of 32 registers
Compare register to zero (=/!=) and branch           8 registers; 7-bit offset 8 registers; 8-bit    no: but see caption
                                                                               offset

Figure K.16 Summary of three embedded RISC approaches to conditional branches. A blank indicates that
the instruction does not exist. Thumb-2 uses 4 condition code bits; it provides a conditional branch that tests the
4-bit condition code and has a branch offset of 8 bits.

Function             Definition              ARMv8             MIPS64        PowerPC                  SPARC v.9
Load/store           Loads or stores 2 or   Load pair,                      Load store
multiple registers   more registers         store pair                      multiple (<=31
                                                                            registers),
Cache                Modifies status of a   Prefetch          CACHE,        Prefetch                 Prefetch
manipulation and     cache line or does a                     PREFETCH
prefetch             prefetch

Figure K.17 Data transfer instructions not found in RISC-V core but found in two or more of the five desktop
architectures. SPARC requires memory accesses to be aligned, while the other architectures support unaligned
access, albeit, often with major performance penalties. The other architectures do not require alignment, but may
use slow mechanisms to handle unaligned accesses.MIPS provides a set of instructions to handle misaligned
accesses: LDL and LDR (load double left and load double right instructions) work as a pair to load a misaligned word;
the corresponding store instructions perform the inverse. The Prefetch instruction causes a cache prefetch, while
CACHE provides limited user control over the cache state.

                              Instructions: Common Extensions beyond RV64G
                              Figures K.15 through K.18 list instructions not found in Figures K.9 through K.13
                              in the same four categories (data transfer, ALU, and control. The only significant
                              floating point extension is the reciprocal instruction, which both MIPS64 and
                              Power support. Instructions are put in these lists if they appear in more than
                              one of the standard architectures. Recall that Figure K.3 on page 6 showed the
                              address modes supported by the various instruction sets. All three processors pro-
                              vide more address modes than provided by RV64G. The loads and stores using
                              these additional address modes are not shown in Figure K.17, but are effectively
                              additional data transfer instructions. This means that ARM has 64 additional load
                              and store instructions, while Power3 has 12, and MIPS64 and SPARVv9 each
                              have 4.
                                  To accelerate branches, modern processors use dynamic branch prediction (see
                              Section 3.3). Many of these architectures in earlier versions supported delayed
                              branches, although they have been dropped or largely eliminated in later versions

Name                   Definition                      ARMv8    MIPS64                PowerPC        SPARC v.9
Delayed branches       Delayed branches                        BEQ, BNE, BGTZ,                      BPcc, A,
                       with/without cancellation               BLEZ, BCxEQZ,                        FPBcc, A
                                                               BCxNEZ
Conditional trap       Traps if a condition is true            TEQ, TNE, TGE,        TW, TD,        Tcc
                                                               TLT, TGEU, TLTU       TWI, TDI

Figure K.18 Control instructions not found in RV64G core but found in two or more of the other architectures.
MIPS64 Release 6 has nondelayed and normal delayed branches, while SPARC v.9 has delayed branches with can-
cellation based on the static prediction.

                                  of the architecture, typically by offering a nondelayed version, as the preferred con-
                                  ditional branch. The SPARC “annulling” branch is an optimized form of delayed
                                  branch that executes the instruction in the delay slot only if the branch is taken;
                                  otherwise, the instruction is annulled. This means the instruction at the target of
                                  the branch can safely be copied into the delay slot since it will only be executed
                                  if the branch is taken. The restrictions are that the target is not another branch and
                                  that the target is known at compile time. (SPARC also offers a nondelayed jump
                                  because an unconditional branch with the annul bit set does not execute the follow-
                                  ing instruction.).
                                       In contrast to the differences among the full ISAs, the 16-bit subsets of the three
                                  embedded ISAs have essentially no significant differences other than those
                                  described in the earlier figures (e.g. size of immediate fields, uses of SP or other
                                  registers, etc.).
                                       Now that we have covered the similarities, we will focus on the unique features
                                  of each architecture. We first cover the desktop/server RISCs, ordering them by
                                  length of description of the unique features from shortest to longest, and then
                                  the embedded RISCs.

                                  Instructions Unique to MIPS64 R6
                                  MIPS has gone through six generations of instruction sets. Generations 1–4 mostly
                                  added instructions. Release 6 eliminated many older instructions but also provided
                                  support for nondelayed branches and misaligned data access. Figure K.19 summa-
                                  rizes the unique instructions in MIPS64 R6.

Instruction
class                Instruction name(s)             Function
ALU                  Byte align                      Take a pair of registers and extract a word or double word of bytes.
                                                     Used to implement unaligned byte copies.
                     Align Immediate to PC           Adds the upper 16 bits of the PC to an immediate shifted left 16 bits
                                                     and puts the result in a register; Used to get a PC-relative address.
                     Bit swap                        Reverses the bits in each byte of a register.
                     No-op and link                  Puts the value of PC+8 into a register
                     Logical NOR                     Computes the NOR of 2 registers
Control transfer     Branch and Link conditional Compares a register to 0 and does a branch if condition is true; places
                                                 the return address in the link register.
                     Jump indexed, Jump and          Adds an offset and register to get new PC, w/wo link address
                     link indexed

Figure K.19 Additional instructions provided MIPS64 R6. In addition, there are several instructions for supporting
virtual machines, most are privileged.

                         Instructions Unique to SPARC v.9
                         Several features are unique to SPARC. We review the major figures and then sum-
                         marize those and small differences in a figure.

                         Register Windows
                         The primary unique feature of SPARC is register windows, an optimization for
                         reducing register traffic on procedure calls. Several banks of registers are used, with
                         a new one allocated on each procedure call. Although this could limit the depth of
                         procedure calls, the limitation is avoided by operating the banks as a circular buffer.
                         The knee of the cost-performance curve seems to be six to eight banks; programs
                         with deeper call stacks, would need to save and restore the registers to memory.
                              SPARC can have between 2 and 32 windows, typically using 8 registers each
                         for the globals, locals, incoming parameters, and outgoing parameters. (Given that
                         each window has 16 unique registers, an implementation of SPARC can have as
                         few as 40 physical registers and as many as 520, although most have 128 to 136, so
                         far.) Rather than tie window changes with call and return instructions, SPARC has
                         the separate instructions SAVE and RESTORE. SAVE is used to “save” the caller’s
                         window by pointing to the next window of registers in addition to performing an
                         add instruction. The trick is that the source registers are from the caller’s window of
                         the addition operation, while the destination register is in the callee’s window.
                         SPARC compilers typically use this instruction for changing the stack pointer
                         to allocate local variables in a new stack frame. RESTORE is the inverse of SAVE,
                         bringing back the caller’s window while acting as an add instruction, with the
                         source registers from the callee’s window and the destination register in the caller’s
                         window. This automatically deallocates the stack frame. Compilers can also make
                         use of it for generating the callee’s final return value.
                              The danger of register windows is that the larger number of registers could
                         slow down the clock rate. This was not the case for early implementations. The
                         SPARC architecture (with register windows) and the MIPS R2000 architecture
                         (without) have been built in several technologies since 1987. For several genera-
                         tions the SPARC clock rate has not been slower than the MIPS clock rate for imple-
                         mentations in similar technologies, probably because cache access times dominate
                         register access times in these implementations. With the advent of multiple issue,
                         which requires many more register ports, as will as register renaming or reorder
                         buffers, register windows posed a larger penalty.Register windows were a feature
                         of the original Berkeley RISC designs, and their inclusion in SPARC was inspired
                         by those designs. Tensilica is the only other major architecture in use today
                         employs them, and they were not included in the RISC-V ISA.

                         Fast Traps
                         SPARCv9 includes support to make traps fast. It expands the single level of traps to at
                         least four levels, allowing the window overflow and underflow trap handlers to be inter-
                         rupted. The extra levels mean the handler does not need to check for page faults or

                misaligned stack pointers explicitly in the code, thereby making the handler faster. Two
                new instructions were added to return from this multilevel handler: RETRY (which
                retries the interrupted instruction) and DONE (which does not). To support user-level
                traps, the instruction RETURN will return from the trap in nonprivileged mode.

                Support for LISP and Smalltalk
                The primary remaining arithmetic feature is tagged addition and subtraction. The
                designers of SPARC spent some time thinking about languages like LISP and
                Smalltalk, and this influenced some of the features of SPARC already discussed:
                register windows, conditional trap instructions, calls with 32-bit instruction
                addresses, and multi-word arithmetic (see Taylor et al. [1986] and Ungar et al.
                [1984]). A small amount of support is offered for tagged data types with operations
                for addition, subtraction, and hence comparison. The two least-significant bits indi-
                cate whether the operand is an integer (coded as 00), so TADDcc and TSUBcc set
                the overflow bit if either operand is not tagged as an integer or if the result is too
                large. A subsequent conditional branch or trap instruction can decide what to do.
                (If the operands are not integers, software recovers the operands, checks the types
                of the operands, and invokes the correct operation based on those types.) It turns
                out that the misaligned memory access trap can also be put to use for tagged data,
                since loading from a pointer with the wrong tag can be an invalid access.
                Figure K.20 shows both types of tag support.

                      (a) Add, sub, or                                        00           (R5)
                      compare integers
                      (coded as 00)        +
                                           –                                  00           (R6)
                       TADDcc r7, r5, r6

                                                                              00           (R7)

                      (b) Loading via
                      valid pointer                                           11           (R4)
                      (coded as 11)

                                           –                                   3
                       LD rD, r4, – 3
                                                                              00            (Word
                                                                                            address)

                Figure K.20 SPARC uses the two least-significant bits to encode different data types
                for the tagged arithmetic instructions. (a) Integer arithmetic, which takes a single cycle
                as long as the operands and the result are integers. (b) The misaligned trap can be used
                to catch invalid memory accesses, such as trying to use an integer as a pointer. For lan-
                guages with paired data like LISP, an offset of –3 can be used to access the even word of
                a pair (CAR) and +1 can be used for the odd word of a pair (CDR).

Instruction
class              Instruction name(s)             Function
Data transfer      SAVE, RESTORE                   Save or restore a register window
                   Nonfaulting load                Version of load instructions that do not generate faults on address
                                                   exceptions; allows speculation for loads.
ALU                Tagged add, Tagged subtract,    Perform a tagged add/subtract, set condition codes, optionally
                   with and without trap           trap.
Control transfer   Retry, Return, and Done         To provide handling for traps.
Floating Point     FMOVcc                          Conditional move between FP registers based on integer or FP
Instructions                                       condition codes.

Figure K.21 Additional instructions provided in SPARCv9. Although register windows are by far the most signif-
icant distinction, they do not require many instructions!

                                Figure K.21 summarizes the additional instructions mentioned above as well as
                             several others.

                             Instructions Unique to ARM
                             Earlier versions of the ARM architecture (ARM v6 and v7) had a number of
                             unusual features including conditional execution of all instructions, and making
                             the PC a general purpose register. These features were eliminated with the arrival
                             of ARMv8 (in both the 32-bit and 64-bit ISA). What remains, however, is much of
                             the complexity, at least in terms of the size of the instruction set. As Figure K.3 on
                             page 6 shows, ARM has the most addressing modes, including all those listed in
                             the table; remember that these addressing modes add dozens of load/store instruc-
                             tions compared to RVG, even though they are not listed in the table that follows. As
                             Figure K.6 on page 8 shows, ARMv8 also has by far the largest number of different
                             instruction formats, which reflects a variety of instructions, as well as the different
                             addressing modes, some of which are applicable to some loads and stores but not
                             others.
                                  Most ARMv8 ALU instructions allow the second operand to be shifted before
                             the operation is completed. This extends the range of immediates, but operand
                             shifting is not limited to immediates. The shift options are shift left logical, shift
                             right logical, shift right arithmetic, and rotate right. In addition, as in Power3, most
                             ALU instructions can optionally set the condition flags. Figure K.22 includes the
                             additional instructions, but does not enumerate all the varieties (such as optional
                             setting of the condition flags); see the caption for more detail. While conditional
                             execution of all instructions was eliminated, ARMv8 provides a number of condi-
                             tional instructions beyond the conditional move and conditional set, mentioned
                             earlier.

Instruction
class            Instruction name(s)                   Function
Data transfer    Load/Store Non-temporal pair          Loads/stores a pair of registers with an indication not to cache
                                                       the data. Base + scaled offset addressing mode only.
ALU              Add Extended word/double word         Add 2 registers after left shifting the second register operand
                                                       and extending it.
                 Add with shift; add immediate with Adds with shift of the second operand.
                 shift
                 Address of page                       Computes the address of a page based on PC (similar to
                                                       ADDUIPC, which is the same as ADR in ARMv8)
                 AND, OR, XOR, XOR NOT shifted Logical operation on a register and a shifted register.
                 register
                 Bit field clear shifted               Shift operand, invert and AND with another operand
                 Conditional compare, immediate,       If condition true, then set condition flags to compare result,
                 negative, negative immediate          otherwise leave condition flags untouched.
                 Conditional increment, invert,        If condition then set destination to increment/invert/negate of
                 negate                                source register
                 CRC                                   Computes a CRC checksum: byte, word, halfword, double
                 Multiply add, subtract                Integer multiply-add or multiply-subtract
                 Multiply negate                       Negate the product of two integers; word & double word
                 Move immediate or inverse             Replace 16-bits in a register with immediate, possibly shifted
                 Reverse bit order                     Reverses the order of bits in a register
                 Signed bit field move                 Move a signed bit field; sign extend to left; zero extend to right
                 Unsigned divide, multiple, multiply Unsigned versions of the basic instructions
                 negate, multiply-add, multiply-sub
Control transfer CBNZ, CBZ                             Compare branch =/!= 0, indicating this is not a call or return.
                 TBNZ, TBZ                             Tests bit in a register =/!= 0, and branch.

Figure K.22 Additional instructions provided in ARMv8, the AArch64 instruction set. Unless noted the instruction
is available in a word and double word format, if there is a difference. Most of the ALU instructions can optionally set
the condition codes; these are not included as separate instructions here or in earlier tables.

                              Instructions Unique to Power3
                              Power3 is the result of several generations of IBM commercial RISC machines—
                              IBM RT/PC, IBM Power1, and IBM Power2, and the PowerPC development,
                              undertaken primarily by IBM and Motorola. First, we describe branch registers
                              and the support for loop branches. Figure K.23 then lists the other instructions pro-
                              vided only in Power3.

Instruction
class              Instruction name(s)              Function
Data transfer      LHBRX, LWBRX, LDBRX              Loads a halfword/word/double word but reverses the byte order.
                   SHBRX, SWBRX, SDBRX              Stores a halfword/word/double word but reverses the byte order
                   LDQ, STQ                         Load/store quadword to a register pair.
ALU                DRAN                             Generate a random number in a register
                   CMPB                             Compares the individual bytes in a register and sets another
                                                    register byte by byte.
                   CMPRB                            Compares a byte (x) against two other bytes (y and z) and sets a
                                                    condition to indicate if the value of y<=x<=z.
                   CRAND, CRNAND, CROR,             Logical operations on the condition register.
                   CRNOR, CRXOR, CREQV,
                   CORC, CRANDC
                   ZCMPEQB                          Compares a byte (x) against the eight bytes in another register and
                                                    sets a condition to indicate if x = any of the 8 bytes
                   EXTSWSL                          Sign extend word and shift left
                   POPCNTB, POPCNTW                 Count number of 1s in each byte and place total in another byte.
                   POPCNTD                          Count number of 1s in each word and place total in another word.
                                                    Count number of 1s in a double word.
                   PRTYD, PRTYW                     Compute byte parity of the bytes in a word or double word.
                   BPERMD                           Permutes the bits in a double word, producing a permuted byte.

                   CDTBCD, CDCBCD,                  Instructions to convert from/to binary coded decimal (BCD) or
                   ADDGCS                           operate on two BCD values
Control transfer   BA, BCA                          Branches to an absolute address, conditionally & unconditionally
                   BCCTR, BCCTRL                    Conditional branch to address in the count register, w/wo linking
                   BCTSAR, BCTARL                   Conditional branch to address in the Branch Target Address
                                                    register, w/wo linking
                   CLRBHRB, MFBHRBE                 Manipulate the branch history rolling buffer.
Floating Point     FRSQRTE                          Computes an estimate of reciprocal of the square root,
Instructions
                   FTDIV, FTSQRT                    Tests for divide by zero or square of negative number
                   FSEL                             Test register against zero and select one of two operands to move
                   Decimal floating point           A series of 48 instructions to support decimal floating point.
                   operations

Figure K.23 Additional instructions provided in Power3. Rotate instructions have two forms: one that sets a con-
dition register and one that does not. There are a set of string instructions that load up to 32 bytes from an arbitrary
address to a set of registers. These instructions will be phased out in future implementations, and hence we just
mention them here.

                Branch Registers: Link and Counter
                Rather than dedicate one of the 32 general-purpose registers to save the return
                address on procedure call, Power3 puts the address into a special register called
                the link register. Since many procedures will return without calling another pro-
                cedure, link doesn’t always have to be saved away. Making the return address a
                special register makes the return jump faster since the hardware need not go
                through the register read pipeline stage for return jumps.
                    In a similar vein, Power3 has a count register to be used in for loops where the
                program iterates for a fixed number of times. By using a special register the branch
                hardware can determine quickly whether a branch based on the count register is
                likely to branch, since the value of the register is known early in the execution
                cycle. Tests of the value of the count register in a branch instruction will automat-
                ically decrement the count register.
                    Given that the count register and link register are already located with the hard-
                ware that controls branches, and that one of the problems in branch prediction is
                getting the target address early in the pipeline (see Appendix C), the Power archi-
                tects decided to make a second use of these registers. Either register can hold a
                target address of a conditional branch. Thus, PowerPC supplements its basic con-
                ditional branch with two instructions that get the target address from these registers
                (BCLR, BCCTR). Figure K.23 shows the several dozen instructions that have been
                added; note that there is an extensive facility for decimal floating point, as well.

                Instructions: Multimedia Extensions of the
                Desktop/Server RISCs
                Support for multimedia and graphics operations developed in several phases,
                beginning in 1996 with Intel MMX, MIPS MDMX, and SPARC VIS. As described
                in Section 4.3, which we assume the reader has read, these extensions allowed a
                register to be treated as multiple independent small integers (8 or 16 bits long) with
                arithmetic and logical operations done in parallel on all the items in a register.
                These initial SIMD extensions, sometimes called packed SIMD, were further
                developed after 2000 by widening the registers, partially or totally separating them
                from the general purpose or floating pointer registers, and by adding support for
                parallel floating point operations. RISC-V has reserved an extension for such
                packed SIMD instructions, but the designers have opted to focus on a true vector
                extension for the present. The vector extension RV64V is a vector architecture,
                and, as Section 4.3 points out, a true vector instruction set is considerably more
                general, and can typically perform the operations handled by the SIMD extensions
                using vector operations.
                    Figure K.24 shows the basic structure of the SIMD extensions in ARM, MIPS,
                Power, and SPARC. Note the difference in how the SIMD “vector registers” are
                structured: repurposing the floating point, extending the floating point, or adding
                additional registers. Other key differences include support for FP as well as integers,

                             ARMv8                  MIPS64 R6             Power v3.0          SPARCv9
Name of ISA extension        Advanced SIMD          MIPS64 SIMD           Vector Facility     VIS
                                                    Architecture
Date of Current Version      2011                   2012                  2015                1995
Vector registers: # x size   32 x 128 bits          32 x 128 bits         32 x 128 bits       32 x 64 bits
Use GP/FP registers or       extend FP registers    extend FP registers   Independent         Same as FP registers
independent set              doubling width         doubling width
Integer data sizes           8, 16, 32, 64          8, 16, 32, 64         8, 16, 32, 64, 128 8,16, 32
FP data sizes                32, 64                 32, 64                32
Immediates for integer and                          5 bits arithmetic
logical operations                                  8 bits logical

Figure K.24 Structure of the SIMD extensions intended for multimedia support. In addition to the vector facility,
The last row states whether the SIMD instruction set supports immediates (e.g, add vector immediate or AND vector
immediate); the entry states the size of immediates for those ISAs that support them. Note that the fact that an imme-
diate is present is encoded in the opcode space, and could alternatively be added to the next table as additional
instructions. Power 3 has an optional Vector-Scalar Extension. The Vector-Scalar Extension defines a set of vector
registers that overlap the FP and normal vector registers, eliminating the need to move data back and forth to
the vector registers. It also supports double precision floating point operations.

                             support for 128-bit integers, and provisions for immediate fields as operands in inte-
                             ger and logical operations. Standard load and store instructions are used for moving
                             data from the SIMD registers to memory with special extensions to handle moving
                             less than a full SIMD register. SPARC VIS, which was one of the earliest ISA exten-
                             sions for graphics, is much more limited: only add, subtract, and multiply are
                             included, there is no FP support, and only limited instructions for bit element oper-
                             ations; we include it in Figure K.24 but will not be going into more detail.
                                 Figure K.25 shows the arithmetic instructions included in these SIMD exten-
                             sions; only those appearing in at least two extensions are included. MIPS SIMD
                             includes many other instructions, as does the Power 3 Vector-Scalar extension,
                             which we do not cover. One frequent feature not generally found in general-
                             purpose microprocessors is saturating operations. Saturation means that when a
                             calculation overflows the result is set to the largest positive number or most neg-
                             ative number, rather than a modulo calculation as in two’s complement arithmetic.
                             Commonly found in digital signal processors (see the next subsection), these sat-
                             urating operations are helpful in routines for filtering. Another common extension
                             are instructions for accumulating values within a single register; the dot product
                             instruction an the maximum/minimum instructions are typical examples.
                                 In addition to the arithmetic instructions, the most common additions are log-
                             ical and bitwise operations and instructions for doing version of permutations and
                             packing elements into the SIMD registers. These additions are summarized in
                             Figure K.26, Lastly, all three extensions support SIMD FP operations, as summa-
                             rized in Figure K.27.
Instruction category                      ARM Advanced SIMD           MIPS SIMD             Power Vector Facility
Add/subtract                              16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H; 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W, 2 D, Q
Saturating add/sub                        16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H; 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W, 2 D, Q
Absolute value of difference              16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Adjacent add & subtract (pairwise)        16B, 8H, 4W                 16B, 8H, 4W           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D
Average                                                               16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Dot product add, dot product subtract     16B, 8H, 4W                 16B, 8H, 4W           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D
Divide: signed, unsigned                  16B, 8H, 4W                 16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Multiply: signed, unsigned                16B, 8H, 4W                 16B, 8H, 4W           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D
Multiply add, multiply subtract           16B, 8H, 4W                 16B, 8H, 4W           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D
Maximum, signed & unsigned                16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Minimum, signed & unsigned                16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Modulo, signed & unsigned                                             16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Compare equal                             16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Compare <, <=, signed, unsigned           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q

Figure K.25 Summary of arithmetic SIMD instructions. B stands for byte (8 bits), H for half word (16 bits), and W for
word (32 bits), D for double word (64 bits), and Q for quad word (128 bits). Thus, 8B means an operation on 8 bytes in a
single instruction. Note that some instructions–such as adjacent add/subtract, or multiply–produce results that are
twice the width of the inputs (e.g. multiply on 16 bytes produces 8 halfword results). Dot product is a multiply and
accumulate. The SPARC VIS instructions are aimed primarily at graphics and are structured accordingly.

Instruction category                 ARM Advanced SIMD          MIPS SIMD                   Power Vector Facility
Shift right/left, logical, arithmetic 16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D          16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q         16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Count leading or trailing zeros      16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
and/or/xor                           Q                          Q                           Q
Bit insert & extract                 16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Population count                                                16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D; Q
Interleave even/odd, left/right                                 16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            6B, 8H, 4W; 2 D
Pack even/odd                                                   16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            6B, 8H, 4W; 2 D
Shuffle                                                         16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D
SPLAT                                                           16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D            16B, 8H, 4W; 2 D

Figure K.26 Summary of logical, bitwise, permute, and pack/unpack instructions, using the same format as the
previous figure. When there is a single operand the instruction applies to the entire register; for logical operations
there is no difference.Interleave puts together the elements (all even, odd, leftmost or rightmost) from two different
registers to create one value; it can be used for unpacking. Pack moves the even or odd elements from two different
registers to the leftmost and rightmost halves of the result. Shuffle creates a from two registers based on a mask that
selects which source for each item. SPLAT copies a value into each item in a register.

Figure K.27 Summary of floating point, using the same format as the previous figure.

                          Instructions: Digital Signal-Processing Extensions
                          of the Embedded RISCs
                          Both Thumb2 and microMIPS32 provide instructions for DSP (Digital Signal Pro-
                          cessing) and multimedia operations. In Thumb2, these are part of the core instruc-
                          tion set; in microMIPS32, they are part of the DSP extension. These extensions,
                          which are encoded as 32-bit instructions, are less extensive than the multimedia
                          and graphics support provided in the SIMD/Vector extensions of MIPS64 or
                          ARMv8 (AArch64). Like those more comprehensive extensions, the ones in
                          Thumb2 and microMIPS32 also rely on packed SIMD, but they use the existing
                          integer registers, with a small extension to allow a wide accumulator, and only
                          operate on integer data. RISC-V has specified that the “P” extension will support
                          packed integer SIMD using the floating point registers, but at the time of publica-
                          tion, the specification was not completed.
                              DSP operations often include linear algebra functions and operations such
                          as convolutions; these operations produce intermediate results that will be larger
                          than the inputs. In Thumb2, this is handled by a set of operations that produce
                          64-bit results using a pair of integer registers. In microMIPS32 DSP, there are 4
                          64-bit accumulator registers, including the Hi-Lo register, which is already
                          exists for doing integer multiply and divide. Both architectures provide parallel
                          arithmetic using bytes, halfwords, and words, as in the multimedia extensions in
                          ARMv8 and MIPS64. In addition, the MIPS DSP extension handles fractional
                          data, such data is heavily used in DSP operations. Fractional data items have a
                          sign bit and the remaining bits are used to represent the fraction, providing a
                          range of values from -1.0 to 0.9999 (in decimal). MIPS DSP supports two
                          fractional data sizes Q15 and Q31 each with one sign bit and 15 or 31 bits
                          of fraction.
                              Figure K.28 shows the common operations using the same notation as was
                          used in Figure K.25. Remember that the basic 32-bit instruction set provides
                          additional functionality, including basic arithmetic, logical, and bit
                          manipulation.

Function                                                                    Thumb-2        microMIPS32 DSP
Add/Subtract                                                                4B, 2H         4B, 2Q15
Add /Subtract with saturation                                               4B, 2H         4B, 2Q15, Q31
Add/Subtract with Exchange (exchanges halfwords in rt, then adds first      2H
halfword and subtracts second) with optional saturation
Reduce by add (sum the values)                                                             4B
Absolute value                                                                             2Q15, Q31
Precision reduce/increase (reduces or increases the precision of a value)                  2B, Q15, 2Q15, Q31
Shifts: left, right, logical & arithmetic, with optional saturation                        4B, 2H
Multiply                                                                    2H             2B, 2H, 2Q15
Multiply add/subtract (to GPR or accumulator register in MIPS)              2H             2Q15
Complex multiplication step (2 multiplies and addition/subtraction)         2H             2Q15
Multiply and accumulate (by addition or subtraction)                        2H             Q15, Q31
Replicate bits                                                                             B, H
Compare: =, <, <=, sets condition field                                                    4B, 2H
Pick (use condition bits to choose bytes or halfwords from two operands)                   4B, 2H
Pack choosing a halfword from each operand                                                 H
Extract                                                                                    Q63
Move from/to accumulator                                                                   DW

Figure K.28 Summary of two embedded RISC DSP operations, showing the data types for each operation. A blank
indicates that the operation is not supported as a single instruction. Byte quantities are usually unsigned. Complex
multiplication step implements multiplication of complex numbers where each component is a Q15 value. ARM uses
its standard condition register, while MIPS adds a set of condition bits as part of the state in the DSP extension.

                                Concluding Remarks
                                This survey covers the addressing modes, instruction formats, and almost all the
                                instructions found in 8 RISC architectures. Although the later sections concentrate
                                on the differences, it would not be possible to cover 8 architectures in these few
                                pages if there were not so many similarities. In fact, we would guess that more than
                                90% of the instructions executed for any of these architectures would be found in
                                Figures K.9 through K.13. To contrast this homogeneity, Figure K.29 gives a sum-
                                mary for four architectures from the 1970s in a format similar to that shown in
                                Figure K.1. (Since it would be impossible to write a single section in this style
                                for those architectures, the next three sections cover the 80x86, VAX, and IBM
                                360/370.) In the history of computing, there has never been such widespread agree-
                                ment on computer architecture as there has been since the RISC ideas emerged in
                                the 1980s.

                                      IBM 360/370        Intel 8086            Motorola 68000          DEC VAX
Date announced                        1964/1970          1978                  1980                    1977
Instruction size(s) (bits)            16, 32, 48         8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48 16, 32, 48, 64, 80      8, 16, 24, 32, ... ,
                                                                                                       432
Addressing (size, model)              24 bits, flat/     4 + 16 bits,          24 bits, flat           32 bits, flat
                                      31 bits, flat      segmented
Data aligned?                         Yes 360/No 370     No                    16-bit aligned          No
Data addressing modes                 2/3                5                     9                       =14
Protection                            Page               None                  Optional                Page
Page size                             2 KB & 4 KB        —                     0.25 to 32 KB           0.5 KB
I/O                                   Opcode             O p c od e            Memory mapped           M e m o ry ma p p ed
Integer registers (size, model,       16 GPR × 32 bits   8 dedicated           8 data and 8 address    15 GPR × 32 bits
number)                                                  data × 16 bits        × 32 bits
Separate floating-point               4 × 64 bits        Optional: 8 × 80 bits Optional: 8 × 80 bits   0
registers
Floating-point format                 IBM (floating      IEEE 754 single,      IEEE 754 single,        DEC
                                      hexadecimal)       double, extended      double, extended

Figure K.29 Summary of four 1970s architectures. Unlike the architectures in Figure K.1, there is little agreement
between these architectures in any category. (See Section K.3 for more details on the 80x86 and Section K.4 for a
description of the VAX.)

                   K.3            The Intel 80x86
                                  Introduction
                                  MIPS was the vision of a single architect. The pieces of this architecture fit nicely
                                  together and the whole architecture can be described succinctly. Such is not the case
                                  of the 80x86: It is the product of several independent groups who evolved the archi-
                                  tecture over 20 years, adding new features to the original instruction set as you might
                                  add clothing to a packed bag. Here are important 80x86 milestones:

                                  ■   1978—The Intel 8086 architecture was announced as an assembly language–
                                      compatible extension of the then-successful Intel 8080, an 8-bit microproces-
                                      sor. The 8086 is a 16-bit architecture, with all internal registers 16 bits wide.
                                      Whereas the 8080 was a straightforward accumulator machine, the 8086
                                      extended the architecture with additional registers. Because nearly every reg-
                                      ister has a dedicated use, the 8086 falls somewhere between an accumulator
                                      machine and a general-purpose register machine, and can fairly be called an
                                      extended accumulator machine.
                                  ■   1980—The Intel 8087 floating-point coprocessor is announced. This architec-
                                      ture extends the 8086 with about 60 floating-point instructions. Its architects
                                      rejected extended accumulators to go with a hybrid of stacks and registers,

    essentially an extended stack architecture: A complete stack instruction set is
    supplemented by a limited set of register-memory instructions.
■   1982—The 80286 extended the 8086 architecture by increasing the address
    space to 24 bits, by creating an elaborate memory mapping and protection
    model, and by adding a few instructions to round out the instruction set and
    to manipulate the protection model. Because it was important to run 8086 pro-
    grams without change, the 80286 offered a real addressing mode to make the
    machine look just like an 8086.
■   1985—The 80386 extended the 80286 architecture to 32 bits. In addition to a
    32-bit architecture with 32-bit registers and a 32-bit address space, the 80386
    added new addressing modes and additional operations. The added instructions
    make the 80386 nearly a general-purpose register machine. The 80386 also
    added paging support in addition to segmented addressing (see Chapter 2). Like
    the 80286, the 80386 has a mode to execute 8086 programs without change.

    This history illustrates the impact of the “golden handcuffs” of compatibility on
the 80x86, as the existing software base at each step was too important to jeopar-
dize with significant architectural changes. Fortunately, the subsequent 80486 in
1989, Pentium in 1992, and P6 in 1995 were aimed at higher performance, with
only four instructions added to the user-visible instruction set: three to help with
multiprocessing plus a conditional move instruction.
    Since 1997 Intel has added hundreds of instructions to support multimedia by
operating on many narrower data types within a single clock (see Appendix A).
These SIMD or vector instructions are primarily used in hand-coded libraries or
drivers and rarely generated by compilers. The first extension, called MMX,
appeared in 1997. It consists of 57 instructions that pack and unpack multiple
bytes, 16-bit words, or 32-bit double words into 64-bit registers and performs shift,
logical, and integer arithmetic on the narrow data items in parallel. It supports both
saturating and nonsaturating arithmetic. MMX uses the registers comprising the
floating-point stack and hence there is no new state for operating systems to save.
    In 1999 Intel added another 70 instructions, labeled SSE, as part of Pentium III.
The primary changes were to add eight separate registers, double their width to 128
bits, and add a single-precision floating-point data type. Hence, four 32-bit
floating-point operations can be performed in parallel. To improve memory perfor-
mance, SSE included cache prefetch instructions plus streaming store instructions
that bypass the caches and write directly to memory.
    In 2001, Intel added yet another 144 instructions, this time labeled SSE2. The
new data type is double-precision arithmetic, which allows pairs of 64-bit floating-
point operations in parallel. Almost all of these 144 instructions are versions of
existing MMX and SSE instructions that operate on 64 bits of data in parallel.
Not only does this change enable multimedia operations, but it also gives the com-
piler a different target for floating-point operations than the unique stack architec-
ture. Compilers can choose to use the eight SSE registers as floating-point registers
as found in the RISC machines. This change has boosted performance on the
Pentium 4, the first microprocessor to include SSE2 instructions. At the time of

                         announcement, a 1.5 GHz Pentium 4 was 1.24 times faster than a 1 GHz Pentium
                         III for SPECint2000(base), but it was 1.88 times faster for SPECfp2000(base).
                              In 2003 a company other than Intel enhanced the IA-32 architecture this time.
                         AMD announced a set of architectural extensions to increase the address space for
                         32 to 64 bits. Similar to the transition from 16- to 32-bit address space in 1985 with
                         the 80386, AMD64 widens all registers to 64 bits. It also increases the number of
                         registers to sixteen and has 16 128-bit registers to support XMM, AMD’s answer to
                         SSE2. Rather than expand the instruction set, the primary change is adding a new
                         mode called long mode that redefines the execution of all IA-32 instructions with
                         64-bit addresses. To address the larger number of registers, it adds a new prefix to
                         instructions. AMD64 still has a 32-bit mode that is backwards compatible to the
                         standard Intel instruction set, allowing a more graceful transition to 64-bit addres-
                         sing than the HP/Intel Itanium. Intel later followed AMD’s lead, making almost
                         identical changes so that most software can run on either 64-bit address version
                         of the 80x86 without change.
                              Whatever the artistic failures of the 80x86, keep in mind that there are more
                         instances of this architectural family than of any other server or desktop processor
                         in the world. Nevertheless, its checkered ancestry has led to an architecture that is
                         difficult to explain and impossible to love.
                              We start our explanation with the registers and addressing modes, move on to
                         the integer operations, then cover the floating-point operations, and conclude with
                         an examination of instruction encoding.

                         80x86 Registers and Data Addressing Modes
                         The evolution of the instruction set can be seen in the registers of the 80x86
                         (Figure K.30). Original registers are shown in black type, with the extensions of
                         the 80386 shown in a lighter shade, a coloring scheme followed in subsequent fig-
                         ures. The 80386 basically extended all 16-bit registers (except the segment regis-
                         ters) to 32 bits, prefixing an “E” to their name to indicate the 32-bit version. The
                         arithmetic, logical, and data transfer instructions are two-operand instructions that
                         allow the combinations shown in Figure K.31.
                             To explain the addressing modes, we need to keep in mind whether we are talk-
                         ing about the 16-bit mode used by both the 8086 and 80286 or the 32-bit mode
                         available on the 80386 and its successors. The seven data memory addressing
                         modes supported are

                         ■   Absolute
                         ■   Register indirect
                         ■   Based
                         ■   Indexed
                         ■   Based indexed with displacement
                         ■   Based with scaled indexed
                         ■   Based with scaled indexed and displacement

   80 x386, 80x486, Pentium                                           80 x86, 80 x286
                     31                          15        8 7               0

          GPR 0      EAX                AX            AH         AL                Accumulator

          GPR 1      ECX                CX            CH         CL                Count reg: string, loop

          GPR 2      EDX                DX            DH         DL                Data reg: multiply, divide

          GPR 3      EBX                BX            BH         BL                Base addr. reg

          GPR 4      ESP                SP                                         Stack ptr.

          GPR 5      EBP                BP                                         Base ptr. (for base of stack seg.)

          GPR 6      ESI                    SI                                     Index reg, string source ptr.

          GPR 7      EDI                DI                                         Index reg, string dest. ptr.

                                        CS                                         Code segment ptr.

                                        SS                                         Stack segment ptr. (top of stack)

                                        DS                                         Data segment ptr.

                                        ES                                         Extra data segment ptr.

                                        FS                                         Data segment ptr. 2

                                       GS                                          Data segment ptr. 3

              PC     EIP                    IP                                     Instruction ptr. (PC)

                     EFLAGS         FLAGS                                          Condition codes
 79                                                                                                                                0

                                                             FPR 0

                                                             FPR 1

                                                             FPR 2

                                                             FPR 3

                                                             FPR 4

                                                             FPR 5

                                                             FPR 6

                                                             FPR 7

                                                 15                          0
                                                                                  Top of FP stack,
                                   Status
                                                                                  FP condition codes

Figure K.30 The 80x86 has evolved over time, and so has its register set. The original set is shown in black and the
extended set in gray. The 8086 divided the first four registers in half so that they could be used either as one 16-bit
register or as two 8-bit registers. Starting with the 80386, the top eight registers were extended to 32 bits and could
also be used as general-purpose registers. The floating-point registers on the bottom are 80 bits wide, and although
they look like regular registers they are not. They implement a stack, with the top of stack pointed to by the status
register. One operand must be the top of stack, and the other can be any of the other seven registers below the top
of stack.

                          Source/destination operand type                          Second source operand
                                       Register                                               Register
                                       Register                                               Immediate
                                       Register                                               Memory
                                       Memory                                                 Register
                                       Memory                                                 Immediate

                         Figure K.31 Instruction types for the arithmetic, logical, and data transfer instruc-
                         tions. The 80x86 allows the combinations shown. The only restriction is the absence
                         of a memory-memory mode. Immediates may be 8, 16, or 32 bits in length; a register
                         is any one of the 14 major registers in Figure K.30 (not IP or FLAGS).

                         Displacements can be 8 or 32 bits in 32-bit mode, and 8 or 16 bits in 16-bit mode.
                         If we count the size of the address as a separate addressing mode, the total is 11
                         addressing modes.
                             Although a memory operand can use any addressing mode, there are restric-
                         tions on what registers can be used in a mode. The section “80x86 Instruction
                         Encoding” on page K-11 gives the full set of restrictions on registers, but the fol-
                         lowing description of addressing modes gives the basic register options:

                         ■   Absolute—With 16-bit or 32-bit displacement, depending on the mode.
                         ■   Register indirect—BX, SI, DI in 16-bit mode and EAX, ECX, EDX, EBX,
                             ESI, and EDI in 32-bit mode.
                         ■   Based mode with 8-bit or 16-bit/32-bit displacement—BP, BX, SI, and DI
                             in 16-bit mode and EAX, ECX, EDX, EBX, ESI, and EDI in 32-bit mode.
                             The displacement is either 8 bits or the size of the address mode: 16 or 32 bits.
                             (Intel gives two different names to this single addressing mode, based and
                             indexed, but they are essentially identical and we combine them. This book
                             uses indexed addressing to mean something different, explained next.)
                         ■   Indexed—The address is the sum of two registers. The allowable combinations
                             are BX+SI, BX+DI, BP+SI, and BP+DI. This mode is called based
                             indexed on the 8086. (The 32-bit mode uses a different addressing mode to
                             get the same effect.)
                         ■   Based indexed with 8- or 16-bit displacement—The address is the sum of dis-
                             placement and contents of two registers. The same restrictions on registers
                             apply as in indexed mode.
                         ■   Base plus scaled indexed—This addressing mode and the next were added in
                             the 80386 and are only available in 32-bit mode. The address calculation is
                                                  Base register + 2Scale ? Index ? register

    where Scale has the value 0, 1, 2, or 3; Index register can be any of the eight
    32-bit general registers except ESP; and Base register can be any of the eight
    32-bit general registers.
■   Base plus scaled index with 8- or 32-bit displacement—The address is the sum
    of the displacement and the address calculated by the scaled mode immediately
    above. The same restrictions on registers apply.

The 80x86 uses Little Endian addressing.
    Ideally, we would refer discussion of 80x86 logical and physical addresses to
Chapter 2, but the segmented address space prevents us from hiding that infor-
mation. Figure K.32 shows the memory mapping options on the generations of
80x86 machines; Chapter 2 describes the segmented protection scheme in greater
detail.
    The assembly language programmer clearly must specify which segment reg-
ister should be used with an address, no matter which address mode is used. To
save space in the instructions, segment registers are selected automatically depend-
ing on which address register is used. The rules are simple: References to instruc-
tions (IP) use the code segment register (CS), references to the stack (BP or SP)
use the stack segment register (SS), and the default segment register for the other
registers is the data segment register (DS). The next section explains how they can
be overridden.

80x86 Integer Operations
The 8086 provides support for both 8-bit (byte) and 16-bit (called word) data
types. The data type distinctions apply to register operations as well as memory
accesses. The 80386 adds 32-bit addresses and data, called double words. Almost
every operation works on both 8-bit data and one longer data size. That size is
determined by the mode and is either 16 or 32 bits.
    Clearly some programs want to operate on data of all three sizes, so the 80x86
architects provide a convenient way to specify each version without expanding
code size significantly. They decided that most programs would be dominated
by either 16- or 32-bit data, and so it made sense to be able to set a default large
size. This default size is set by a bit in the code segment register. To override the
default size, an 8-bit prefix is attached to the instruction to tell the machine to use
the other large size for this instruction.
    The prefix solution was borrowed from the 8086, which allows multiple prefixes
to modify instruction behavior. The three original prefixes override the default seg-
ment register, lock the bus so as to perform a semaphore (see Chapter 5), or repeat the
following instruction until CX counts down to zero. This last prefix was intended to
be paired with a byte move instruction to move a variable number of bytes. The
80386 also added a prefix to override the default address size.

           Real mode                                                              Protected mode

            (8086)                                   (80286)                                           (80386, 80486, Pentium)

       Logical address                            Logical address                                            Logical address

 Segment             Offset         Segment                              Offset                    Segment                             Offset

     16              12       4         16                                  16                        16                                     32

               16
                                                         24                                                              32
                    20

          Physical address         Segmentation                                              Segmentation

                                                                    24                                        Linear address      32

                                                                                                                           20                      12
                                                        Physical address

                                                                                             10                            10

                                                                                                             20                              20
                                                                                             Paging

                                                                                                                                        32

                                                                                                                                Physical address

Figure K.32 The original segmented scheme of the 8086 is shown on the left. All 80x86 processors support this style
of addressing, called real mode. It simply takes the contents of a segment register, shifts it left 4 bits, and adds it to the
16-bit offset, forming a 20-bit physical address. The 80286 (center) used the contents of the segment register to select
a segment descriptor, which includes a 24-bit base address among other items. It is added to the 16-bit offset to form
the 24-bit physical address. The 80386 and successors (right) expand this base address in the segment descriptor to
32 bits and also add an optional paging layer below segmentation. A 32-bit linear address is first formed from the
segment and offset, and then this address is divided into two 10-bit fields and a 12-bit page offset. The first 10-bit field
selects the entry in the first-level page table, and then this entry is used in combination with the second 10-bit field to
access the second-level page table to select the upper 20 bits of the physical address. Prepending this 20-bit address
to the final 12-bit field gives the 32-bit physical address. Paging can be turned off, redefining the 32-bit linear address
as the physical address. Note that a “flat” 80x86 address space comes simply by loading the same value in all the
segment registers; that is, it doesn’t matter which segment register is selected.

                                      The 80x86 integer operations can be divided into four major classes:

                                  1. Data movement instructions, including move, push, and pop
                                  2. Arithmetic and logic instructions, including logical operations, test, shifts, and
                                     integer and decimal arithmetic operations
                                  3. Control flow, including conditional branches and unconditional jumps, calls,
                                     and returns
                                  4. String instructions, including string move and string compare

Instruction             Function
JE name                 if equal(CC) {IP          name};IP–128        name IP+128
JMP name                IP    name
CALLF name, seg         SP SP–2;M[SS:SP] IP+5;SP SP–2;
                        M[SS:SP] CS;IP name;CS seg;
                        MOVW BX,[DI+45]         BX    16M[DS:DI+45]
PUSH SI                 SP    SP–2;M[SS:SP]        SI
POP DI                  DI    M[SS:SP];SP        SP+2
ADD AX,#6765            AX    AX+6765
SHL BX,1                BX    BX1..15## 0
TEST DX,#42             Set CC flags with DX & 42
MOVSB                   M[ES:DI]      8M[DS:SI];DI       DI+1;SI SI+1

Figure K.33 Some typical 80x86 instructions and their functions. A list of frequent
operations appears in Figure K.34. We use the abbreviation SR:X to indicate the forma-
tion of an address with segment register SR and offset X. This effective address corre-
sponding to SR:X is (SR<<4)+X. The CALLF saves the IP of the next instruction and
the current CS on the stack.

Figure K.33 shows some typical 80x86 instructions and their functions.
    The data transfer, arithmetic, and logic instructions are unremarkable, except
that the arithmetic and logic instruction operations allow the destination to be either
a register or a memory location.
    Control flow instructions must be able to address destinations in another seg-
ment. This is handled by having two types of control flow instructions: “near” for
intrasegment (within a segment) and “far” for intersegment (between segments)
transfers. In far jumps, which must be unconditional, two 16-bit quantities follow
the opcode in 16-bit mode. One of these is used as the instruction pointer,
while the other is loaded into CS and becomes the new code segment. In 32-
bit mode the first field is expanded to 32 bits to match the 32-bit program
counter (EIP).
    Calls and returns work similarly—a far call pushes the return instruction
pointer and return segment on the stack and loads both the instruction pointer
and the code segment. A far return pops both the instruction pointer and the code
segment from the stack. Programmers or compiler writers must be sure to always
use the same type of call and return for a procedure—a near return does not work
with a far call, and vice versa.
    String instructions are part of the 8080 ancestry of the 80x86 and are not
commonly executed in most programs.
    Figure K.34 lists some of the integer 80x86 instructions. Many of the
instructions are available in both byte and word formats.

Instruction               Meaning
Control                   Conditional and unconditional branches
JNZ, JZ                  Jump if condition to IP + 8-bit offset; JNE (for JNZ) and JE (for JZ) are alternative names
JMP, JMPF                Unconditional jump—8- or 16-bit offset intrasegment (near) and intersegment (far) versions
CALL, CALLF              Subroutine call—16-bit offset; return address pushed; near and far versions
RET, RETF                Pops return address from stack and jumps to it; near and far versions
LOOP                     Loop branch—decrement CX; jump to IP + 8-bit displacement if CX ¦ 0
Data transfer             Move data between registers or between register and memory
MOV                       Move between two registers or between register and memory
PUSH                      Push source operand on stack
POP                      Pop operand from stack top to a register
LES                      Load ES and one of the GPRs from memory
Arithmetic/logical        Arithmetic and logical operations using the data registers and memory
ADD                      Add source to destination; register-memory format
SUB                       Subtract source from destination; register-memory format
CMP                       Compare source and destination; register-memory format
SHL                       Shift left
SHR                       Shift logical right
RCR                      Rotate right with carry as fill
CBW                      Convert byte in AL to word in AX
TEST                      Logical AND of source and destination sets flags
INC                      Increment destination; register-memory format
DEC                      Decrement destination; register-memory format
OR                       Logical OR; register-memory format
XOR                      Exclusive OR; register-memory format
String instructions       Move between string operands; length given by a repeat prefix
MOVS                     Copies from string source to destination; may be repeated
LODS                      Loads a byte or word of a string into the A register

Figure K.34 Some typical operations on the 80x86. Many operations use register-memory format, where either the
source or the destination may be memory and the other may be a register or immediate operand.

                             80x86 Floating-Point Operations
                             Intel provided a stack architecture with its floating-point instructions: loads push
                             numbers onto the stack, operations find operands in the top two elements of the
                             stacks, and stores can pop elements off the stack, just as the stack example in
                             Figure A.31 on page A-4 suggests.

    Intel supplemented this stack architecture with instructions and addressing
modes that allow the architecture to have some of the benefits of a register-memory
model. In addition to finding operands in the top two elements of the stack, one
operand can be in memory or in one of the seven registers below the top of the stack.
    This hybrid is still a restricted register-memory model, however, in that loads
always move data to the top of the stack while incrementing the top of stack pointer
and stores can only move the top of stack to memory. Intel uses the notation ST to
indicate the top of stack, and ST(i) to represent the ith register below the top of stack.
    One novel feature of this architecture is that the operands are wider in the reg-
ister stack than they are stored in memory, and all operations are performed at this
wide internal precision. Numbers are automatically converted to the internal 80-bit
format on a load and converted back to the appropriate size on a store. Memory
data can be 32-bit (single-precision) or 64-bit (double-precision) floating-point
numbers, called real by Intel. The register-memory version of these instructions
will then convert the memory operand to this Intel 80-bit format before performing
the operation. The data transfer instructions also will automatically convert 16- and
32-bit integers to reals, and vice versa, for integer loads and stores.
    The 80x86 floating-point operations can be divided into four major classes:

1. Data movement instructions, including load, load constant, and store
2. Arithmetic instructions, including add, subtract, multiply, divide, square root,
   and absolute value
3. Comparison, including instructions to send the result to the integer CPU so that
   it can branch
4. Transcendental instructions, including sine, cosine, log, and exponentiation

Figure K.35 shows some of the 60 floating-point operations. We use the curly
brackets {} to show optional variations of the basic operations: {I} means there
is an integer version of the instruction, {P} means this variation will pop one
operand off the stack after the operation, and {R} means reverse the sense of
the operands in this operation.
    Not all combinations are provided. Hence,

    F{I}SUB{R}{P}

represents these instructions found in the 80x86:

    FSUB
    FISUB
    FSUBR
    FISUBR
    FSUBP
    FSUBRP

Data transfer                    Arithmetic                               Compare                      Transcendental

F{I}LD mem/ST(i)                 F{I}ADD{P}mem/ST(i)                      F{I}COM{P}{P}                FPA TA N
F{I}ST{P} mem/ST(i)              F{I}SUB{R}{P}mem/ST(i)                   F{I}UCOM{P}{P}               F2XM1
FLD PI                           F{I}MUL{P}mem/ST(i)                      FSTSW AX/mem                 FC O S
FLD 1                            F{I}DIV{R}{P}mem/ST(i)                                                FPTA N
FLD Z                            FSQ R T                                                               FPR EM
                                 FA B S                                                                FSIN
                                 FRNDINT                                                               FY L2X

Figure K.35 The floating-point instructions of the 80x86. The first column shows the data transfer instructions,
which move data to memory or to one of the registers below the top of the stack. The last three operations push
constants on the stack: pi, 1.0, and 0.0. The second column contains the arithmetic operations described above. Note
that the last three operate only on the top of stack. The third column is the compare instructions. Since there are no
special floating-point branch instructions, the result of the compare must be transferred to the integer CPU via the
FSTSW instruction, either into the AX register or into memory, followed by an SAHF instruction to set the condition
codes. The floating-point comparison can then be tested using integer branch instructions. The final column gives the
higher-level floating-point operations.

                             There are no pop or reverse pop versions of the integer subtract instructions.
                                 Note that we get even more combinations when including the operand modes
                             for these operations. The floating-point add has these options, ignoring the integer
                             and pop versions of the instruction:

                             FADD                     Both operands are in the in stack, and the result replaces the top of
                                                      stack.
                             FADD      ST(i)          One source operand is ith register below the top of stack, and the
                                                      result replaces the top of stack.
                             FADD      ST(i),ST       One source operand is the top of stack, and the result replaces ith
                                                      register below the top of stack.
                             FADD      mem32          One source operand is a 32-bit location in memory, and the result
                                                      replaces the top of stack.
                             FADD      mem64          One source operand is a 64-bit location in memory, and the result
                                                      replaces the top of stack.

                             As mentioned earlier SSE2 presents a model of IEEE floating-point registers.

                             80x86 Instruction Encoding
                             Saving the worst for last, the encoding of instructions in the 8086 is complex, with
                             many different instruction formats. Instructions may vary from 1 byte, when there
                             are no operands, to up to 6 bytes, when the instruction contains a 16-bit immediate

and uses 16-bit displacement addressing. Prefix instructions increase 8086 instruc-
tion length beyond the obvious sizes.
     The 80386 additions expand the instruction size even further, as Figure K.36
shows. Both the displacement and immediate fields can be 32 bits long, two more
prefixes are possible, the opcode can be 16 bits long, and the scaled index mode spec-
ifier adds another 8 bits. The maximum possible 80386 instruction is 17 bytes long.
     Figure K.37 shows the instruction format for several of the example instruc-
tions in Figure K.33. The opcode byte usually contains a bit saying whether the
operand is a byte wide or the larger size, 16 bits or 32 bits depending on the mode.
For some instructions, the opcode may include the addressing mode and the reg-
ister; this is true in many instructions that have the form register
    register op immediate. Other instructions use a “postbyte” or extra
opcode byte, labeled “mod, reg, r/m” in Figure K.36, which contains the addres-
sing mode information. This postbyte is used for many of the instructions that
address memory. The based with scaled index uses a second postbyte, labeled
“sc, index, base” in Figure K.36.
     The floating-point instructions are encoded in the escape opcode of the 8086
and the postbyte address specifier. The memory operations reserve 2 bits to decide

                                 Repeat

                                  Lock

                              Seg. override
                                                   Prefixes
                              Addr. override

                              Size override

                                 Opcode
                                                   Opcode
                              Opcode ext.

                              mod, reg, r/m
                                                   Address
                                                   specifiers
                             sc, index, base

                                  Disp8

                                 Disp16
                                                   Displacement
                                 Disp24

                                 Disp32

                                  Imm8

                                 Imm16
                                                   Immediate
                                 Imm24

                                 Imm32

Figure K.36 The instruction format of the 8086 (black type) and the extensions for
the 80386 (shaded type). Every field is optional except the opcode.

                                               4                     4                      8

                                            JE                 Condition          Displacement

                                          a. JE PC + displacement

                                                       8                               16                           16

                                               CALLF                                  Offset                  Segment number

                                          b. CALLF

                                                       6          2               8                       8
                                                                                 r-m
                                               MOV              d/w                                  Displacement
                                                                               postbyte

                                          c. MOV BX, [DI + 45]

                                                       5                   3

                                               PUSH                      Reg

                                          d. PUSH SI

                                           4               3      1                             16

                                          ADD          Reg       w                          Constant

                                          e. ADD AX, #6765

                                                   6             2                8
                                                                                  r-r
                                               SHL              v/w
                                                                               postbyte

                                          f. SHL BX, 1

                                                   7             1                8                       8

                                               TEST              w             Postbyte                Immediate

                                          g. TEST DX, #42

                         Figure K.37 Typical 8086 instruction formats. The encoding of the postbyte is shown
                         in Figure K.38. Many instructions contain the 1-bit field w, which says whether the oper-
                         ation is a byte or a word. Fields of the form v/w or d/w are a d-field or v-field followed by
                         the w-field. The d-field in MOV is used in instructions that may move to or from memory
                         and shows the direction of the move. The field v in the SHL instruction indicates a
                         variable-length shift; variable-length shifts use a register to hold the shift count. The
                         ADD instruction shows a typical optimized short encoding usable only when the first
                         operand is AX. Overall instructions may vary from 1 to 6 bytes in length.

                         whether the operand is a 32- or 64-bit real or a 16- or 32-bit integer. Those same 2
                         bits are used in versions that do not access memory to decide whether the stack
                         should be popped after the operation and whether the top of stack or a lower reg-
                         ister should get the result.
                             Alas, you cannot separate the restrictions on registers from the encoding of the
                         addressing modes in the 80x86. Hence, Figures K.38 and K.39 show the encoding
                         of the two postbyte address specifiers for both 16- and 32-bit mode.
               w=1                     mod = 0                      mod = 1                     mod = 2

reg w = 0 16b 32b r/m              16b          32b          16b           32b           16b            32b        mod = 3
 0    AL     AX    EAX    0 addr=BX+SI        =EAX       same          same           same          same           same

 1    CL     CX    ECX    1 addr=BX+DI        =ECX       addr as       addr as        addr as      addr as         as

 2    DL     DX    EDX    2 addr=BP+SI        =ED X      mod= 0        mod= 0         mod= 0       mod= 0          reg

 3    BL     BX    EBX    3 addr=BP+SI        =EB X      + disp 8      + disp 8       + disp1 6    + disp3 2       field

 4    AH     SP    ESP    4 addr=SI           =(si)b     SI+disp16 (sib)+disp8 SI+disp8             (sib)+disp32 "
 5    CH     BP    EBP    5 addr=DI           =disp32 DI+disp8 EBP+disp8              DI+disp16 EBP+disp32           "
 6    DH     SI    ESI    6 addr=disp16 =E SI            B P+disp8     ESI+disp8      BP+disp16 ESI+disp32           "
 7    BH     DI    EDI    7 addr=BX           =ED I      B X+disp8 EDI+disp8          BX+disp16 EDI+disp32           "

Figure K.38 The encoding of the first address specifier of the 80x86, mod, reg, r/m. The first four columns show the
encoding of the 3-bit reg field, which depends on the w bit from the opcode and whether the machine is in 16- or 32-
bit mode. The remaining columns explain the mod and r/m fields. The meaning of the 3-bit r/m field depends on the
value in the 2-bit mod field and the address size. Basically, the registers used in the address calculation are listed in the
sixth and seventh columns, under mod ¼ 0, with mod ¼ 1 adding an 8-bit displacement and mod ¼ 2 adding a 16- or
32-bit displacement, depending on the address mode. The exceptions are r/m ¼ 6 when mod ¼ 1 or mod ¼ 2 in 16-bit
mode selects BP plus the displacement; r/m ¼ 5 when mod ¼ 1 or mod ¼ 2 in 32-bit mode selects EBP plus displace-
ment; and r/m ¼ 4 in 32-bit mode when mod ¦3 (sib) means use the scaled index mode shown in Figure K.39. When
mod ¼ 3, the r/m field indicates a register, using the same encoding as the reg field combined with the w bit.

                               Index                                                                   Base
                               0                                     EAX                               EAX
                               1                                     ECX                               ECX
                               2                                     EDX                               EDX
                               3                                     EBX                               EBX
                               4                                     No index                          ESP
                               5                                     EBP                               If mod = 0, disp32
                                                                                                       If mod ¦ 0, EBP
                               6                                     ESI                               ESI
                               7                                     EDI                               EDI

                               Figure K.39 Based plus scaled index mode address specifier found in the 80386. This
                               mode is indicated by the (sib) notation in Figure K.38. Note that this mode expands the
                               list of registers to be used in other modes: Register indirect using ESP comes from Scale
                               ¼ 0, Index ¼ 4, and Base ¼ 4, and base displacement with EBP comes from Scale ¼ 0,
                               Index ¼ 5, and mod ¼ 0. The two-bit scale field is used in this formula of the effective
                               address: Base register + 2Scale ? Index register.

                         Putting It All Together: Measurements
                         of Instruction Set Usage
                         In this section, we present detailed measurements for the 80x86 and then compare
                         the measurements to MIPS for the same programs. To facilitate comparisons
                         among dynamic instruction set measurements, we use a subset of the SPEC92 pro-
                         grams. The 80x86 results were taken in 1994 using the Sun Solaris FORTRAN and
                         C compilers V2.0 and executed in 32-bit mode. These compilers were comparable
                         in quality to the compilers used for MIPS.
                             Remember that these measurements depend on the benchmarks chosen and the
                         compiler technology used. Although we feel that the measurements in this section
                         are reasonably indicative of the usage of these architectures, other programs may
                         behave differently from any of the benchmarks here, and different compilers may
                         yield different results. In doing a real instruction set study, the architect would want
                         to have a much larger set of benchmarks, spanning as wide an application range as
                         possible, and consider the operating system and its usage of the instruction set.
                         Single-user benchmarks like those measured here do not necessarily behave in
                         the same fashion as the operating system.
                             We start with an evaluation of the features of the 80x86 in isolation, and later
                         compare instruction counts with those of DLX.

                         Measurements of 80x86 Operand Addressing
                         We start with addressing modes. Figure K.40 shows the distribution of the operand
                         types in the 80x86. These measurements cover the “second” operand of the oper-
                         ation; for example,

                             mov EAX, [45]

                         counts as a single memory operand. If the types of the first operand were counted,
                         the percentage of register usage would increase by about a factor of 1.5.
                             The 80x86 memory operands are divided into their respective addressing
                         modes in Figure K.41. Probably the biggest surprise is the popularity of the

                                                                    Integer average                FP average
                        Register                                           45%                         22%
                        Immediate                                          16%                          6%
                        Memory                                             39%                         72%

                        Figure K.40 Operand type distribution for the average of five SPECint92 programs
                        (compress, eqntott, espresso, gcc, li) and the average of five SPECfp92 programs
                        (doduc, ear, hydro2d, mdljdp2, su2cor).

Addressing mode                                    Integer average       FP average
Register indirect                                        13%                   3%
Base + 8-bit disp.                                       31%                15%
Base + 32-bit disp.                                       9%                25%
Indexed                                                   0%                   0%
Based indexed + 8-bit disp.                               0%                   0%
Based indexed + 32 -bit disp.                             0%                   1%
Base + scaled indexed                                    22%                   7%
Base + scaled indexed + 8-bit disp.                       0%                   8%
Base + scaled indexed + 32-bit disp.                      4%                   4%
32-bit direct                                            20%                37%

Figure K.41 Operand addressing mode distribution by program. This chart does not
include addressing modes used by branches or control instructions.

addressing modes added by the 80386, the last four rows of the figure. They
account for about half of all the memory accesses. Another surprise is the popu-
larity of direct addressing. On most other machines, the equivalent of the direct
addressing mode is rare. Perhaps the segmented address space of the 80x86 makes
direct addressing more useful, since the address is relative to a base address from
the segment register.
     These addressing modes largely determine the size of the Intel instructions.
Figure K.42 shows the distribution of instruction sizes. The average number of
bytes per instruction for integer programs is 2.8, with a standard deviation of
1.5, and 4.1 with a standard deviation of 1.9 for floating-point programs. The dif-
ference in length arises partly from the differences in the addressing modes: Integer
programs rely more on the shorter register indirect and 8-bit displacement addres-
sing modes, while floating-point programs more frequently use the 80386 addres-
sing modes with the longer 32-bit displacements.
     Given that the floating-point instructions have aspects of both stacks and reg-
isters, how are they used? Figure K.43 shows that, at least for the compilers used in
this measurement, the stack model of execution is rarely followed. (See Section L.3
for a historical explanation of this observation.)
     Finally, Figures K.44 and K.45 show the instruction mixes for 10 SPEC92
programs.

Comparative Operation Measurements
Figures K.46 and K.47 show the number of instructions executed for each of the 10
programs on the 80x86 and the ratio of instruction execution compared with that

                                                                        0%
                                                                  11
                                                                        0%
                                                                        0%
                                                                  10                                  Floating-point
                                                                        0%
                                                                                                      average
                                                                        0%
                                                                   9                                  Integer average
                                                                        0%
                                                                        0%
                                                                   8
                                                                        1%

                                                                          4%

                                            Instruction lengths
                                                                  7
                                                                         2%

                                                                                                                         39%
                                                                   6
                                                                                  8%

                                                                             4%
                                                                   5              6%

                                                                               7%
                                                                  4
                                                                             5%

                                                                                                18%
                                                                   3
                                                                                                         25%

                                                                                                19%
                                                                   2
                                                                                                                          40%

                                                                                       10%
                                                                   1
                                                                                          14%

                                                                   0%                        20%                        40%             60%

                                                                                       Percentage of instructions at each length

                             Figure K.42 Averages of the histograms of 80x86 instruction lengths for five SPE-
                             Cint92 programs and for five SPECfp92 programs, all running in 32-bit mode.

Option                                     doduc                                   ear           hydro2d          mdljdp2          su2cor     FP average
Stack (2nd operand ST (1))                                  1.1%                   0.0%               0.0%              0.2%        0.6%         0.4%
Register (2nd operand ST(i), i > 1)          17.3%                                63.4%               14.2%             7.1%       30.7%        26.5%
Memory                                       81.6%                                36.6%               85.8%            92.7%       68.7%        73.1%

Figure K.43 The percentage of instructions for the floating-point operations (add, sub, mul, div) that use each of
the three options for specifying a floating-point operand on the 80x86. The three options are (1) the strict stack
model of implicit operands on the stack, (2) register version naming an explicit operand that is not one of the top two
elements of the stack, and (3) memory operand.

                             for DLX: Numbers less than 1.0 mean that the 80x86 executes fewer instructions
                             than DLX. The instruction count is surprisingly close to DLX for many integer
                             programs, as you would expect a load-store instruction set architecture like
                             DLX to execute more instructions than a register-memory architecture like the
                             80x86. The floating-point programs always have higher counts for the 80x86,

Instruction                   doduc          ear         hydro2d       mdljdp2       su2cor        FP average
Load                           8.9%          6.5%         18.0%         27.6%         27.6%              20%
Store                         12.4%          3.1%         11.5%          7.8%          7.8%              8%
Add                            5.4%          6.6%         14.6%          8.8%          8.8%              10%
Sub                            1.0%          2.4%          3.3%          2.4%          2.4%              3%
Mul                                                                                                      0%
Div                                                                                                      0%
Compare                        1.8%          5.1%          0.8%          1.0%          1.0%              2%
Mov reg-reg                    3.2%          0.1%          1.8%          2.3%          2.3%              2%
Load imm                       0.4%          1.5%                                                        0%
Cond. branch                   5.4%          8.2%          5.1%          2.7%          2.7%              5%
Uncond branch                  0.8%          0.4%          1.3%          0.3%          0.3%              1%
Call                           0.5%          1.6%                        0.1%          0.1%              0%
Return, jmp indirect           0.5%          1.6%                        0.1%          0.1%              0%
Shift                          1.1%                        4.5%          2.5%          2.5%              2%
AND                            0.8%          0.8%          0.7%          1.3%          1.3%              1%
OR                             0.1%                                      0.1%          0.1%              0%
Other (XOR, not, . . .)                                                                                  0%
Load FP                       14.1%         22.5%          9.1%         12.6%         12.6%              14%
Store FP                       8.6%         11.4%          4.1%          6.6%          6.6%              7%
Add FP                         5.8%          6.1%          1.4%          6.6%          6.6%              5%
Sub FP                         2.2%          2.7%          3.1%          2.9%          2.9%              3%
Mul FP                         8.9%          8.0%          4.1%         12.0%         12.0%              9%
Div FP                         2.1%                        0.8%          0.2%          0.2%              0%
Compare FP                     9.4%          6.9%         10.8%          0.5%          0.5%              5%
Mov reg-reg FP                 2.5%          0.8%          0.3%          0.8%          0.8%              1%
Other (abs, sqrt, . . .)       3.9%          3.8%          4.1%          0.8%          0.8%              2%

Figure K.44 80x86 instruction mix for five SPECfp92 programs.

                           presumably due to the lack of floating-point registers and the use of a stack
                           architecture.
                               Another question is the total amount of data traffic for the 80x86 versus DLX,
                           since the 80x86 can specify memory operands as part of operations while DLX
                           can only access via loads and stores. Figures K.46 and K.47 also show the data
                           reads, data writes, and data read-modify-writes for these 10 programs. The total

Instruction                 compress      eqntott      espresso     gcc (cc1)        li       Int. average
Load                         20.8%         18.5%        21 .9%       24.9 %        23 .3%         2 2%
Store                        13.8%          3.2%         8. 3%       16 .6%        1 8.7%         12%
Add                          10.3%          8.8%        8. 15%        7. 6%         6. 1%          8%
Sub                           7.0%         10.6%         3.5%         2.9 %         3.6%           5%
Mul                                                                   0.1%                         0%
Div                                                                                                0%
Compare                       8.2%         27.7%        15.3%        13.5%          7.7%          16%
Mov reg-reg                   7.9%          0.6%         5.0%         4.2%          7.8%           4%
Load imm                      0.5%          0.2%         0.6%         0.4%                         0%
Cond. branch                 15.5%         28.6%        18.9%        17.4%         15.4%          20%
Uncond. branch                1.2%          0.2%         0.9%         2.2%          2.2%           1%
Call                          0.5%          0.4%         0 .7%        1.5%          3.2%           1%
Return, jmp indirect          0.5%          0.4%         0.7%         1.5%          3.2%           1%
Shift                         3.8%                       2.5%         1.7%                         1%
AND                           8.4%          1.0%         8.7%         4.5%          8.4%           6%
OR                            0.6%                       2.7%         0.4%          0.4%           1%
Other (XOR, not, . . .)       0.9%                       2.2%         0.1%                         1%
Load FP                                                                                            0%
Store FP                                                                                           0%
Add FP                                                                                             0%
Sub FP                                                                                             0%
Mul FP                                                                                             0%
Div FP                                                                                             0%
Compare FP                                                                                         0%
Mov reg-reg FP                                                                                     0%
Other (abs, sqrt, . . .)                                                                           0%

Figure K.45 80x86 instruction mix for five SPECint92 programs.

                            accesses ratio to DLX of each memory access type is shown in the bottom
                            rows, with the read-modify-write counting as one read and one write. The
                            80x86 performs about two to four times as many data accesses as DLX for
                            floating-point programs, and 1.25 times as many for integer programs. Finally,
                            Figure K.48 shows the percentage of instructions in each category for 80x86
                            and DLX.

                                               compress     eqntott     espresso      gcc (cc1)          li   Int. avg.
Instructions executed on 80x86 (millions)        2226         1203       2216           3770         5020
Instructions executed ratio to DLX               0.61         1.74        0.85          0.96         0.98          1.03
Data reads on 80x86 (millions)                    589         229         622           1079         1459
Data writes on 80x86 (millions)                   311            39       191            661         981
Data read-modify-writes on 80x86 (millions)       26              1       129            48           48
Total data reads on 80x86 (millions)              615         230         751           1127         1507
Data read ratio to DLX                           0.85         1.09        1.38          1.25         0.94          1.10
Total data writes on 80x86 (millions)             338            40       319            709         1029
Data write ratio to DLX                          1.67         9.26        2.39          1.25         1.20          3.15
Total data accesses on 80x86 (millions)           953         269        1070           1836         2536
Data access ratio to DLX                         1.03         1.25        1.58          1.25         1.03          1.23

Figure K.46 Instructions executed and data accesses on 80x86 and ratios compared to DLX for five SPECint92
programs.

                                               doduc        ear       hydro2d     mdljdp2         su2cor FP average
Instructions executed on 80x86 (millions)       1223      15,220      13,342          6197        6197
Instructions executed ratio to DLX               1.19       1.19       2.53           2.09         1.62           1.73
Data reads on 80x86 (millions)                   515       6007        5501           3696        3643
Data writes on 80x86 (millions)                  260       2205        2085           892          892
Data read-modify-writes on 80x86 (millions)       1          0          189           124          124
Total data reads on 80x86 (millions)             517       6007        5690           3820        3767
Data read ratio to DLX                           2.04       2.36       4.48           4.77         3.91           3.51
Total data writes on 80x86 (millions)            261       2205        2274           1015        1015
Data write ratio to DLX                          3.68      33.25       38.74          16.74        9.35       20.35
Total data accesses on 80x86 (millions)          778       8212        7965           4835        4782
Data access ratio to DLX                         2.40       3.14       5.99           5.73         4.47           4.35

Figure K.47 Instructions executed and data accesses for five SPECfp92 programs on 80x86 and ratio to DLX.

                             Concluding Remarks
                             Beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
                                                                                                  Old Adage

                             As we have seen, “orthogonal” is not a term found in the Intel architectural dictio-
                             nary. To fully understand which registers and which addressing modes are avail-
                             able, you need to see the encoding of all addressing modes and sometimes the
                             encoding of the instructions.

                                                             Integer average                  FP average

                         Category                          x86               DLX              x86        DLX
                         Total data transfer               34%               36%              28%          2%
                         Total integer arithmetic          34%               31%              16%         12%
                         Total control                     24%               20%               6%         10%
                         Total logical                      8%               13%               3%          2%
                         Total FP data transfer             0%                 0%             22%         33%
                         Total FP arithmetic                0%                 0%             25%         41%

                         Figure K.48 Percentage of instructions executed by category for 80x86 and DLX for
                         the averages of five SPECint92 and SPECfp92 programs of Figures K.46 and K.47.

                              Some argue that the inelegance of the 80x86 instruction set is unavoidable, the
                         price that must be paid for rampant success by any architecture. We reject that
                         notion. Obviously, no successful architecture can jettison features that were added
                         in previous implementations, and over time some features may be seen as unde-
                         sirable. The awkwardness of the 80x86 began at its core with the 8086 instruction
                         set and was exacerbated by the architecturally inconsistent expansions of the 8087,
                         80286, and 80386.
                              A counterexample is the IBM 360/370 architecture, which is much older than
                         the 80x86. It dominates the mainframe market just as the 80x86 dominates the PC
                         market. Due undoubtedly to a better base and more compatible enhancements, this
                         instruction set makes much more sense than the 80x86 more than 30 years after its
                         first implementation.
                              For better or worse, Intel had a 16-bit microprocessor years before its compet-
                         itors’ more elegant architectures, and this head start led to the selection of the 8086
                         as the CPU for the IBM PC. What it lacks in style is made up in quantity, making
                         the 80x86 beautiful from the right perspective.
                              The saving grace of the 80x86 is that its architectural components are not too
                         difficult to implement, as Intel has demonstrated by rapidly improving perfor-
                         mance of integer programs since 1978. High floating-point performance is a larger
                         challenge in this architecture.

               K.4       The VAX Architecture
                         VAX: the most successful minicomputer design in industry history . . . the VAX was
                         probably the hacker’s favorite machine . . . . Especially noted for its large,
                         assembler-programmer-friendly instruction set—an asset that became a liability
                         after the RISC revolution.
                                                                                  Eric Raymond
                                                            The New Hacker’s Dictionary (1991)

Introduction
To enhance your understanding of instruction set architectures, we chose the VAX as
the representative Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC) because it is so differ-
ent from MIPS and yet still easy to understand. By seeing two such divergent styles,
we are confident that you will be able to learn other instruction sets on your own.
    At the time the VAX was designed, the prevailing philosophy was to create
instruction sets that were close to programming languages in order to simplify
compilers. For example, because programming languages had loops, instruction
sets should have loop instructions. As VAX architect William Strecker said
(“VAX-11/780—A Virtual Address Extension to the PDP-11 Family,” AFIPS
Proc., National Computer Conference, 1978):

   A major goal of the VAX-11 instruction set was to provide for effective compiler
   generated code. Four decisions helped to realize this goal: 1) A very regular and
   consistent treatment of operators . . . . 2) An avoidance of instructions unlikely
   to be generated by a compiler . . . . 3) Inclusions of several forms of common
   operators . . . . 4) Replacement of common instruction sequences with single
   instructions . . . . Examples include procedure calling, multiway branching, loop
   control, and array subscript calculation.

    Recall that DRAMs of the mid-1970s contained less than 1/1000th the capacity
of today’s DRAMs, so code space was also critical. Hence, another prevailing phi-
losophy was to minimize code size, which is de-emphasized in fixed-length
instruction sets like MIPS. For example, MIPS address fields always use 16 bits,
even when the address is very small. In contrast, the VAX allows instructions to be
a variable number of bytes, so there is little wasted space in address fields.
    Whole books have been written just about the VAX, so this VAX extension
cannot be exhaustive. Hence, the following sections describe only a few of its
addressing modes and instructions. To show the VAX instructions in action, later
sections show VAX assembly code for two C procedures. The general style will be
to contrast these instructions with the MIPS code that you are already familiar with.
    The differing goals for VAX and MIPS have led to very different architectures.
The VAX goals, simple compilers and code density, led to the powerful addressing
modes, powerful instructions, and efficient instruction encoding. The MIPS goals
were high performance via pipelining, ease of hardware implementation, and com-
patibility with highly optimizing compilers. The MIPS goals led to simple instruc-
tions, simple addressing modes, fixed-length instruction formats, and a large
number of registers.

VAX Operands and Addressing Modes
The VAX is a 32-bit architecture, with 32-bit-wide addresses and 32-bit-wide reg-
isters. Yet, the VAX supports many other data sizes and types, as Figure K.49
shows. Unfortunately, VAX uses the name “word” to refer to 16-bit quantities;
in this text, a word means 32 bits. Figure K.49 shows the conversion between

                         Bits      Data type                 MIPS name                  VAX name
                         08        Integer                   Byte                        Byte
                         16        Integer                   Half word                   Word
                         32        Integer                   Word                        Long word
                         32        Floating point            Single precision            F_floating
                         64        Integer                   Double word                 Quad word
                         64        Floating point            Double precision            D_floating or G_floating
                         8n        Character string          Character                   Character

                         Figure K.49 VAX data types, their lengths, and names. The first letter of the VAX type
                         (b, w, l, f, q, d, g, c) is often used to complete an instruction name. Examples of move
                         instructions include movb, movw, movl, movf, movq, movd, movg, and movc3.
                         Each move instruction transfers an operand of the data type indicated by the letter
                         following mov.

                         the MIPS data type names and the VAX names. Be careful when reading about
                         VAX instructions, as they refer to the names of the VAX data types.
                             The VAX provides sixteen 32-bit registers. The VAX assembler uses the
                         notation r0, r1, . . . , r15 to refer to these registers, and we will stick to that
                         notation. Alas, 4 of these 16 registers are effectively claimed by the instruction set
                         architecture. For example, r14 is the stack pointer (sp) and r15 is the program
                         counter (pc). Hence, r15 cannot be used as a general-purpose register, and using
                         r14 is very difficult because it interferes with instructions that manipulate the
                         stack. The other dedicated registers are r12, used as the argument pointer (ap),
                         and r13, used as the frame pointer (fp); their purpose will become clear later.
                         (Like MIPS, the VAX assembler accepts either the register number or the register
                         name.)
                             VAX addressing modes include those discussed in Appendix A, which has all
                         the MIPS addressing modes: register, displacement, immediate, and PC-relative.
                         Moreover, all these modes can be used for jump addresses or for data addresses.
                             But that’s not all the addressing modes. To reduce code size, the VAX has three
                         lengths of addresses for displacement addressing: 8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit
                         addresses called, respectively, byte displacement, word displacement, and long
                         displacement addressing. Thus, an address can be not only as small as possible
                         but also as large as necessary; large addresses need not be split, so there is no equiv-
                         alent to the MIPS lui instruction (see Figure A.24 on page A-37).
                             Those are still not all the VAX addressing modes. Several have a deferred
                         option, meaning that the object addressed is only the address of the real object,
                         requiring another memory access to get the operand. This addressing mode is
                         called indirect addressing in other machines. Thus, register deferred, autoincre-
                         ment deferred, and byte/word/long displacement deferred are other addressing
                         modes to choose from. For example, using the notation of the VAX assembler,

                                r1 means the operand is register 1 and (r1) means the operand is the location in
                                memory pointed to by r1.
                                    There is yet another addressing mode. Indexed addressing automatically con-
                                verts the value in an index operand to the proper byte address to add to the rest of
                                the address. For a 32-bit word, we needed to multiply the index of a 4-byte quantity
                                by 4 before adding it to a base address. Indexed addressing, called scaled addres-
                                sing on some computers, automatically multiplies the index of a 4-byte quantity by
                                4 as part of the address calculation.
                                    To cope with such a plethora of addressing options, the VAX architecture
                                separates the specification of the addressing mode from the specification of
                                the operation. Hence, the opcode supplies the operation and the number of oper-
                                ands, and each operand has its own addressing mode specifier. Figure K.50
                                shows the name, assembler notation, example, meaning, and length of the address
                                specifier.
                                    The VAX style of addressing means that an operation doesn’t know where its
                                operands come from; a VAX add instruction can have three operands in registers,
                                three operands in memory, or any combination of registers and memory
                                operands.

Addressing mode                                                                                 Length of address
name                       Syntax                  Example Meaning                              specifier in bytes
Literal                    #value                  #–1        –1                                1 (6-bit signed value)
Immediate                  #value                  #100       100                               1 + length of the
                                                                                                immediate
Register                   rn                      r3         r3                                1
Register deferred          (rn)                    (r3)       Memory[r3]                        1
Byte/word/long             Displacement (rn)       100(r3)    Memory[r3 + 100]                  1 + length of the
displacement                                                                                    displacement
Byte/word/long             @displacement (rn)      @100(r3) Memory[Memory [r3 + 100]]           1 + length of the
displacement deferred                                                                           displacement
Indexed (scaled)           Base mode [rx]          (r3)[r4]   Memory[r3 + r4 d]                 1 + length of base
                                                              (where d is data size in bytes)   addressing mode
Autoincrement              (rn)+                   (r3)+      Memory[r3]; r3 = r3 + d           1
Autodecrement              – (rn)                  –(r3)      r3 = r3 – d; Memory[r3]           1
Autoincrement deferred     @(rn)+                  @(r3)+     Memory[Memory[r3]]; r3 = r3 + d 1

Figure K.50 Definition and length of the VAX operand specifiers. The length of each addressing mode is 1 byte
plus the length of any displacement or immediate field needed by the mode. Literal mode uses a special 2-bit tag and
the remaining 6 bits encode the constant value. If the constant is too big, it must use the immediate addressing mode.
Note that the length of an immediate operand is dictated by the length of the data type indicated in the opcode, not
the value of the immediate. The symbol d in the last four modes represents the length of the data in bytes; d is 4 for
32-bit add.

             Example     How long is the following instruction?
                             addl3 r1,737(r2),(r3)[r4]
                         The name addl3 means a 32-bit add instruction with three operands. Assume the
                         length of the VAX opcode is 1 byte.

               Answer    The first operand specifier—r1—indicates register addressing and is 1 byte long.
                         The second operand specifier—737(r2)—indicates displacement addressing
                         and has two parts: The first part is a byte that specifies the word displacement
                         addressing mode and base register (r2); the second part is the 2-byte-long dis-
                         placement (737). The third operand specifier—(r3)[r4]—also has two parts:
                         The first byte specifies register deferred addressing mode ((r3)), and the second
                         byte specifies the Index register and the use of indexed addressing ([r4]). Thus, the
                         total length of the instruction is 1 + (1) + (1 + 2) + (1 + 1) ¼ 7 bytes.

                         In this example instruction, we show the VAX destination operand on the left and
                         the source operands on the right, just as we show MIPS code. The VAX assembler
                         actually expects operands in the opposite order, but we felt it would be less con-
                         fusing to keep the destination on the left for both machines. Obviously, left or right
                         orientation is arbitrary; the only requirement is consistency.
           Elaboration   Because the PC is 1 of the 16 registers that can be selected in a VAX addressing
                         mode, 4 of the 22 VAX addressing modes are synthesized from other addressing
                         modes. Using the PC as the chosen register in each case, immediate addressing is
                         really autoincrement, PC-relative is displacement, absolute is autoincrement
                         deferred, and relative deferred is displacement deferred.

                         Encoding VAX Instructions
                         Given the independence of the operations and addressing modes, the encoding of
                         instructions is quite different from MIPS.
                             VAX instructions begin with a single byte opcode containing the operation and
                         the number of operands. The operands follow the opcode. Each operand begins
                         with a single byte, called the address specifier, that describes the addressing mode
                         for that operand. For a simple addressing mode, such as register addressing, this
                         byte specifies the register number as well as the mode (see the rightmost column
                         in Figure K.50). In other cases, this initial byte can be followed by many more
                         bytes to specify the rest of the address information.
                             As a specific example, let’s show the encoding of the add instruction from the
                         example on page K-24:

                             addl3 r1,737(r2),(r3)[r4]

                         Assume that this instruction starts at location 201.
                             Figure K.51 shows the encoding. Note that the operands are stored in memory
                         in opposite order to the assembly code above. The execution of VAX instructions

Byte address        Contents at each byte                                       Machine code
     201            Opcode containing addl3                                          c1hex
     202            Index mode specifier for [r4]                                    44hex
     203            Register indirect mode specifier for (r3)                        63hex
     204            Word displacement mode specifier using r2 as base                c2hex
     205            T h e 1 6- b it c o n st an t 737                                e1hex
     206                                                                             02hex
     207            Register mode specifier for r1                                   51hex

Figure K.51 The encoding of the VAX instruction addl3 r1,737(r2),(r3)[r4], assuming
it starts at address 201. To satisfy your curiosity, the right column shows the actual VAX
encoding in hexadecimal notation. Note that the 16-bit constant 737ten takes 2 bytes.

begins with fetching the source operands, so it makes sense for them to come first.
Order is not important in fixed-length instructions like MIPS, since the source and
destination operands are easily found within a 32-bit word.
    The first byte, at location 201, is the opcode. The next byte, at location 202, is a
specifier for the index mode using register r4. Like many of the other specifiers,
the left 4 bits of the specifier give the mode and the right 4 bits give the register
used in that mode. Since addl3 is a 4-byte operation, r4 will be multiplied by 4
and added to whatever address is specified next. In this case it is register deferred
addressing using register r3. Thus, bytes 202 and 203 combined define the third
operand in the assembly code.
    The following byte, at address 204, is a specifier for word displacement addres-
sing using register r2 as the base register. This specifier tells the VAX that the fol-
lowing two bytes, locations 205 and 206, contain a 16-bit address to be added to r2.
    The final byte of the instruction gives the destination operand, and this specifier
selects register addressing using register r1.
    Such variability in addressing means that a single VAX operation can have
many different lengths; for example, an integer add varies from 3 bytes to 19 bytes.
VAX implementations must decode the first operand before they can find the sec-
ond, and so implementors are strongly tempted to take 1 clock cycle to decode each
operand; thus, this sophisticated instruction set architecture can result in higher
clock cycles per instruction, even when using simple addresses.

VAX Operations
In keeping with its philosophy, the VAX has a large number of operations as well
as a large number of addressing modes. We review a few here to give the flavor of
the machine.
    Given the power of the addressing modes, the VAX move instruction performs
several operations found in other machines. It transfers data between any two
addressable locations and subsumes load, store, register-register moves, and

                         memory-memory moves as special cases. The first letter of the VAX data type (b,
                         w, l, f, q, d, g, c in Figure K.49) is appended to the acronym mov to determine the
                         size of the data. One special move, called move address, moves the 32-bit address
                         of the operand rather than the data. It uses the acronym mova.
                             The arithmetic operations of MIPS are also found in the VAX, with two major
                         differences. First, the type of the data is attached to the name. Thus, addb, addw,
                         and addl operate on 8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit data in memory or registers, respec-
                         tively; MIPS has a single add instruction that operates only on the full 32-bit reg-
                         ister. The second difference is that to reduce code size the add instruction specifies
                         the number of unique operands; MIPS always specifies three even if one operand is
                         redundant. For example, the MIPS instruction

                             add $1, $1, $2

                         takes 32 bits like all MIPS instructions, but the VAX instruction

                             addl2 r1, r2

                         uses r1 for both the destination and a source, taking just 24 bits: 8 bits for the
                         opcode and 8 bits each for the two register specifiers.

                         Number of Operations
                         Now we can show how VAX instruction names are formed:
                                                                                  
                                                                                2
                                                       ðoperationÞðdatatypeÞ
                                                                                3
                         The operation add works with data types byte, word, long, float, and double and
                         comes in versions for either 2 or 3 unique operands, so the following instructions
                         are all found in the VAX:

                                     addb2         addw2        addl2           addf2      addd2
                                     addb3         addw3        addl3           addf3      addd3

                         Accounting for all addressing modes (but ignoring register numbers and immediate
                         values) and limiting to just byte, word, and long, there are more than 30,000 ver-
                         sions of integer add in the VAX; MIPS has just 4!
                             Another reason for the large number of VAX instructions is the instructions
                         that either replace sequences of instructions or take fewer bytes to represent a sin-
                         gle instruction. Here are four such examples (* means the data type):

                         VAX operation              Example              Meaning
                         clr*                       clrl r3              r3 = 0
                         inc*                       incl r3              r3 = r3+1
                         dec*                       decl r3              r3 = r3 − 1
                         push*                      pushl r3             sp = sp −4; Memory[sp] = r3;

The push instruction in the last row is exactly the same as using the move instruc-
tion with autodecrement addressing on the stack pointer:

    movl – (sp), r3

Brevity is the advantage of pushl: It is 1 byte shorter since sp is implied.

Branches, Jumps, and Procedure Calls
The VAX branch instructions are related to the arithmetic instructions because the
branch instructions rely on condition codes. Condition codes are set as a side effect
of an operation, and they indicate whether the result is positive, negative, or zero or
if an overflow occurred. Most instructions set the VAX condition codes according
to their result; instructions without results, such as branches, do not. The VAX con-
dition codes are N (Negative), Z (Zero), V (oVerflow), and C (Carry). There is also
a compare instruction cmp* just to set the condition codes for a subsequent branch.
     The VAX branch instructions include all conditions. Popular branch instruc-
tions include beql(=), bneq(6¼), blss(<), bleq(?), bgtr(>),
and bgeq(?), which do just what you would expect. There are also unconditional
branches whose name is determined by the size of the PC-relative offset. Thus,
brb (branch byte) has an 8-bit displacement, and brw (branch word) has a 16-
bit displacement.
     The final major category we cover here is the procedure call and return instruc-
tions. Unlike the MIPS architecture, these elaborate instructions can take dozens of
clock cycles to execute. The next two sections show how they work, but we need to
explain the purpose of the pointers associated with the stack manipulated by calls
and ret. The stack pointer, sp, is just like the stack pointer in MIPS; it points to the
top of the stack. The argument pointer, ap, points to the base of the list of arguments
or parameters in memory that are passed to the procedure. The frame pointer, fp,
points to the base of the local variables of the procedure that are kept in memory (the
stack frame). The VAX call and return instructions manipulate these pointers to
maintain the stack in proper condition across procedure calls and to provide conve-
nient base registers to use when accessing memory operands. As we shall see, call
and return also save and restore the general-purpose registers as well as the program
counter. Figure K.52 gives a further sampling of the VAX instruction set.

An Example to Put It All Together: swap
To see programming in VAX assembly language, we translate two C procedures,
swap and sort. The C code for swap is reproduced in Figure K.53. The next
section covers sort.
    We describe the swap procedure in three general steps of assembly language
programming:

1. Allocate registers to program variables.
2. Produce code for the body of the procedure.
3. Preserve registers across the procedure invocation.

Instruction type                   Example                  Instruction meaning
Data transfers                     Move data between byte, half-word, word, or double-word operands; * is data type
                                   mov*                     Move between two operands
                                   movzb*                   Move a byte to a half word or word, extending it with zeros
                                   mova*                    Move the 32-bit address of an operand; data type is last
                                   push*                    Push operand onto stack
Arithmetic/logical                 Operations on integer or logical bytes, half words (16 bits), words (32 bits); * is data
                                   type
                                   add*_                    Add with 2 or 3 operands
                                   cmp*                     Compare and set condition codes
                                   tst*                     Compare to zero and set condition codes
                                   ash*                     Arithmetic shift
                                   clr*                     Clear
                                   cvtb*                    Sign-extend byte to size of data type
C o n tr o l                       Conditional and unconditional branches
                                   beql, bneq               Branch equal, branch not equal
                                   bleq, bgeq               Branch less than or equal, branch greater than or equal
                                   brb, brw                 Unconditional branch with an 8-bit or 16-bit address
                                   jmp                      Jump using any addressing mode to specify target
                                   aobleq                   Add one to operand; branch if result second operand
                                   case_                    Jump based on case selector
Procedure                          Call/return from procedure
                                   calls                    Call procedure with arguments on stack (see “A Longer
                                                            Example: sort” on page K-33)
                                   callg                    Call procedure with FORTRAN-style parameter list
                                   jsb                      Jump to subroutine, saving return address (like MIPS jal)
                                   ret                      Return from procedure call
Floating point                     Floating-point operations on D, F, G, and H formats
                                   addd_                    Add double-precision D-format floating numbers
                                   subd_                    Subtract double-precision D-format floating numbers
                                   mulf_                    Multiply single-precision F-format floating point
                                   polyf                    Evaluate a polynomial using table of coefficients in F format
Other                              Special operations
                                   crc                      Calculate cyclic redundancy check
                                   insque                   Insert a queue entry into a queue

Figure K.52 Classes of VAX instructions with examples. The asterisk stands for multiple data types: b, w, l, d, f, g, h,
and q. The underline, as in addd_, means there are 2-operand (addd2) and 3-operand (addd3) forms of this
instruction.

swap(int v[], int k)
{
   int temp;
   temp = v[k];
   v[k] = v[k + 1];
   v[k + 1] = temp;
}

Figure K.53 A C procedure that swaps two locations in memory. This procedure will
be used in the sorting example in the next section.

The VAX code for these procedures is based on code produced by the VMS C
compiler using optimization.

Register Allocation for swap
In contrast to MIPS, VAX parameters are normally allocated to memory, so this
step of assembly language programming is more properly called “variable alloca-
tion.” The standard VAX convention on parameter passing is to use the stack. The
two parameters, v[] and k, can be accessed using register ap, the argument
pointer: The address 4(ap) corresponds to v[] and 8(ap) corresponds to k.
Remember that with byte addressing the address of sequential 4-byte words differs
by 4. The only other variable is temp, which we associate with register r3.

Code for the Body of the Procedure swap
The remaining lines of C code in swap are

   temp = v[k];
   v[k] = v[k + 1];
   v[k + 1] = temp;

Since this program uses v[] and k several times, to make the programs run faster
the VAX compiler first moves both parameters into registers:

   movl r2, 4(ap) ;r2 = v[]
   movl r1, 8(ap) ;r1 = k

Note that we follow the VAX convention of using a semicolon to start a comment;
the MIPS comment symbol # represents a constant operand in VAX assembly
language.

                             The VAX has indexed addressing, so we can use index k without converting it
                         to a byte address. The VAX code is then straightforward:

                             movl r3, (r2)[r1]                    ;r3 (temp) = v[k]
                             addl3 r0, #1,8(ap)                   ;r0 = k + 1
                             movl (r2)[r1],(r2)[r0] ;v[k] = v[r0] (v[k + 1])
                             movl (r2)[r0],r3                      ;v[k + 1] = r3 (temp)

                         Unlike the MIPS code, which is basically two loads and two stores, the key VAX
                         code is one memory-to-register move, one memory-to-memory move, and one
                         register-to-memory move. Note that the addl3 instruction shows the flexibility
                         of the VAX addressing modes: It adds the constant 1 to a memory operand and
                         places the result in a register.
                             Now we have allocated storage and written the code to perform the operations
                         of the procedure. The only missing item is the code that preserves registers across
                         the routine that calls swap.

                         Preserving Registers across Procedure Invocation of swap
                         The VAX has a pair of instructions that preserve registers, calls and ret. This
                         example shows how they work.
                             The VAX C compiler uses a form of callee convention. Examining the code
                         above, we see that the values in registers r0, r1, r2, and r3 must be saved
                         so that they can later be restored. The calls instruction expects a 16-bit mask
                         at the beginning of the procedure to determine which registers are saved: if bit i
                         is set in the mask, then register i is saved on the stack by the calls instruction.
                         In addition, calls saves this mask on the stack to allow the return instruction
                         (ret) to restore the proper registers. Thus, the calls executed by the caller does
                         the saving, but the callee sets the call mask to indicate what should be saved.
                             One of the operands for calls gives the number of parameters being passed,
                         so that calls can adjust the pointers associated with the stack: the argument
                         pointer (ap), frame pointer (fp), and stack pointer (sp). Of course, calls also
                         saves the program counter so that the procedure can return!
                             Thus, to preserve these four registers for swap, we just add the mask at the
                         beginning of the procedure, letting the calls instruction in the caller do all the work:

                             .word ^m<r0,r1,r2,r3 > ;set bits in mask for 0,1,2,3

                         This directive tells the assembler to place a 16-bit constant with the proper bits set
                         to save registers r0 through r3.
                             The return instruction undoes the work of calls. When finished, ret sets the
                         stack pointer from the current frame pointer to pop everything calls placed on
                         the stack. Along the way, it restores the register values saved by calls, including
                         those marked by the mask and old values of the fp, ap, and pc.

   To complete the procedure swap, we just add one instruction:

   ret        ;restore registers and return

The Full Procedure swap
We are now ready for the whole routine. Figure K.54 identifies each block of code
with its purpose in the procedure, with the MIPS code on the left and the VAX code
on the right. This example shows the advantage of the scaled indexed addressing
and the sophisticated call and return instructions of the VAX in reducing the num-
ber of lines of code. The 17 lines of MIPS assembly code became 8 lines of VAX
assembly code. It also shows that passing parameters in memory results in extra
memory accesses.
    Keep in mind that the number of instructions executed is not the same as per-
formance; the fallacy on page K-38 makes this point.
    Note that VAX software follows a convention of treating registers r0 and r1
as temporaries that are not saved across a procedure call, so the VMS C compiler
does include registers r0 and r1 in the register saving mask. Also, the C compiler
should have used r1 instead of 8(ap) in the addl3 instruction; such examples
inspire computer architects to try to write compilers!

                            MIPS versus VAX
                              Saving register
swap: addi       $29,$29, –12             swap: .word ^m<r0,r1,r2,r3>
      sw          $2, 0($29)
      sw         $15, 4($29)
      sw         $16, 8($29)
                             Procedure body
         muli    $2, $5,4                           movl    r2, 4(a)
         add     $2, $4,$2                          movl    r1, 8(a)
         lw      $15, 0($2)                         movl    r3, (r2)[r1]
         lw      $16, 4($2)                         addl3   r0, #1,8(ap)
         sw      $16, 0($2)                         movl    (r2)[r1],(r2)[r0]
         sw      $15, 4($2)                         movl    (r2)[r0],r3
                            Restoring registers
         lw       $2, 0($29)
         lw      $15, 4($29)
         lw      $16, 8($29)
         addi    $29,$29, 12
                             Procedure return
         jr      $31                                ret

Figure K.54 MIPS versus VAX assembly code of the procedure swap in Figure K.53
on page K-30.

                         A Longer Example: sort
                         We show the longer example of the sort procedure. Figure K.55 shows the C ver-
                         sion of the program. Once again we present this procedure in several steps, con-
                         cluding with a side-by-side comparison to MIPS code.

                         Register Allocation for sort
                         The two parameters of the procedure sort, v and n, are found in the stack in loca-
                         tions 4(ap) and 8(ap), respectively. The two local variables are assigned to regis-
                         ters: i to r6 and j to r4. Because the two parameters are referenced frequently in the
                         code, the VMS C compiler copies the address of these parameters into registers
                         upon entering the procedure:

                             moval      r7,8(ap)       ;move      address       of     n   into     r7
                             moval      r5,4(ap)       ;move      address       of     v   into     r5

                         It would seem that moving the value of the operand to a register would be more
                         useful than its address, but once again we bow to the decision of the VMS C com-
                         piler. Apparently the compiler cannot be sure that v and n don’t overlap in memory.

                         Code for the Body of the sort Procedure
                         The procedure body consists of two nested for loops and a call to swap, which
                         includes parameters. Let’s unwrap the code from the outside to the middle.
                         The Outer Loop
                         The first translation step is the first for loop:

                             for (i = 0; i < n; i = i + 1) {

                         Recall that the C for statement has three parts: initialization, loop test, and iteration
                         increment. It takes just one instruction to initialize i to 0, the first part of the for
                         statement:
                             clrl        r6      ;i = 0

                         sort (int v[], int n)
                         {
                            int i, j;
                            for (i = 0; i < n; i = i + 1) {
                            for (j = i – 1; j >= 0 && v[j] > v[j + 1]; j = j – 1)
                               { swap(v,j);
                             }
                           }
                         }

                         Figure K.55 A C procedure that performs a bubble sort on the array v.

It also takes just one instruction to increment i, the last part of the for:
    incl        r6       ;i = i + 1
The loop should be exited if i < n is false, or said another way, exit the loop if
i ? n. This test takes two instructions:
    for1tst: cmpl r6,(r7) ;compare r6 and memory[r7] (i:n)
             bgeq exit1   ;go to exit1 if r6 ? mem[r7] (i ? n)
    Note that cmpl sets the condition codes for use by the conditional branch
instruction bgeq.
    The bottom of the loop just jumps back to the loop test:
                  brb    for1tst        ;branch to test of outer loop
    exit1:
    The skeleton code of the first for loop is then
             clrl r6       ;i = 0
    for1tst: cmpl r6,(r7) ;compare r6 and memory[r7] (i:n)
             bgeq exit1    ;go to exit1 if r6 ? mem[r7] (i ? n)
                   ...
                   (body of first for loop)
                   ...
             incl r6       ;i = i + 1
             brb   for1tst ;branch to test of outer loop
    exit1:

The Inner Loop
The second for loop is
    for (j = i – 1; j >= 0 && v[j] > v[j + 1]; j = j – 1) {
The initialization portion of this loop is again one instruction:
    subl3         r4,r6,#1          ;j = i – 1
The decrement of j is also one instruction:
    decl          r4                ;j = j – 1
The loop test has two parts. We exit the loop if either condition fails, so the first test
must exit the loop if it fails (j < 0):
    for2tst:blss                exit2             ;go to exit2 if r4 < 0 (j < 0)
Notice that there is no explicit comparison. The lack of comparison is a benefit of
condition codes, with the conditions being set as a side effect of the prior instruc-
tion. This branch skips over the second condition test.
    The second test exits if v[j] > v[j + 1] is false, or exits if v[j] ? v[j + 1].
First we load v and put j + 1 into registers:
    movl        r3,(r5)          ;r3 = Memory[r5] (r3 = v)
    addl3       r2,r4,#1         ;r2 = r4 + 1 (r2 = j + 1)

                         Register indirect addressing is used to get the operand pointed to by r5.
                             Once again the index addressing mode means we can use indices without con-
                         verting to the byte address, so the two instructions for v[j] ? v[j + 1] are
                             cmpl (r3)[r4],(r3)[r2]                ;v[r4] : v[r2] (v[j]:v[j + 1])
                             bleq exit2                            ;go to exit2 if v[j] ? v[j + 1]
                         The bottom of the loop jumps back to the full loop test:
                             brb         for2tst #            jump to test of inner loop
                         Combining the pieces, the second for loop looks like this:
                                     subl3 r4,r6, #1             ;j = i – 1
                         for2tst: blss exit2                     ;go to exit2 if r4 < 0 (j < 0)
                                      movl r3,(r5)               ;r3 = Memory[r5] (r3 = v)
                                      addl3 r2,r4,#1             ;r2 = r4 + 1 (r2 = j + 1)
                                      cmpl (r3)[r4],(r3)[r2];v[r4] : v[r2]
                                      bleq exit2                 ;go to exit2 if v[j] ð [j+1]
                                                ...
                                                (body of second for loop) ...
                                      decl r4                    ;j = j – 1
                                      brb      for2tst           ;jump to test of inner loop
                         exit2:
                         Notice that the instruction blss (at the top of the loop) is testing the condition
                         codes based on the new value of r4 (j), set either by the subl3 before entering
                         the loop or by the decl at the bottom of the loop.

                         The Procedure Call
                         The next step is the body of the second for loop:
                             swap(v,j);
                         Calling swap is easy enough:
                             calls          #2,swap
                         The constant 2 indicates the number of parameters pushed on the stack.

                         Passing Parameters
                         The C compiler passes variables on the stack, so we pass the parameters to swap
                         with these two instructions:
                             pushl        (r5)            ;first swap parameter is v
                             pushl         r4             ;second swap parameter is j
                         Register indirect addressing is used to get the operand of the first instruction.

                         Preserving Registers across Procedure Invocation of sort
                         The only remaining code is the saving and restoring of registers using the callee
                         save convention. This procedure uses registers r2 through r7, so we add a mask
                         with those bits set:

              .word ^m<r2,r3,r4,r5,r6,r7 >; set mask for registers 2-7
          Since ret will undo all the operations, we just tack it on the end of the procedure.

          The Full Procedure sort
          Now we put all the pieces together in Figure K.56. To make the code easier to fol-
          low, once again we identify each block of code with its purpose in the procedure
          and list the MIPS and VAX code side by side. In this example, 11 lines of the sort
          procedure in C become the 44 lines in the MIPS assembly language and 20 lines in
          VAX assembly language. The biggest VAX advantages are in register saving and
          restoring and indexed addressing.

          Fallacies and Pitfalls
          The ability to simplify means to eliminate the unnecessary so that the necessary
          may speak.
                                                                   Hans Hoffman
                                                         Search for the Real (1967)

Fallacy   It is possible to design a flawless architecture.
          All architecture design involves trade-offs made in the context of a set of hardware
          and software technologies. Over time those technologies are likely to change, and
          decisions that may have been correct at one time later look like mistakes. For exam-
          ple, in 1975 the VAX designers overemphasized the importance of code size effi-
          ciency and underestimated how important ease of decoding and pipelining would
          be 10 years later. And, almost all architectures eventually succumb to the lack of
          sufficient address space. Avoiding these problems in the long run, however, would
          probably mean compromising the efficiency of the architecture in the short run.
Fallacy   An architecture with flaws cannot be successful.
          The IBM 360 is often criticized in the literature—the branches are not PC-relative,
          and the address is too small in displacement addressing. Yet, the machine has been
          an enormous success because it correctly handled several new problems. First, the
          architecture has a large amount of address space. Second, it is byte addressed and
          handles bytes well. Third, it is a general-purpose register machine. Finally, it is sim-
          ple enough to be efficiently implemented across a wide performance and cost range.
               The Intel 8086 provides an even more dramatic example. The 8086 architecture
          is the only widespread architecture in existence today that is not truly a general-
          purpose register machine. Furthermore, the segmented address space of the
          8086 causes major problems for both programmers and compiler writers. Never-
          theless, the 8086 architecture—because of its selection as the microprocessor in the
          IBM PC—has been enormously successful.
                                          MIPS versus VAX
                                           Saving registers
                  sort:      addi $29,$29, –36                  sort:    .word ^m<r2,r3,r4,r5,r6,r7>
                             sw   $15, 0($29)
                             sw   $16, 4($29)
                             sw   $17, 8($29)
                             sw   $18,12($29)
                             sw   $19,16($29)
                             sw   $20,20($29)
                             sw   $24,24($29)
                             sw   $25,28($29)
                             sw   $31,32($29)
                                           Procedure body
Move parameters              move $18, $4                                  moval   r7,8(ap)
                             move $20, $5                                  moval   r5,4(ap)
Outer loop                 add      $19, $0, $0                          clrl      r6
                  for1tst: slt      $8, $19, $20                for1tst: cmpl      r6,(r7)
                           beq      $8, $0, exit1                        bgeq      exit1
Inner loop                 addi $17, $19, –1                               subl3   r4,r6,#1
                  for2tst: slti $8, $17, 0                      for2tst:
                           bne $8, $0, exit2                               blss    exit2
                           muli $15, $17, 4                                movl    r3,(r5)
                           add $16, $18, $15
                           lw   $24, 0($16)
                           lw   $25, 4($16)                                addl3 r2,r4,#1
                           slt $8, $25, $24                                cmpl  (r3)[r4],(r3)[r2]
                           beq $8, $0, exit2                               bleq  exit2
Pass parameters              move $4, $18                                  pushl (r5)
and call                     move $5, $17                                  pushl r4
                             jal swap                                      calls #2,swap
Inner loop                   addi $17, $17, –1                             decl    r4
                             j    for2tst                                  brb     for2tst
Outer loop        exit2:     addi $19, $19, 1                   exit2:     incl    r6
                             j    for1tst                                  brb     for1tst
                                          Restoring registers
                  exit1:     lw   $15,0($29)
                             lw   $16, 4($29)
                             lw   $17, 8($29)
                             lw   $18,12($29)
                             lw   $19,16($29)
                             lw   $20,20($29)
                             lw   $24,24($29)
                             lw   $25,28($29)
                             lw   $31,32($29)
                             addi $29,$29, 36
                                           Procedure return
                             jr     $31                         exit1:     ret

Figure K.56 MIPS32 versus VAX assembly version of procedure sort in Figure K.55 on page K-33.

                         4

                        3.5
                                      Instructions executed                           Performance
                         3

                        2.5

             MIPS/VAX
                         2

                        1.5

                         1

                        0.5

                         0
                              spice       matrix    nasa7      fpppp     tomcatv     doduc     espresso   eqntott       li
                                                              Number of bits of displacement

          Figure K.57 Ratio of MIPS M2000 to VAX 8700 in instructions executed and perfor-
          mance in clock cycles using SPEC89 programs. On average, MIPS executes a little over
          twice as many instructions as the VAX, but the CPI for the VAX is almost six times the
          MIPS CPI, yielding almost a threefold performance advantage. (Based on data from “Per-
          formance from Architecture: Comparing a RISC and CISC with Similar Hardware Orga-
          nization,” by D. Bhandarkar and D. Clark, in Proc. Symp. Architectural Support for
          Programming Languages and Operating Systems IV, 1991.)

Fallacy   The architecture that executes fewer instructions is faster.
          Designers of VAX machines performed a quantitative comparison of VAX and
          MIPS for implementations with comparable organizations, the VAX 8700 and
          the MIPS M2000. Figure K.57 shows the ratio of the number of instructions exe-
          cuted and the ratio of performance measured in clock cycles. MIPS executes about
          twice as many instructions as the VAX while the MIPS M2000 has almost three
          times the performance of the VAX 8700.

          Concluding Remarks
          The Virtual Address eXtension of the PDP-11 architecture … provides a virtual
          address of about 4.3 gigabytes which, even given the rapid improvement of mem-
          ory technology, should be adequate far into the future.
                                                                 William Strecker
                        “VAX-11/780—A Virtual Address Extension to the PDP-11 Family,”
                                    AFIPS Proc., National Computer Conference (1978)
          We have seen that instruction sets can vary quite dramatically, both in how they
          access operands and in the operations that can be performed by a single instruction.
          Figure K.58 compares instruction usage for both architectures for two programs;
          even very different architectures behave similarly in their use of instruction classes.

                                                                 Arithmetic/       Data      Floating
                         Program     Machine         Branch        logical       transfer      point    Totals
                         gcc          VAX             30%           40%            19%                   89%
                                      MIPS            24%           35%            27%                   86%
                         spice        VAX             18%           23%            15%         23%       79%
                                      MIPS            04%           29%            35%         15%       83%

                         Figure K.58 The frequency of instruction distribution for two programs on VAX
                         and MIPS.

                             A product of its time, the VAX emphasis on code density and complex oper-
                         ations and addressing modes conflicts with the current emphasis on easy decoding,
                         simple operations and addressing modes, and pipelined performance.
                             With more than 600,000 sold, the VAX architecture has had a very successful
                         run. In 1991, DEC made the transition from VAX to Alpha.
                             Orthogonality is key to the VAX architecture; the opcode is independent of the
                         addressing modes, which are independent of the data types and even the number of
                         unique operands. Thus, a few hundred operations expand to hundreds of thousands of
                         instructions when accounting for the data types, operand counts, and addressing modes.

                         Exercises
                   K.1   [3] < K.4 > The following VAX instruction decrements the location pointed to be
                         register r5:
                                      decl (r5)
                         What is the single MIPS instruction, or if it cannot be represented in a single
                         instruction, the shortest sequence of MIPS instructions, that performs the same
                         operation? What are the lengths of the instructions on each machine?
                   K.2   [5] < K.4 > This exercise is the same as Exercise K.1, except this VAX instruction
                         clears a location using autoincrement deferred addressing:
                                     clrl @(r5)+
                   K.3   [5] < K.4 > This exercise is the same as Exercise K.1, except this VAX instruction
                         adds 1 to register r5, placing the sum back in register r5, compares the sum to reg-
                         ister r6, and then branches to L1 if r5 < r6:
                                     aoblss r6, r5, L1 # r5 = r5 + 1; if (r5 < r6) goto L1.
                   K.4   [5] < K.4 > Show the single VAX instruction, or minimal sequence of instructions,
                         for this C statement:
                                     a = b + 100;
                         Assume a corresponds to register r3 and b corresponds to register r4.
                   K.5   [10] < K.4 > Show the single VAX instruction, or minimal sequence of instruc-
                         tions, for this C statement:

                                   x[i + 1] = x[i] + c;
                         Assume c corresponds to register r3, i to register r4, and x is an array of 32-bit
                         words beginning at memory location 4,000,000ten.

K.5   The IBM 360/370 Architecture for Mainframe Computers
      Introduction
      The term “computer architecture” was coined by IBM in 1964 for use with the IBM
      360. Amdahl, Blaauw, and Brooks [1964] used the term to refer to the programmer-
      visible portion of the instruction set. They believed that a family of machines of the
      same architecture should be able to run the same software. Although this idea may
      seem obvious to us today, it was quite novel at the time. IBM, even though it was the
      leading company in the industry, had five different architectures before the 360. Thus,
      the notion of a company standardizing on a single architecture was a radical one. The
      360 designers hoped that six different divisions of IBM could be brought together by
      defining a common architecture. Their definition of architecture was
          … the structure of a computer that a machine language programmer must
          understand to write a correct (timing independent) program for that machine.

         The term “machine language programmer” meant that compatibility would
      hold, even in assembly language, while “timing independent” allowed different
      implementations.
          The IBM 360 was introduced in 1964 with six models and a 25:1 performance
      ratio. Amdahl, Blaauw, and Brooks [1964] discussed the architecture of the IBM
      360 and the concept of permitting multiple object-code-compatible implementa-
      tions. The notion of an instruction set architecture as we understand it today
      was the most important aspect of the 360. The architecture also introduced several
      important innovations, now in wide use:

      1. 32-bit architecture
      2. Byte-addressable memory with 8-bit bytes
      3. 8-, 16-, 32-, and 64-bit data sizes
      4. 32-bit single-precision and 64-bit double-precision floating-point data

           In 1971, IBM shipped the first System/370 (models 155 and 165), which included
      a number of significant extensions of the 360, as discussed by Case and Padegs
      [1978], who also discussed the early history of System/360. The most important addi-
      tion was virtual memory, though virtual memory 370 s did not ship until 1972, when
      a virtual memory operating system was ready. By 1978, the high-end 370 was several
      hundred times faster than the low-end 360 s shipped 10 years earlier. In 1984, the 24-
      bit addressing model built into the IBM 360 needed to be abandoned, and the 370-XA
      (eXtended Architecture) was introduced. While old 24-bit programs could be sup-
      ported without change, several instructions could not function in the same manner
      when extended to a 32-bit addressing model (31-bit addresses supported) because
      they would not produce 31-bit addresses. Converting the operating system, which
      was written mostly in assembly language, was no doubt the biggest task.
           Several studies of the IBM 360 and instruction measurement have been made.
      Shustek’s thesis [1978] is the best known and most complete study of the 360/370
      architecture. He made several observations about instruction set complexity that

                         were not fully appreciated until some years later. Another important study of the
                         360 is the Toronto study by Alexander and Wortman [1975] done on an IBM 360
                         using 19 XPL programs.

                         System/360 Instruction Set
                         The 360 instruction set is shown in the following tables, organized by instruction
                         type and format. System/370 contains 15 additional user instructions.

                         Integer/Logical and Floating-Point R-R Instructions
                         The * indicates the instruction is floating point, and may be either D (double pre-
                         cision) or E (single precision).

                         Instruction                    Description
                         ALR                            Add logical register
                         AR                             Add register
                         A*R                            FP addition
                         CLR                            Compare logical register
                         CR                             Compare register
                         C*R                            FP compare
                         DR                             Divide register
                         D*R                            FP divide
                         H*R                            FP halve
                         LCR                            Load complement register
                         LC*R                           Load complement
                         LNR                            Load negative register
                         LN*R                           Load negative
                         LPR                            Load positive register
                         LP*R                           Load positive
                         LR                             Load register
                         L*R                            Load FP register
                         LTR                            Load and test register
                         LT*R                           Load and test FP register
                         MR                             Multiply register
                         M*R                            FP multiply
                         NR                             And register
                         OR                             Or register
                         SLR                            Subtract logical register
                         SR                             Subtract register
                         S*R                            FP subtraction
                         XR                             Exclusive or register

Branches and Status Setting R-R Instructions
These are R-R format instructions that either branch or set some system status; sev-
eral of them are privileged and legal only in supervisor mode.

Instruction               Description
BALR                      Branch and link
BCTR                      Branch on count
BCR                       Branch/condition
ISK                       Insert key
SPM                       Set program mask
SSK                       Set storage key
SVC                       Supervisor call

Branches/Logical and Floating-Point Instructions—RX Format
These are all RX format instructions. The symbol “+” means either a word oper-
ation (and then stands for nothing) or H (meaning half word); for example, A +
stands for the two opcodes A and AH. The “*” represents D or E, standing for
double- or single-precision floating point.

Instruction               Description
A+                       Add
A*                       FP add
AL                       Add logical
C+                       Compare
C*                       FP compare
CL                       Compare logical
D                        Divide
D*                       FP divide
L+                       Load
L*                       Load FP register
M+                       Multiply
M*                       FP multiply
N                        And
O                        Or
S+                       Subtract
S*                       FP subtract
SL                       Subtract logical
ST+                      Store
ST*                      Store FP register
X                        Exclusive or

                         Branches and Special Loads and Stores—RX Format

                         Instruction                    Description
                         BAL                            Branch and link
                         BC                             Branch condition
                         BCT                            Branch on count
                         CVB                            Convert-binary
                         CVD                            Convert-decimal
                         EX                             Execute
                         IC                             Insert character
                         LA                             Load address
                         STC                            Store character

                         RS and SI Format Instructions
                         These are the RS and SI format instructions. The symbol “*” may be A (arith-
                         metic) or L (logical).
                          Instruction                   Description
                         BXH                            Branch/high
                         BXLE                           Branch/low-equal
                         CLI                            Compare logical immediate
                         HIO                            Halt I/O
                         LPSW                           Load PSW
                         LM                             Load multiple
                         MVI                            Move immediate
                         NI                             And immediate
                         OI                             Or immediate
                         RDD                            Read direct
                         SIO                            Start I/O
                         SL*                            Shift left A/L
                         SLD*                           Shift left double A/L
                         SR*                            Shift right A/L
                         SRD*                           Shift right double A/L
                         SSM                            Set system mask
                         STM                            Store multiple
                         TCH                            Test channel
                         TIO                            Test I/O
                         TM                             Test under mask
                         TS                             Test-and-set
                         WRD                            Write direct
                         XI                             Exclusive or immediate

SS Format Instructions
These are add decimal or string instructions.

Instruction                          Description
AP                                   Add packed
CLC                                  Compare logical chars
CP                                   Compare packed
DP                                   Divide packed
ED                                   Edit
EDMK                                 Edit and mark
MP                                   Multiply packed
MVC                                  Move character
MVN                                  Move numeric
MVO                                  Move with offset
MVZ                                  Move zone
NC                                   And characters
OC                                   Or characters
PACK                                 Pack (Character → decimal)
SP                                   Subtract packed
TR                                   Translate
TRT                                  Translate and test
UNPK                                 Unpack
XC                                   Exclusive or characters
ZAP                                  Zero and add packed

360 Detailed Measurements
Figure K.59 shows the frequency of instruction usage for four IBM 360 programs.
Instruction                               PLIC            FORTGO             PLIGO           COBOLGO         Average

Control                                   32%                13%                5%               16%            16%
BC, BCR                                   28%                13%                5%               14%            15%
BAL, BALR                                  3%                                                     2%             1%
Arithmetic/logical                        29%                35%               29%                9%            26%
A, AR                                      3%                17%               21%                              10%
SR                                         3%                 7%                                                 3%
SLL                                                           6%                3%                               2%
LA                                          8%                1%                1%                               2%
CLI                                         7%                                                                   2%
NI                                                                                                7%             2%
C                                           5%                4%                4%                0%             3%
TM                                          3%                1%                                  3%             2%
MH                                                                              2%                               1%
Data transfer                             17%                40%               56%               20%            33%
L, LR                                      7%                23%               28%               19%            19%
MVI                                        2%                                  16%                1%             5%
ST                                         3%                                   7%                               3%
LD                                                            7%                2%                               2%
STD                                                           7%                2%                               2%
LPDR                                                          3%                                                 1%
LH                                          3%                                                                   1%
IC                                          2%                                                                   1%
LTR                                                           1%                                                 0%
Floating point                                                7%                                                 2%
AD                                                            3%                                                 1%
MDR                                                           3%                                                 1%
Decimal, string                             4%                                                   40%            11%
MVC                                         4%                                                    7%             3%
AP                                                                                               11%             3%
ZAP                                                                                               9%             2%
CVD                                                                                               5%             1%
MP                                                                                                3%             1%
CLC                                                                                               3%             1%
CP                                                                                                2%             1%
ED                                                                                                1%             0%
Total                                     82%                95%               90%               85%            88%

Figure K.59 Distribution of instruction execution frequencies for the four 360 programs. All instructions with a fre-
quency of execution greater than 1.5% are included. Immediate instructions, which operate on only a single byte, are
included in the section that characterized their operation, rather than with the long character-string versions of the
same operation. By comparison, the average frequencies for the major instruction classes of the VAX are 23% (con-
trol), 28% (arithmetic), 29% (data transfer), 7% (floating point), and 9% (decimal). Once again, a 1% entry in the aver-
age column can occur because of entries in the constituent columns. These programs are a compiler for the
programming language PL-I and runtime systems for the programming languages FORTRAN, PL/I, and Cobol.
                                                          Acknowledgments       ■   K-75

K.6   Historical Perspective and References
      Section L.4 (available online) features a discussion on the evolution of instruction
      sets and includes references for further reading and exploration of related topics.

      Acknowledgments
      We would like to thank the following people for comments on drafts of this survey:
      Professor Steven B. Furber, University of Manchester; Dr. Dileep Bhandarkar,
      Intel Corporation; Dr. Earl Killian, Silicon Graphics/MIPS; and Dr. Hiokazu
      Takata, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation.
