H
    Hardware and Software for
    VLIW and EPIC

    The EPIC approach is based on the application of massive
    resources. These resources include more load-store, computational,
    and branch units, as well as larger, lower-latency caches than would
    be required for a superscalar processor. Thus, IA-64 gambles that, in
    the future, power will not be the critical limitation, and that massive
    resources, along with the machinery to exploit them, will not
    penalize performance with their adverse effect on clock speed,
    path length, or CPI factors.
                                                             M. Hopkins
                                          in a commentary on the EPIC
                               approach and the IA-64 architecture (2000)
H-2   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

               H.1      Introduction: Exploiting Instruction-Level Parallelism
                        Statically
                        In this chapter, we discuss compiler technology for increasing the amount of par-
                        allelism that we can exploit in a program as well as hardware support for these
                        compiler techniques. The next section defines when a loop is parallel, how a depen-
                        dence can prevent a loop from being parallel, and techniques for eliminating some
                        types of dependences. The following section discusses the topic of scheduling code
                        to improve parallelism. These two sections serve as an introduction to these
                        techniques.
                            We do not attempt to explain the details of ILP-oriented compiler techniques,
                        since that would take hundreds of pages, rather than the 20 we have allotted.
                        Instead, we view this material as providing general background that will enable
                        the reader to have a basic understanding of the compiler techniques used to exploit
                        ILP in modern computers.
                            Hardware support for these compiler techniques can greatly increase their
                        effectiveness, and Sections H.4 and H.5 explore such support. The IA-64 repre-
                        sents the culmination of the compiler and hardware ideas for exploiting
                        parallelism statically and includes support for many of the concepts proposed
                        by researchers during more than a decade of research into the area of compiler-
                        based instruction-level parallelism. Section H.6 provides a description and perfor-
                        mance analyses of the Intel IA-64 architecture and its second-generation imple-
                        mentation, Itanium 2.
                            The core concepts that we exploit in statically based techniques—finding par-
                        allelism, reducing control and data dependences, and using speculation—are the
                        same techniques we saw exploited in Chapter 3 using dynamic techniques. The
                        key difference is that the techniques in this appendix are applied at compile time
                        by the compiler, rather than at runtime by the hardware. The advantages of compile
                        time techniques are primarily two: They do not burden runtime execution with any
                        inefficiency, and they can take into account a wider range of the program than a
                        runtime approach might be able to incorporate. As an example of the latter, the next
                        section shows how a compiler might determine that an entire loop can be executed
                        in parallel; hardware techniques might or might not be able to find such parallel-
                        ism. The major disadvantage of static approaches is that they can use only compile
                        time information. Without runtime information, compile time techniques must
                        often be conservative and assume the worst case.

               H.2      Detecting and Enhancing Loop-Level Parallelism
                        Loop-level parallelism is normally analyzed at the source level or close to it, while
                        most analysis of ILP is done once instructions have been generated by the
                        compiler. Loop-level analysis involves determining what dependences exist
                        among the operands in a loop across the iterations of that loop. For now, we will
                         H.2    Detecting and Enhancing Loop-Level Parallelism          ■   H-3

          consider only data dependences, which arise when an operand is written at some
          point and read at a later point. Name dependences also exist and may be removed
          by renaming techniques like those we explored in Chapter 3.
              The analysis of loop-level parallelism focuses on determining whether data
          accesses in later iterations are dependent on data values produced in earlier
          iterations; such a dependence is called a loop-carried dependence. Most of the
          examples we considered in Section 3.2 have no loop-carried dependences and,
          thus, are loop-level parallel. To see that a loop is parallel, let us first look at the
          source representation:

              for (i=1000; i>0; i=i-1)
                    x[i] = x[i] + s;

          In this loop, there is a dependence between the two uses of x[i], but this depen-
          dence is within a single iteration and is not loop carried. There is a dependence
          between successive uses of i in different iterations, which is loop carried, but this
          dependence involves an induction variable and can be easily recognized and elim-
          inated. We saw examples of how to eliminate dependences involving induction
          variables during loop unrolling in Section 3.2, and we will look at additional exam-
          ples later in this section.
              Because finding loop-level parallelism involves recognizing structures such as
          loops, array references, and induction variable computations, the compiler can do
          this analysis more easily at or near the source level, as opposed to the machine-code
          level. Let’s look at a more complex example.

Example   Consider a loop like this one:

             for (i=1; i<=100; i=i+1) {
                   A[i+1] = A[i] + C[i];   /* S1 */
                   B[i+1] = B[i] + A[i+1]; /* S2 */
             }

              Assume that A, B, and C are distinct, nonoverlapping arrays. (In practice, the
          arrays may sometimes be the same or may overlap. Because the arrays may be
          passed as parameters to a procedure, which includes this loop, determining whether
          arrays overlap or are identical often requires sophisticated, interprocedural analysis
          of the program.) What are the data dependences among the statements S1 and S2 in
          the loop?

 Answer   There are two different dependences:
          1. S1 uses a value computed by S1 in an earlier iteration, since iteration i com-
             putes A[i+1], which is read in iteration i+1. The same is true of S2 for B[i]
             and B[i+1].
          2. S2 uses the value, A[i+1], computed by S1 in the same iteration.
H-4   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                             These two dependences are different and have different effects. To see how
                        they differ, let’s assume that only one of these dependences exists at a time.
                        Because the dependence of statement S1 is on an earlier iteration of S1, this depen-
                        dence is loop carried. This dependence forces successive iterations of this loop to
                        execute in series.
                            The second dependence (S2 depending on S1) is within an iteration and is not
                        loop carried. Thus, if this were the only dependence, multiple iterations of the loop
                        could execute in parallel, as long as each pair of statements in an iteration were kept
                        in order. We saw this type of dependence in an example in Section 3.2, where
                        unrolling was able to expose the parallelism.
                            It is also possible to have a loop-carried dependence that does not prevent par-
                        allelism, as the next example shows.

             Example    Consider a loop like this one:

                           for (i=1; i<=100; i=i+1) {
                                 A[i] = A[i] + B[i];   /* S1 */
                                 B[i+1] = C[i] + D[i]; /* S2 */
                           }

                        What are the dependences between S1 and S2? Is this loop parallel? If not, show
                        how to make it parallel.

               Answer   Statement S1 uses the value assigned in the previous iteration by statement S2, so
                        there is a loop-carried dependence between S2 and S1. Despite this loop-carried
                        dependence, this loop can be made parallel. Unlike the earlier loop, this depen-
                        dence is not circular: Neither statement depends on itself, and, although S1
                        depends on S2, S2 does not depend on S1. A loop is parallel if it can be written
                        without a cycle in the dependences, since the absence of a cycle means that the
                        dependences give a partial ordering on the statements.
                           Although there are no circular dependences in the above loop, it must be trans-
                        formed to conform to the partial ordering and expose the parallelism. Two obser-
                        vations are critical to this transformation:
                        1. There is no dependence from S1 to S2. If there were, then there would be a
                           cycle in the dependences and the loop would not be parallel. Since this other
                           dependence is absent, interchanging the two statements will not affect the exe-
                           cution of S2.
                        2. On the first iteration of the loop, statement S1 depends on the value of B[1]
                           computed prior to initiating the loop.
                        These two observations allow us to replace the loop above with the following code
                        sequence:
               H.2    Detecting and Enhancing Loop-Level Parallelism         ■   H-5

   A[1] = A[1] + B[1];
   for (i=1; i<=99; i=i+1) {
         B[i+1] = C[i] + D[i];
         A[i+1] = A[i+1] + B[i+1];
   }
   B[101] = C[100] + D[100];
   The dependence between the two statements is no longer loop carried, so iter-
ations of the loop may be overlapped, provided the statements in each iteration are
kept in order.

   Our analysis needs to begin by finding all loop-carried dependences. This
dependence information is inexact, in the sense that it tells us that such a depen-
dence may exist. Consider the following example:
   for (i=1;i<=100;i=i+1) {
         A[i] = B[i] + C[i]
         D[i] = A[i] * E[i]
   }
The second reference to A in this example need not be translated to a load instruc-
tion, since we know that the value is computed and stored by the previous state-
ment; hence, the second reference to A can simply be a reference to the register into
which A was computed. Performing this optimization requires knowing that the
two references are always to the same memory address and that there is no inter-
vening access to the same location. Normally, data dependence analysis only tells
that one reference may depend on another; a more complex analysis is required to
determine that two references must be to the exact same address. In the example
above, a simple version of this analysis suffices, since the two references are in the
same basic block.
    Often loop-carried dependences are in the form of a recurrence:
   for (i=2;i<=100;i=i+1) {
         Y[i] = Y[i-1] + Y[i];
   }
    A recurrence is when a variable is defined based on the value of that variable in
an earlier iteration, often the one immediately preceding, as in the above fragment.
Detecting a recurrence can be important for two reasons: Some architectures (espe-
cially vector computers) have special support for executing recurrences, and some
recurrences can be the source of a reasonable amount of parallelism. To see how
the latter can be true, consider this loop:
   for (i=6;i<=100;i=i+1) {
         Y[i] = Y[i-5] + Y[i];
   }
H-6   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                        On the iteration i, the loop references element i ? 5. The loop is said to have a
                        dependence distance of 5. Many loops with carried dependences have a depen-
                        dence distance of 1. The larger the distance, the more potential parallelism can
                        be obtained by unrolling the loop. For example, if we unroll the first loop, with
                        a dependence distance of 1, successive statements are dependent on one another;
                        there is still some parallelism among the individual instructions, but not much. If
                        we unroll the loop that has a dependence distance of 5, there is a sequence of five
                        statements that have no dependences, and thus much more ILP. Although many
                        loops with loop-carried dependences have a dependence distance of 1, cases with
                        larger distances do arise, and the longer distance may well provide enough paral-
                        lelism to keep a processor busy.

                        Finding Dependences
                        Finding the dependences in a program is an important part of three tasks: (1) good
                        scheduling of code, (2) determining which loops might contain parallelism, and (3)
                        eliminating name dependences. The complexity of dependence analysis arises
                        because of the presence of arrays and pointers in languages like C or C++, or
                        pass-by-reference parameter passing in FORTRAN. Since scalar variable refer-
                        ences explicitly refer to a name, they can usually be analyzed quite easily, with
                        aliasing because of pointers and reference parameters causing some complications
                        and uncertainty in the analysis.
                            How does the compiler detect dependences in general? Nearly all dependence
                        analysis algorithms work on the assumption that array indices are affine. In sim-
                        plest terms, a one-dimensional array index is affine if it can be written in the form
                        a ? i + b, where a and b are constants and i is the loop index variable. The index of
                        a multidimensional array is affine if the index in each dimension is affine. Sparse
                        array accesses, which typically have the form x[y[i]], are one of the major
                        examples of nonaffine accesses.
                            Determining whether there is a dependence between two references to the same
                        array in a loop is thus equivalent to determining whether two affine functions can
                        have the same value for different indices between the bounds of the loop. For
                        example, suppose we have stored to an array element with index value a ? i +
                        b and loaded from the same array with index value c ? i + d, where i is the
                        for-loop index variable that runs from m to n. A dependence exists if two condi-
                        tions hold:

                        1. There are two iteration indices, j and k, both within the limits of the for loop.
                           That is, m ? j ? n, m ? k ? n.
                        2. The loop stores into an array element indexed by a ? j + b and later fetches from
                           that same array element when it is indexed by c ? k + d. That is, a ? j + b ¼ c ?
                           k + d.
                         H.2    Detecting and Enhancing Loop-Level Parallelism          ■   H-7

              In general, we cannot determine whether a dependence exists at compile time.
          For example, the values of a, b, c, and d may not be known (they could be values in
          other arrays), making it impossible to tell if a dependence exists. In other cases, the
          dependence testing may be very expensive but decidable at compile time. For
          example, the accesses may depend on the iteration indices of multiple nested loops.
          Many programs, however, contain primarily simple indices where a, b, c, and d are
          all constants. For these cases, it is possible to devise reasonable compile time tests
          for dependence.
               As an example, a simple and sufficient test for the absence of a dependence is
          the greatest common divisor (GCD) test. It is based on the observation that if a
          loop-carried dependence exists, then GCD (c,a) must divide (d ? b). (Recall that
          an integer, x, divides another integer, y, if we get an integer quotient when we do
          the division y/x and there is no remainder.)

Example   Use the GCD test to determine whether dependences exist in the following loop:

             for (i=1; i<=100; i=i+1) {
                   X[2*i+3] = X[2*i] * 5.0;
             }

 Answer   Given the values a ¼ 2, b ¼ 3, c ¼ 2, and d ¼ 0, then GCD(a,c) ¼ 2, and d ? b ¼
           3. Since 2 does not divide ?3, no dependence is possible.

              The GCD test is sufficient to guarantee that no dependence exists; however,
          there are cases where the GCD test succeeds but no dependence exists. This
          can arise, for example, because the GCD test does not take the loop bounds into
          account.
              In general, determining whether a dependence actually exists is NP complete.
          In practice, however, many common cases can be analyzed precisely at low cost.
          Recently, approaches using a hierarchy of exact tests increasing in generality
          and cost have been shown to be both accurate and efficient. (A test is exact if
          it precisely determines whether a dependence exists. Although the general case
          is NP complete, there exist exact tests for restricted situations that are much
          cheaper.)
              In addition to detecting the presence of a dependence, a compiler wants to
          classify the type of dependence. This classification allows a compiler to recog-
          nize name dependences and eliminate them at compile time by renaming and
          copying.

Example   The following loop has multiple types of dependences. Find all the true depen-
          dences, output dependences, and antidependences, and eliminate the output depen-
          dences and antidependences by renaming.
H-8   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                           for (i=1; i<=100; i=i+1) {
                               Y[i] = X[i] / c; /* S1 */
                               X[i] = X[i] + c; /* S2 */
                               Z[i] = Y[i] + c; /* S3 */
                               Y[i] = c - Y[i]; /* S4 */
                           }

               Answer   The following dependences exist among the four statements:
                        1. There are true dependences from S1 to S3 and from S1 to S4 because of Y[i].
                           These are not loop carried, so they do not prevent the loop from being consid-
                           ered parallel. These dependences will force S3 and S4 to wait for S1 to
                           complete.
                        2. There is an antidependence from S1 to S2, based on X[i].
                        3. There is an antidependence from S3 to S4 for Y[i].
                        4. There is an output dependence from S1 to S4, based on Y[i].
                        The following version of the loop eliminates these false (or pseudo) dependences:

                           for (i=1; i<=100; i=i+1 {
                               /* Y renamed to T to remove output dependence */
                               T[i] = X[i] / c;
                               /* X renamed to X1 to remove antidependence */
                               X1[i] = X[i] + c;
                               /* Y renamed to T to remove antidependence */
                               Z[i] = T[i] + c;
                               Y[i] = c - T[i];
                           }

                        After the loop, the variable X has been renamed X1. In code that follows the loop,
                        the compiler can simply replace the name X by X1. In this case, renaming does not
                        require an actual copy operation but can be done by substituting names or by reg-
                        ister allocation. In other cases, however, renaming will require copying.

                            Dependence analysis is a critical technology for exploiting parallelism. At the
                        instruction level, it provides information needed to interchange memory references
                        when scheduling, as well as to determine the benefits of unrolling a loop. For
                        detecting loop-level parallelism, dependence analysis is the basic tool. Effectively
                        compiling programs to either vector computers or multiprocessors depends criti-
                        cally on this analysis. The major drawback of dependence analysis is that it applies
                        only under a limited set of circumstances—namely, among references within a sin-
                        gle loop nest and using affine index functions. Thus, there is a wide variety of sit-
                        uations in which array-oriented dependence analysis cannot tell us what we might
                        want to know, including the following:
                H.2    Detecting and Enhancing Loop-Level Parallelism            ■   H-9

■   When objects are referenced via pointers rather than array indices (but see
    discussion below)
■   When array indexing is indirect through another array, which happens with
    many representations of sparse arrays
■   When a dependence may exist for some value of the inputs but does not exist in
    actuality when the code is run since the inputs never take on those values
■   When an optimization depends on knowing more than just the possibility of a
    dependence but needs to know on which write of a variable does a read of that
    variable depend

    To deal with the issue of analyzing programs with pointers, another type of anal-
ysis, often called points-to analysis, is required (see Wilson and Lam [1995]). The key
question that we want answered from dependence analysis of pointers is whether two
pointers can designate the same address. In the case of complex dynamic data struc-
tures, this problem is extremely difficult. For example, we may want to know whether
two pointers can reference the same node in a list at a given point in a program, which in
general is undecidable and in practice is extremely difficult to answer. We may, how-
ever, be able to answer a simpler question: Can two pointers designate nodes in the
same list, even if they may be separate nodes? This more restricted analysis can still
be quite useful in scheduling memory accesses performed through pointers.
    The basic approach used in points-to analysis relies on information from three
major sources:

1. Type information, which restricts what a pointer can point to.
2. Information derived when an object is allocated or when the address of an object
   is taken, which can be used to restrict what a pointer can point to. For example,
   if p always points to an object allocated in a given source line and q never points
   to that object, then p and q can never point to the same object.
3. Information derived from pointer assignments. For example, if p may be
   assigned the value of q, then p may point to anything q points to.

   There are several cases where analyzing pointers has been successfully applied
and is extremely useful:

■   When pointers are used to pass the address of an object as a parameter, it is
    possible to use points-to analysis to determine the possible set of objects refer-
    enced by a pointer. One important use is to determine if two pointer parameters
    may designate the same object.
■   When a pointer can point to one of several types, it is sometimes possible to
    determine the type of the data object that a pointer designates at different parts
    of the program.
■   It is often possible to separate out pointers that may only point to a local object
    versus a global one.
H-10   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                           There are two different types of limitations that affect our ability to do accu-
                       rate dependence analysis for large programs. The first type of limitation arises
                       from restrictions in the analysis algorithms. Often, we are limited by the lack
                       of applicability of the analysis rather than a shortcoming in dependence analysis
                       per se. For example, dependence analysis for pointers is essentially impossible
                       for programs that use pointers in arbitrary fashion—such as by doing arithmetic
                       on pointers.
                            The second limitation is the need to analyze behavior across procedure bound-
                       aries to get accurate information. For example, if a procedure accepts two param-
                       eters that are pointers, determining whether the values could be the same requires
                       analyzing across procedure boundaries. This type of analysis, called interproce-
                       dural analysis, is much more difficult and complex than analysis within a single
                       procedure. Unlike the case of analyzing array indices within a single loop nest,
                       points-to analysis usually requires an interprocedural analysis. The reason for this
                       is simple. Suppose we are analyzing a program segment with two pointers; if the
                       analysis does not know anything about the two pointers at the start of the program
                       segment, it must be conservative and assume the worst case. The worst case is that
                       the two pointers may designate the same object, but they are not guaranteed to
                       designate the same object. This worst case is likely to propagate through the anal-
                       ysis, producing useless information. In practice, getting fully accurate interproce-
                       dural information is usually too expensive for real programs. Instead, compilers
                       usually use approximations in interprocedural analysis. The result is that the infor-
                       mation may be too inaccurate to be useful.
                            Modern programming languages that use strong typing, such as Java, make the
                       analysis of dependences easier. At the same time the extensive use of procedures to
                       structure programs, as well as abstract data types, makes the analysis more diffi-
                       cult. Nonetheless, we expect that continued advances in analysis algorithms, com-
                       bined with the increasing importance of pointer dependency analysis, will mean
                       that there is continued progress on this important problem.

                       Eliminating Dependent Computations
                       Compilers can reduce the impact of dependent computations so as to achieve more
                       instruction-level parallelism (ILP). The key technique is to eliminate or reduce a
                       dependent computation by back substitution, which increases the amount of par-
                       allelism and sometimes increases the amount of computation required. These tech-
                       niques can be applied both within a basic block and within loops, and we describe
                       them differently.
                           Within a basic block, algebraic simplifications of expressions and an optimi-
                       zation called copy propagation, which eliminates operations that copy values, can
                       be used to simplify sequences like the following:
                           DADDUI           R1,R2,#4
                           DADDUI           R1,R1,#4
              H.2   Detecting and Enhancing Loop-Level Parallelism          ■   H-11

to
     DADDUI          R1,R2,#8

assuming this is the only use of R1. In fact, the techniques we used to reduce
multiple increments of array indices during loop unrolling and to move the incre-
ments across memory addresses in Section 3.2 are examples of this type of
optimization.
    In these examples, computations are actually eliminated, but it is also pos-
sible that we may want to increase the parallelism of the code, possibly even
increasing the number of operations. Such optimizations are called tree height
reduction because they reduce the height of the tree structure representing a
computation, making it wider but shorter. Consider the following code
sequence:

     ADD             R1,R2,R3
     ADD             R4,R1,R6
     ADD             R8,R4,R7

    Notice that this sequence requires at least three execution cycles, since all the
instructions depend on the immediate predecessor. By taking advantage of asso-
ciativity, we can transform the code and rewrite it as

     ADD             R1,R2,R3
     ADD             R4,R6,R7
     ADD             R8,R1,R4

This sequence can be computed in two execution cycles. When loop unrolling is
used, opportunities for these types of optimizations occur frequently.
    Although arithmetic with unlimited range and precision is associative, com-
puter arithmetic is not associative, for either integer arithmetic, because of limited
range, or floating-point arithmetic, because of both range and precision. Thus,
using these restructuring techniques can sometimes lead to erroneous behavior,
although such occurrences are rare. For this reason, most compilers require that
optimizations that rely on associativity be explicitly enabled.
    When loops are unrolled, this sort of algebraic optimization is important to
reduce the impact of dependences arising from recurrences. Recurrences are
expressions whose value on one iteration is given by a function that depends on
the previous iterations. When a loop with a recurrence is unrolled, we may be able
to algebraically optimize the unrolled loop, so that the recurrence need only be
evaluated once per unrolled iteration. One common type of recurrence arises from
an explicit program statement, such as:

     sum = sum + x;
H-12   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       Assume we unroll a loop with this recurrence five times. If we let the value of x on
                       these five iterations be given by x1, x2, x3, x4, and x5, then we can write the
                       value of sum at the end of each unroll as:

                           sum = sum + x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5;

                       If unoptimized, this expression requires five dependent operations, but it can be
                       rewritten as:

                           sum = ((sum + x1) + (x2 + x3)) + (x4 + x5);

                       which can be evaluated in only three dependent operations.
                           Recurrences also arise from implicit calculations, such as those associated with
                       array indexing. Each array index translates to an address that is computed based on
                       the loop index variable. Again, with unrolling and algebraic optimization, the
                       dependent computations can be minimized.

              H.3      Scheduling and Structuring Code for Parallelism
                       We have already seen that one compiler technique, loop unrolling, is useful to
                       uncover parallelism among instructions by creating longer sequences of straight-
                       line code. There are two other important techniques that have been developed for
                       this purpose: software pipelining and trace scheduling.

                       Software Pipelining: Symbolic Loop Unrolling
                       Software pipelining is a technique for reorganizing loops such that each iteration in
                       the software-pipelined code is made from instructions chosen from different iter-
                       ations of the original loop. This approach is most easily understood by looking at
                       the scheduled code for the unrolled loop, which appeared in the example in
                       Section 2.2. The scheduler in this example essentially interleaves instructions from
                       different loop iterations, so as to separate the dependent instructions that occur
                       within a single loop iteration. By choosing instructions from different iterations,
                       dependent computations are separated from one another by an entire loop body,
                       increasing the possibility that the unrolled loop can be scheduled without stalls.
                           A software-pipelined loop interleaves instructions from different iterations
                       without unrolling the loop, as illustrated in Figure H.1. This technique is the soft-
                       ware counterpart to what Tomasulo’s algorithm does in hardware. The software-
                       pipelined loop for the earlier example would contain one load, one add, and one
                       store, each from a different iteration. There is also some start-up code that is needed
                       before the loop begins as well as code to finish up after the loop is completed. We
                       will ignore these in this discussion, for simplicity.
                           H.3   Scheduling and Structuring Code for Parallelism         ■   H-13

                             Iteration
                                 0         Iteration
                                               1         Iteration
                                                             2       Iteration
                                                                         3       Iteration
                                                                                     4

              Software-
              pipelined
               iteration

          Figure H.1 A software-pipelined loop chooses instructions from different loop iter-
          ations, thus separating the dependent instructions within one iteration of the
          original loop. The start-up and finish-up code will correspond to the portions above
          and below the software-pipelined iteration.

Example   Show a software-pipelined version of this loop, which increments all the elements
          of an array whose starting address is in R1 by the contents of F2:
             Loop:         L.D           F0,0(R1)
                           ADD.D         F4,F0,F2
                           S.D           F4,0(R1)
                           DADDUI        R1,R1,#-8
                           BNE           R1,R2,Loop
          You may omit the start-up and clean-up code.

 Answer   Software pipelining symbolically unrolls the loop and then selects instructions
          from each iteration. Since the unrolling is symbolic, the loop overhead instructions
          (the DADDUI and BNE) need not be replicated. Here’s the body of the unrolled loop
          without overhead instructions, highlighting the instructions taken from each
          iteration:
             Iteration i:   L.D                        F0,0(R1)
                            ADD.D                      F4,F0,F2
                            S.D                        F4,0(R1)
             Iteration i+1: L.D                        F0,0(R1)
                            ADD.D                      F4,F0,F2
                            S.D                        F4,0(R1)
             Iteration i+2: L.D                        F0,0(R1)
                            ADD.D                      F4,F0,F2
                            S.D                        F4,0(R1)
H-14   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       The selected instructions from different iterations are then put together in the loop
                       with the loop control instructions:
                          Loop:     S.D            F4,16(R1)              ;stores into M[i]
                                    ADD.D          F4,F0,F2               ;adds to M[i-1]
                                    L.D            F0,0(R1)               ;loads M[i-2]
                                    DADDUI         R1,R1,#-8
                                    BNE            R1,R2,Loop
                       This loop can be run at a rate of 5 cycles per result, ignoring the start-up and clean-
                       up portions, and assuming that DADDUI is scheduled before the ADD.D and that
                       the L.D instruction, with an adjusted offset, is placed in the branch delay slot.
                       Because the load and store are separated by offsets of 16 (two iterations), the loop
                       should run for two fewer iterations. Notice that the reuse of registers (e.g., F4, F0,
                       and R1) requires the hardware to avoid the write after read (WAR) hazards that
                       would occur in the loop. This hazard should not be a problem in this case, since
                       no data-dependent stalls should occur.
                           By looking at the unrolled version we can see what the start-up code and finish-up
                       code will need to be. For start-up, we will need to execute any instructions that cor-
                       respond to iteration 1 and 2 that will not be executed. These instructions are the L.D
                       for iterations 1 and 2 and the ADD.D for iteration 1. For the finish-up code, we need
                       to execute any instructions that will not be executed in the final two iterations. These
                       include the ADD.D for the last iteration and the S.D for the last two iterations.

                           Register management in software-pipelined loops can be tricky. The previous
                       example is not too hard since the registers that are written on one loop iteration are
                       read on the next. In other cases, we may need to increase the number of iterations
                       between when we issue an instruction and when the result is used. This increase is
                       required when there are a small number of instructions in the loop body and the
                       latencies are large. In such cases, a combination of software pipelining and loop
                       unrolling is needed.
                           Software pipelining can be thought of as symbolic loop unrolling. Indeed, some
                       of the algorithms for software pipelining use loop-unrolling algorithms to figure
                       out how to software-pipeline the loop. The major advantage of software pipelining
                       over straight loop unrolling is that software pipelining consumes less code space.
                       Software pipelining and loop unrolling, in addition to yielding a better scheduled
                       inner loop, each reduce a different type of overhead. Loop unrolling reduces the
                       overhead of the loop—the branch and counter update code. Software pipelining
                       reduces the time when the loop is not running at peak speed to once per loop at
                       the beginning and end. If we unroll a loop that does 100 iterations a constant num-
                       ber of times, say, 4, we pay the overhead 100/4 ¼ 25 times—every time the inner
                       unrolled loop is initiated. Figure H.2 shows this behavior graphically. Because
                       these techniques attack two different types of overhead, the best performance
                       can come from doing both. In practice, compilation using software pipelining is
                       quite difficult for several reasons: Many loops require significant transformation
                 H.3    Scheduling and Structuring Code for Parallelism                    ■   H-15

                        Start-up                                 Wind-down
                        code                                     code
             Number
                   of
          overlapped
          operations
                                                                       Time
                                    (a) Software pipelining

                                   Proportional
                                   to number of               Overlap between
                                      unrolls                 unrolled iterations

             Number
                   of
          overlapped
          operations
                                                                                    Time
                                                   (b) Loop unrolling

Figure H.2 The execution pattern for (a) a software-pipelined loop and (b) an
unrolled loop. The shaded areas are the times when the loop is not running with max-
imum overlap or parallelism among instructions. This occurs once at the beginning and
once at the end for the software-pipelined loop. For the unrolled loop it occurs m/n
times if the loop has a total of m iterations and is unrolled n times. Each block represents
an unroll of n iterations. Increasing the number of unrollings will reduce the start-up and
clean-up overhead. The overhead of one iteration overlaps with the overhead of the
next, thereby reducing the impact. The total area under the polygonal region in each
case will be the same, since the total number of operations is just the execution rate
multiplied by the time.

before they can be software pipelined, the trade-offs in terms of overhead versus
efficiency of the software-pipelined loop are complex, and the issue of register
management creates additional complexities. To help deal with the last two of
these issues, the IA-64 added extensive hardware sport for software pipelining.
Although this hardware can make it more efficient to apply software pipelining,
it does not eliminate the need for complex compiler support, or the need to make
difficult decisions about the best way to compile a loop.

Global Code Scheduling
In Section 3.2 we examined the use of loop unrolling and code scheduling to
improve ILP. The techniques in Section 3.2 work well when the loop body is
straight-line code, since the resulting unrolled loop looks like a single basic block.
Similarly, software pipelining works well when the body is a single basic block,
since it is easier to find the repeatable schedule. When the body of an unrolled loop
contains internal control flow, however, scheduling the code is much more com-
plex. In general, effective scheduling of a loop body with internal control flow will
require moving instructions across branches, which is global code scheduling.
In this section, we first examine the challenge and limitations of global code
H-16   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       scheduling. In Section H.4 we examine hardware support for eliminating control
                       flow within an inner loop, then we examine two compiler techniques that can be
                       used when eliminating the control flow is not a viable approach.
                           Global code scheduling aims to compact a code fragment with internal control
                       structure into the shortest possible sequence that preserves the data and control
                       dependences. The data dependences force a partial order on operations, while
                       the control dependences dictate instructions across which code cannot be easily
                       moved. Data dependences are overcome by unrolling and, in the case of memory
                       operations, using dependence analysis to determine if two references refer to the
                       same address. Finding the shortest possible sequence for a piece of code means
                       finding the shortest sequence for the critical path, which is the longest sequence
                       of dependent instructions.
                           Control dependences arising from loop branches are reduced by unrolling.
                       Global code scheduling can reduce the effect of control dependences arising from
                       conditional nonloop branches by moving code. Since moving code across branches
                       will often affect the frequency of execution of such code, effectively using global
                       code motion requires estimates of the relative frequency of different paths.
                       Although global code motion cannot guarantee faster code, if the frequency infor-
                       mation is accurate, the compiler can determine whether such code movement is
                       likely to lead to faster code.
                           Global code motion is important since many inner loops contain conditional
                       statements. Figure H.3 shows a typical code fragment, which may be thought of
                       as an iteration of an unrolled loop, and highlights the more common control flow.

                                                                  A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                                                              T                        F
                                                                      A(i) = 0?

                                                     B(i) =                                X

                                                                        C(i) =

                       Figure H.3 A code fragment and the common path shaded with gray. Moving the
                       assignments to B or C requires a more complex analysis than for straight-line code.
                       In this section we focus on scheduling this code segment efficiently without hardware
                       assistance. Predication or conditional instructions, which we discuss in the next section,
                       provide another way to schedule this code.
               H.3   Scheduling and Structuring Code for Parallelism        ■   H-17

    Effectively scheduling this code could require that we move the assignments to
B and C to earlier in the execution sequence, before the test of A. Such global code
motion must satisfy a set of constraints to be legal. In addition, the movement of the
code associated with B, unlike that associated with C, is speculative: It will speed
the computation up only when the path containing the code would be taken.
    To perform the movement of B, we must ensure that neither the data flow nor
the exception behavior is changed. Compilers avoid changing the exception behav-
ior by not moving certain classes of instructions, such as memory references, that
can cause exceptions. In Section H.5, we will see how hardware support allows for
more opportunities for speculative code motion and removes control dependences.
Although such enhanced support for speculation can make it possible to explore
more opportunities, the difficulty of choosing how to best compile the code
remains complex.
    How can the compiler ensure that the assignments to B and C can be moved
without affecting the data flow? To see what’s involved, let’s look at a typical code
generation sequence for the flowchart in Figure H.3. Assuming that the addresses
for A, B, C are in R1, R2, and R3, respectively, here is such a sequence:

             LD                 R4,0(R1)               ;load A
             LD                 R5,0(R2)               ;load B
             DADDU              R4,R4,R5               ;Add to A
             SD                 R4,0(R1)               ;Store A
             ...
             BNEZ               R4,elsepart            ;Test A
             ...                                       ;then part
             SD                 ...,0(R2)              ;Stores to B
             ...
             J                  join                   ;jump over else
   elsepart: ...                                       ;else part
             X                                         ;code for X
             ...
   join:     ...                                       ;after if
             SD                 ...,0(R3)              ;store C[i]

     Let’s first consider the problem of moving the assignment to B to before the
BNEZ instruction. Call the last instruction to assign to B before the if statement
i. If B is referenced before it is assigned either in code segment X or after the if
statement, call the referencing instruction j. If there is such an instruction j, then
moving the assignment to B will change the data flow of the program. In particular,
moving the assignment to B will cause j to become data dependent on the moved
version of the assignment to B rather than on i, on which j originally depended.
You could imagine more clever schemes to allow B to be moved even when
the value is used: For example, in the first case, we could make a shadow copy
of B before the if statement and use that shadow copy in X. Such schemes are usu-
ally avoided, both because they are complex to implement and because they will
H-18   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       slow down the program if the trace selected is not optimal and the operations end
                       up requiring additional instructions to execute.
                            Moving the assignment to C up to before the first branch requires two steps. First,
                       the assignment is moved over the join point of the else part into the portion corre-
                       sponding to the then part. This movement makes the instructions for C control
                       dependent on the branch and means that they will not execute if the else path, which
                       is the infrequent path, is chosen. Hence, instructions that were data dependent on the
                       assignment to C, and which execute after this code fragment, will be affected. To
                       ensure the correct value is computed for such instructions, a copy is made of the
                       instructions that compute and assign to C on the else path. Second, we can move
                       C from the then part of the branch across the branch condition, if it does not affect
                       any data flow into the branch condition. If C is moved to before the if test, the copy of
                       C in the else branch can usually be eliminated, since it will be redundant.
                            We can see from this example that global code scheduling is subject to many
                       constraints. This observation is what led designers to provide hardware support to
                       make such code motion easier, and Sections H.4 and H.5 explores such support in
                       detail.
                            Global code scheduling also requires complex trade-offs to make code motion
                       decisions. For example, assuming that the assignment to B can be moved before the
                       conditional branch (possibly with some compensation code on the alternative
                       branch), will this movement make the code run faster? The answer is, possibly!
                       Similarly, moving the copies of C into the if and else branches makes the code
                       initially bigger! Only if the compiler can successfully move the computation across
                       the if test will there be a likely benefit.
                            Consider the factors that the compiler would have to consider in moving the
                       computation and assignment of B:

                       ■   What are the relative execution frequencies of the then case and the else case in the
                           branch? If the then case is much more frequent, the code motion may be beneficial.
                           If not, it is less likely, although not impossible, to consider moving the code.
                       ■   What is the cost of executing the computation and assignment to B above the
                           branch? It may be that there are a number of empty instruction issue slots in the
                           code above the branch and that the instructions for B can be placed into these
                           slots that would otherwise go empty. This opportunity makes the computation
                           of B “free” at least to first order.
                       ■   How will the movement of B change the execution time for the then case? If B
                           is at the start of the critical path for the then case, moving it may be highly
                           beneficial.
                       ■   Is B the best code fragment that can be moved above the branch? How does it
                           compare with moving C or other statements within the then case?
                       ■   What is the cost of the compensation code that may be necessary for the else
                           case? How effectively can this code be scheduled, and what is its impact on
                           execution time?
              H.3    Scheduling and Structuring Code for Parallelism       ■   H-19

    As we can see from this partial list, global code scheduling is an extremely
complex problem. The trade-offs depend on many factors, and individual
decisions to globally schedule instructions are highly interdependent. Even choos-
ing which instructions to start considering as candidates for global code motion is
complex!
    To try to simplify this process, several different methods for global code sched-
uling have been developed. The two methods we briefly explore here rely on a
simple principle: Focus the attention of the compiler on a straight-line code seg-
ment representing what is estimated to be the most frequently executed code path.
Unrolling is used to generate the straight-line code, but, of course, the complexity
arises in how conditional branches are handled. In both cases, they are effectively
straightened by choosing and scheduling the most frequent path.

Trace Scheduling: Focusing on the Critical Path
Trace scheduling is useful for processors with a large number of issues per clock,
where conditional or predicated execution (see Section H.4) is inappropriate or
unsupported, and where simple loop unrolling may not be sufficient by itself to
uncover enough ILP to keep the processor busy. Trace scheduling is a way to orga-
nize the global code motion process, so as to simplify the code scheduling by incur-
ring the costs of possible code motion on the less frequent paths. Because it can
generate significant overheads on the designated infrequent path, it is best used
where profile information indicates significant differences in frequency between
different paths and where the profile information is highly indicative of program
behavior independent of the input. Of course, this limits its effective applicability
to certain classes of programs.
     There are two steps to trace scheduling. The first step, called trace selection,
tries to find a likely sequence of basic blocks whose operations will be put together
into a smaller number of instructions; this sequence is called a trace. Loop unrol-
ling is used to generate long traces, since loop branches are taken with high prob-
ability. Additionally, by using static branch prediction, other conditional branches
are also chosen as taken or not taken, so that the resultant trace is a straight-line
sequence resulting from concatenating many basic blocks. If, for example, the pro-
gram fragment shown in Figure H.3 corresponds to an inner loop with the
highlighted path being much more frequent, and the loop were unwound four
times, the primary trace would consist of four copies of the shaded portion of
the program, as shown in Figure H.4.
     Once a trace is selected, the second process, called trace compaction, tries to
squeeze the trace into a small number of wide instructions. Trace compaction is
code scheduling; hence, it attempts to move operations as early as it can in a
sequence (trace), packing the operations into as few wide instructions (or issue
packets) as possible.
     The advantage of the trace scheduling approach is that it simplifies the deci-
sions concerning global code motion. In particular, branches are viewed as jumps
into or out of the selected trace, which is assumed to be the most probable path.
H-20    ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                                           A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                                   T                            F
                                               A(i) = 0?             Trace exit

                          B(i) =

                          C(i) =                                                  Trace entrance

                                           A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                                       T                        F
                                               A(i) = 0?             Trace exit

                          B(i) =

                          C(i) =                                                  Trace entrance

                                           A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                                       T                        F
                                               A(i) = 0?                 Trace exit

                          B(i) =

                          C(i) =                                                  Trace entrance

                                           A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                                       T                        F
                                               A(i) = 0?             Trace exit

                          B(i) =

                          C(i) =

Figure H.4 This trace is obtained by assuming that the program fragment in Figure H.3 is the inner loop and
unwinding it four times, treating the shaded portion in Figure H.3 as the likely path. The trace exits correspond
to jumps off the frequent path, and the trace entrances correspond to returns to the trace.
               H.3   Scheduling and Structuring Code for Parallelism         ■   H-21

When code is moved across such trace entry and exit points, additional bookkeep-
ing code will often be needed on the entry or exit point. The key assumption is that
the trace is so much more probable than the alternatives that the cost of the book-
keeping code need not be a deciding factor: If an instruction can be moved and
thereby make the main trace execute faster, it is moved.
    Although trace scheduling has been successfully applied to scientific code with
its intensive loops and accurate profile data, it remains unclear whether this
approach is suitable for programs that are less simply characterized and less loop
intensive. In such programs, the significant overheads of compensation code may
make trace scheduling an unattractive approach, or, at best, its effective use will be
extremely complex for the compiler.

Superblocks
One of the major drawbacks of trace scheduling is that the entries and exits into the
middle of the trace cause significant complications, requiring the compiler to gen-
erate and track the compensation code and often making it difficult to assess the
cost of such code. Superblocks are formed by a process similar to that used for
traces, but are a form of extended basic blocks, which are restricted to a single entry
point but allow multiple exits.
    Because superblocks have only a single entry point, compacting a superblock
is easier than compacting a trace since only code motion across an exit need be
considered. In our earlier example, we would form superblocks that contained only
one entrance; hence, moving C would be easier. Furthermore, in loops that have a
single loop exit based on a count (for example, a for loop with no loop exit other
than the loop termination condition), the resulting superblocks have only one exit
as well as one entrance. Such blocks can then be scheduled more easily.
    How can a superblock with only one entrance be constructed? The answer is to
use tail duplication to create a separate block that corresponds to the portion of the
trace after the entry. In our previous example, each unrolling of the loop would
create an exit from the superblock to a residual loop that handles the remaining
iterations. Figure H.5 shows the superblock structure if the code fragment from
Figure H.3 is treated as the body of an inner loop and unrolled four times. The
residual loop handles any iterations that occur if the superblock is exited, which,
in turn, occurs when the unpredicted path is selected. If the expected frequency of
the residual loop were still high, a superblock could be created for that loop as well.
    The superblock approach reduces the complexity of bookkeeping and sched-
uling versus the more general trace generation approach but may enlarge code size
more than a trace-based approach. Like trace scheduling, superblock scheduling
may be most appropriate when other techniques (e.g., if conversion) fail. Even
in such cases, assessing the cost of code duplication may limit the usefulness of
the approach and will certainly complicate the compilation process.
    Loop unrolling, software pipelining, trace scheduling, and superblock sched-
uling all aim at trying to increase the amount of ILP that can be exploited by a pro-
cessor issuing more than one instruction on every clock cycle. The effectiveness of
H-22        ■       Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                 A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

            T                                F
                     A(i) = 0?
                                                 Superblock exit
                                                   with n = 4
   B(i) =

   C(i) =

                     A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                T                                                                                          F
                             A(i) = 0?                                                                         A(i) = A(i) + B(i)
                                                   Superblock exit
       B(i) =                                        with n = 3

       C(i) =                                                                                              T                        F
                                                                                                                   A(i) = 0?
                             A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                                                                                                  B(i) =                                X

                     T                                F
                                 A(i) = 0?
                                                              Superblock exit
                                                                with n = 2
            B(i) =
                                                                                                                     C(i) =

            C(i) =
                                                                                                   Execute
                                                                                                   n times
                                A(i) = A(i) + B(i)

                         T                                F
                                    A(i) = 0?
                                                                                Superblock exit
                B(i) =                                                            with n = 1

                C(i) =

Figure H.5 This superblock results from unrolling the code in Figure H.3 four times and creating a superblock.
       H.4   Hardware Support for Exposing Parallelism: Predicated Instructions           ■   H-23

             each of these techniques and their suitability for various architectural approaches
             are among the hottest topics being actively pursued by researchers and designers of
             high-speed processors.

 H.4         Hardware Support for Exposing Parallelism:
             Predicated Instructions
             Techniques such as loop unrolling, software pipelining, and trace scheduling can
             be used to increase the amount of parallelism available when the behavior of
             branches is fairly predictable at compile time. When the behavior of branches is
             not well known, compiler techniques alone may not be able to uncover much
             ILP. In such cases, the control dependences may severely limit the amount of par-
             allelism that can be exploited. To overcome these problems, an architect can extend
             the instruction set to include conditional or predicated instructions. Such instruc-
             tions can be used to eliminate branches, converting a control dependence into a
             data dependence and potentially improving performance. Such approaches are use-
             ful with either the hardware-intensive schemes in Chapter 3 or the software-
             intensive approaches discussed in this appendix, since in both cases predication
             can be used to eliminate branches.
                 The concept behind conditional instructions is quite simple: An instruction
             refers to a condition, which is evaluated as part of the instruction execution. If
             the condition is true, the instruction is executed normally; if the condition is false,
             the execution continues as if the instruction were a no-op. Many newer architec-
             tures include some form of conditional instructions. The most common example of
             such an instruction is conditional move, which moves a value from one register to
             another if the condition is true. Such an instruction can be used to completely elim-
             inate a branch in simple code sequences.

Example      Consider the following code:
                if (A==0) {S=T;}
             Assuming that registers R1, R2, and R3 hold the values of A, S, and T, respec-
             tively, show the code for this statement with the branch and with the
             conditional move.

 Answer      The straightforward code using a branch for this statement is (remember that we are
             assuming normal rather than delayed branches)
                                BNEZ          R1,L
                                ADDU          R2,R3,R0
                L:
                Using a conditional move that performs the move only if the third operand is
             equal to zero, we can implement this statement in one instruction:
                                CMOVZ         R2,R3,R1
H-24   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       The conditional instruction allows us to convert the control dependence present in
                       the branch-based code sequence to a data dependence. (This transformation is also
                       used for vector computers, where it is called if conversion.) For a pipelined pro-
                       cessor, this moves the place where the dependence must be resolved from near
                       the front of the pipeline, where it is resolved for branches, to the end of the pipeline,
                       where the register write occurs.

                           One obvious use for conditional move is to implement the absolute value func-
                       tion: A = abs (B), which is implemented as if (B<0) {A=-B;} else
                       {A=B;}. This if statement can be implemented as a pair of conditional moves,
                       or as one unconditional move (A=B) and one conditional move (A=-B).
                           In the example above or in the compilation of absolute value, conditional
                       moves are used to change a control dependence into a data dependence. This
                       enables us to eliminate the branch and possibly improve the pipeline behavior.
                       As issue rates increase, designers are faced with one of two choices: execute
                       multiple branches per clock cycle or find a method to eliminate branches to
                       avoid this requirement. Handling multiple branches per clock is complex, since
                       one branch must be control dependent on the other. The difficulty of accurately
                       predicting two branch outcomes, updating the prediction tables, and executing
                       the correct sequence has so far caused most designers to avoid processors that
                       execute multiple branches per clock. Conditional moves and predicated instruc-
                       tions provide a way of reducing the branch pressure. In addition, a conditional
                       move can often eliminate a branch that is hard to predict, increasing the
                       potential gain.
                           Conditional moves are the simplest form of conditional or predicated
                       instructions and, although useful for short sequences, have limitations. In par-
                       ticular, using conditional move to eliminate branches that guard the execution
                       of large blocks of code can be inefficient, since many conditional moves may
                       need to be introduced.
                           To remedy the inefficiency of using conditional moves, some architectures
                       support full predication, whereby the execution of all instructions is controlled
                       by a predicate. When the predicate is false, the instruction becomes a no-op. Full
                       predication allows us to simply convert large blocks of code that are branch depen-
                       dent. For example, an if-then-else statement within a loop can be entirely converted
                       to predicated execution, so that the code in the then case executes only if the value
                       of the condition is true and the code in the else case executes only if the value of the
                       condition is false. Predication is particularly valuable with global code scheduling,
                       since it can eliminate nonloop branches, which significantly complicate instruction
                       scheduling.
                           Predicated instructions can also be used to speculatively move an instruction
                       that is time critical, but may cause an exception if moved before a guarding branch.
                       Although it is possible to do this with conditional move, it is more costly.
     H.4    Hardware Support for Exposing Parallelism: Predicated Instructions          ■   H-25

Example    Here is a code sequence for a two-issue superscalar that can issue a combination of
           one memory reference and one ALU operation, or a branch by itself, every cycle:

                    First instruction slot                    Second instruction slot
                    LW                        R1,40           ADD R3,R4,R5
                                              (R2)
                                                              ADD R6,R3,R7
                    BEQZ                      R10,L
                    LW                        R8,0
                                              (R10)
                    LW                        R9,0(R8)

           This sequence wastes a memory operation slot in the second cycle and will incur a
           data dependence stall if the branch is not taken, since the second LW after the
           branch depends on the prior load. Show how the code can be improved using a
           predicated form of LW.

 Answer    Call the predicated version load word LWC and assume the load occurs unless the
           third operand is 0. The LW immediately following the branch can be converted to
           an LWC and moved up to the second issue slot:

               First instruction slot                             Second instruction slot
               LW                            R1,40(R2)            ADD R3,R4,R5
               LWC                           R8,0(R10),R10        ADD R6,R3,R7
               BEQZ                          R10,L
               LW                            R9,0(R8)

           This improves the execution time by several cycles since it eliminates one instruc-
           tion issue slot and reduces the pipeline stall for the last instruction in the sequence.
           Of course, if the compiler mispredicted the branch, the predicated instruction will
           have no effect and will not improve the running time. This is why the transforma-
           tion is speculative.
              If the sequence following the branch were short, the entire block of code might
           be converted to predicated execution and the branch eliminated.

               When we convert an entire code segment to predicated execution or specula-
           tively move an instruction and make it predicted, we remove a control dependence.
           Correct code generation and the conditional execution of predicated instructions
           ensure that we maintain the data flow enforced by the branch. To ensure that
           the exception behavior is also maintained, a predicated instruction must not gen-
           erate an exception if the predicate is false. The property of not causing exceptions is
H-26   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       quite critical, as the previous example shows: If register R10 contains zero, the
                       instruction LW R8,0(R10) executed unconditionally is likely to cause a protec-
                       tion exception, and this exception should not occur. Of course, if the condition is
                       satisfied (i.e., R10 is not zero), the LW may still cause a legal and resumable excep-
                       tion (e.g., a page fault), and the hardware must take the exception when it knows
                       that the controlling condition is true.
                            The major complication in implementing predicated instructions is deciding
                       when to annul an instruction. Predicated instructions may either be annulled during
                       instruction issue or later in the pipeline before they commit any results or raise an
                       exception. Each choice has a disadvantage. If predicated instructions are annulled
                       early in the pipeline, the value of the controlling condition must be known early to
                       prevent a stall for a data hazard. Since data-dependent branch conditions, which
                       tend to be less predictable, are candidates for conversion to predicated execution,
                       this choice can lead to more pipeline stalls. Because of this potential for data hazard
                       stalls, no design with predicated execution (or conditional move) annuls instruc-
                       tions early. Instead, all existing processors annul instructions later in the pipeline,
                       which means that annulled instructions will consume functional unit resources and
                       potentially have a negative impact on performance. A variety of other pipeline
                       implementation techniques, such as forwarding, interact with predicated instruc-
                       tions, further complicating the implementation.
                            Predicated or conditional instructions are extremely useful for implementing
                       short alternative control flows, for eliminating some unpredictable branches,
                       and for reducing the overhead of global code scheduling. Nonetheless, the useful-
                       ness of conditional instructions is limited by several factors:

                       ■   Predicated instructions that are annulled (i.e., whose conditions are false) still
                           take some processor resources. An annulled predicated instruction requires
                           fetch resources at a minimum, and in most processors functional unit execution
                           time. Therefore, moving an instruction across a branch and making it condi-
                           tional will slow the program down whenever the moved instruction would
                           not have been normally executed. Likewise, predicating a control-dependent
                           portion of code and eliminating a branch may slow down the processor if that
                           code would not have been executed. An important exception to these situations
                           occurs when the cycles used by the moved instruction when it is not performed
                           would have been idle anyway (as in the earlier superscalar example). Moving
                           an instruction across a branch or converting a code segment to predicated exe-
                           cution is essentially speculating on the outcome of the branch. Conditional
                           instructions make this easier but do not eliminate the execution time taken
                           by an incorrect guess. In simple cases, where we trade a conditional move
                           for a branch and a move, using conditional moves or predication is almost
                           always better. When longer code sequences are made conditional, the benefits
                           are more limited.
                       ■   Predicated instructions are most useful when the predicate can be evaluated
                           early. If the condition evaluation and predicated instructions cannot be
                         H.5    Hardware Support for Compiler Speculation          ■   H-27

          separated (because of data dependences in determining the condition), then a
          conditional instruction may result in a stall for a data hazard. With branch pre-
          diction and speculation, such stalls can be avoided, at least when the branches
          are predicted accurately.
      ■   The use of conditional instructions can be limited when the control flow
          involves more than a simple alternative sequence. For example, moving an
          instruction across multiple branches requires making it conditional on both
          branches, which requires two conditions to be specified or requires additional
          instructions to compute the controlling predicate. If such capabilities are not
          present, the overhead of if conversion will be larger, reducing its advantage.
      ■   Conditional instructions may have some speed penalty compared with uncon-
          ditional instructions. This may show up as a higher cycle count for such
          instructions or a slower clock rate overall. If conditional instructions are more
          expensive, they will need to be used judiciously.

      For these reasons, many architectures have included a few simple conditional
      instructions (with conditional move being the most frequent), but only a few archi-
      tectures include conditional versions for the majority of the instructions. The
      MIPS, Alpha, PowerPC, SPARC, and Intel x86 (as defined in the Pentium proces-
      sor) all support conditional move. The IA-64 architecture supports full predication
      for all instructions, as we will see in Section H.6.

H.5   Hardware Support for Compiler Speculation
      As we saw in Chapter 3, many programs have branches that can be accurately pre-
      dicted at compile time either from the program structure or by using a profile. In
      such cases, the compiler may want to speculate either to improve the scheduling or
      to increase the issue rate. Predicated instructions provide one method to speculate,
      but they are really more useful when control dependences can be completely elim-
      inated by if conversion. In many cases, we would like to move speculated instruc-
      tions not only before the branch but also before the condition evaluation, and
      predication cannot achieve this.
          To speculate ambitiously requires three capabilities:

      1. The ability of the compiler to find instructions that, with the possible use of reg-
         ister renaming, can be speculatively moved and not affect the program data flow
      2. The ability to ignore exceptions in speculated instructions, until we know that
         such exceptions should really occur
      3. The ability to speculatively interchange loads and stores, or stores and stores,
         which may have address conflicts

      The first of these is a compiler capability, while the last two require hardware sup-
      port, which we explore next.
H-28   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       Hardware Support for Preserving Exception Behavior
                       To speculate ambitiously, we must be able to move any type of instruction and still
                       preserve its exception behavior. The key to being able to do this is to observe that
                       the results of a speculated sequence that is mispredicted will not be used in the final
                       computation, and such a speculated instruction should not cause an exception.
                           There are four methods that have been investigated for supporting more ambi-
                       tious speculation without introducing erroneous exception behavior:

                       1. The hardware and operating system cooperatively ignore exceptions for spec-
                          ulative instructions. As we will see later, this approach preserves exception
                          behavior for correct programs, but not for incorrect ones. This approach may
                          be viewed as unacceptable for some programs, but it has been used, under pro-
                          gram control, as a “fast mode” in several processors.
                       2. Speculative instructions that never raise exceptions are used, and checks are
                          introduced to determine when an exception should occur.
                       3. A set of status bits, called poison bits, are attached to the result registers written
                          by speculated instructions when the instructions cause exceptions. The poison
                          bits cause a fault when a normal instruction attempts to use the register.
                       4. A mechanism is provided to indicate that an instruction is speculative, and the
                          hardware buffers the instruction result until it is certain that the instruction is no
                          longer speculative.

                           To explain these schemes, we need to distinguish between exceptions that indi-
                       cate a program error and would normally cause termination, such as a memory pro-
                       tection violation, and those that are handled and normally resumed, such as a page
                       fault. Exceptions that can be resumed can be accepted and processed for specula-
                       tive instructions just as if they were normal instructions. If the speculative instruc-
                       tion should not have been executed, handling the unneeded exception may have
                       some negative performance effects, but it cannot cause incorrect execution. The
                       cost of these exceptions may be high, however, and some processors use hardware
                       support to avoid taking such exceptions, just as processors with hardware specu-
                       lation may take some exceptions in speculative mode, while avoiding others until
                       an instruction is known not to be speculative.
                            Exceptions that indicate a program error should not occur in correct programs,
                       and the result of a program that gets such an exception is not well defined, except
                       perhaps when the program is running in a debugging mode. If such exceptions arise
                       in speculated instructions, we cannot take the exception until we know that the
                       instruction is no longer speculative.
                            In the simplest method for preserving exceptions, the hardware and the oper-
                       ating system simply handle all resumable exceptions when the exception occurs
                       and simply return an undefined value for any exception that would cause termina-
                       tion. If the instruction generating the terminating exception was not speculative,
                       then the program is in error. Note that instead of terminating the program, the
                              H.5    Hardware Support for Compiler Speculation       ■   H-29

          program is allowed to continue, although it will almost certainly generate incorrect
          results. If the instruction generating the terminating exception is speculative, then
          the program may be correct and the speculative result will simply be unused; thus,
          returning an undefined value for the instruction cannot be harmful. This scheme
          can never cause a correct program to fail, no matter how much speculation is done.
          An incorrect program, which formerly might have received a terminating excep-
          tion, will get an incorrect result. This is acceptable for some programs, assuming
          the compiler can also generate a normal version of the program, which does not
          speculate and can receive a terminating exception.

Example   Consider that the following code fragment from an if-then-else statement of
          the form

             if (A==0) A = B; else A = A+4;
          where A is at 0(R3) and B is at 0(R2):

                                    LD         R1,0(R3)         ;load A
                                    BNEZ       R1,L1            ;test A
                                    LD         R1,0(R2)         ;then clause
                                    J          L2               ;skip else
                        L1:         DADDI      R1,R1,#4         ;else clause
                        L2:         SD         R1,0(R3)         ;store A

          Assume that the then clause is almost always executed. Compile the code using
          compiler-based speculation. Assume R14 is unused and available.

 Answer   Here is the new code:

                           LD           R1,0(R3)         ;load A
                           LD           R14,0(R2)        ;speculative load B
                           BEQZ         R1,L3            ;other branch of the if
                           DADDI        R14,R1,#4        ;the else clause
                  L3:      SD           R14,0(R3)        ;nonspeculative store

          The then clause is completely speculated. We introduce a temporary register to
          avoid destroying R1 when B is loaded; if the load is speculative, R14 will be use-
          less. After the entire code segment is executed, A will be in R14. The else clause
          could have also been compiled speculatively with a conditional move, but if the
          branch is highly predictable and low cost, this might slow the code down, since
          two extra instructions would always be executed as opposed to one branch.

              In such a scheme, it is not necessary to know that an instruction is speculative.
          Indeed, it is helpful only when a program is in error and receives a terminating
          exception on a normal instruction; in such cases, if the instruction were not marked
          as speculative, the program could be terminated.
H-30   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                           In this method for handling speculation, as in the next one, renaming will often
                       be needed to prevent speculative instructions from destroying live values. Renam-
                       ing is usually restricted to register values. Because of this restriction, the targets of
                       stores cannot be destroyed and stores cannot be speculative. The small number of
                       registers and the cost of spilling will act as one constraint on the amount of spec-
                       ulation. Of course, the major constraint remains the cost of executing speculative
                       instructions when the compiler’s branch prediction is incorrect.
                           A second approach to preserving exception behavior when speculating intro-
                       duces speculative versions of instructions that do not generate terminating excep-
                       tions and instructions to check for such exceptions. This combination preserves the
                       exception behavior exactly.

             Example   Show how the previous example can be coded using a speculative load (sLD) and a
                       speculation check instruction (SPECCK) to completely preserve exception behav-
                       ior. Assume R14 is unused and available.

              Answer   Here is the code that achieves this:

                                    LD           R1,0(R3)          ;load A
                                    sLD          R14,0(R2)         ;speculative, no termination
                                    BNEZ         R1,L1             ;test A
                                    SPECCK       0(R2)             ;perform speculation check
                                    J            L2                ;skip else
                            L1:     DADDI        R14,R1,#4         ;else clause
                            L2:     SD           R14,0(R3)         ;store A

                       Notice that the speculation check requires that we maintain a basic block for the
                       then case. If we had speculated only a portion of the then case, then a basic block
                       representing the then case would exist in any event. More importantly, notice that
                       checking for a possible exception requires extra code.

                           A third approach for preserving exception behavior tracks exceptions as they
                       occur but postpones any terminating exception until a value is actually used, pre-
                       serving the occurrence of the exception, although not in a completely precise fash-
                       ion. The scheme is simple: A poison bit is added to every register, and another bit is
                       added to every instruction to indicate whether the instruction is speculative. The
                       poison bit of the destination register is set whenever a speculative instruction
                       results in a terminating exception; all other exceptions are handled immediately.
                       If a speculative instruction uses a register with a poison bit turned on, the destina-
                       tion register of the instruction simply has its poison bit turned on. If a normal
                       instruction attempts to use a register source with its poison bit turned on, the
                       instruction causes a fault. In this way, any program that would have generated
                       an exception still generates one, albeit at the first instance where a result is used
                       by an instruction that is not speculative. Since poison bits exist only on register
                             H.5   Hardware Support for Compiler Speculation         ■   H-31

          values and not memory values, stores are never speculative and thus trap if either
          operand is “poison.”

Example   Consider the code fragment from page H-29 and show how it would be compiled
          with speculative instructions and poison bits. Show where an exception for the
          speculative memory reference would be recognized. Assume R14 is unused and
          available.

 Answer   Here is the code (an s preceding the opcode indicates a speculative instruction):

                      LD           R1,0(R3)          ;load A
                      sLD          R14,0(R2)         ;speculative load B
                      BEQZ         R1,L3             ;
                      DADDI        R14,R1,#4         ;
             L3:      SD           R14,0(R3)         ;exception for speculative LW

          If the speculative sLD generates a terminating exception, the poison bit of R14 will
          be turned on. When the nonspeculative SW instruction occurs, it will raise an
          exception if the poison bit for R14 is on.

              One complication that must be overcome is how the OS saves the user registers
          on a context switch if the poison bit is set. A special instruction is needed to save
          and reset the state of the poison bits to avoid this problem.
              The fourth and final approach listed earlier relies on a hardware mechanism
          that operates like a reorder buffer. In such an approach, instructions are marked
          by the compiler as speculative and include an indicator of how many branches
          the instruction was speculatively moved across and what branch action (taken/
          not taken) the compiler assumed. This last piece of information basically tells
          the hardware the location of the code block where the speculated instruction orig-
          inally was. In practice, most of the benefit of speculation is gained by allowing
          movement across a single branch; thus, only 1 bit saying whether the speculated
          instruction came from the taken or not taken path is required. Alternatively, the
          original location of the speculative instruction is marked by a sentinel, which tells
          the hardware that the earlier speculative instruction is no longer speculative and
          values may be committed.
              All instructions are placed in a reorder buffer when issued and are forced to
          commit in order, as in a hardware speculation approach. (Notice, though, that
          no actual speculative branch prediction or dynamic scheduling occurs.) The reor-
          der buffer tracks when instructions are ready to commit and delays the “write-
          back” portion of any speculative instruction. Speculative instructions are not
          allowed to commit until the branches that have been speculatively moved over
          are also ready to commit, or, alternatively, until the corresponding sentinel is
          reached. At that point, we know whether the speculated instruction should have
          been executed or not. If it should have been executed and it generated a terminating
H-32   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       exception, then we know that the program should be terminated. If the instruction
                       should not have been executed, then the exception can be ignored. Notice that the
                       compiler, rather than the hardware, has the job of register renaming to ensure cor-
                       rect usage of the speculated result, as well as correct program execution.

                       Hardware Support for Memory Reference Speculation
                       Moving loads across stores is usually done when the compiler is certain the
                       addresses do not conflict. As we saw with the examples in Section 3.2, such trans-
                       formations are critical to reducing the critical path length of a code segment. To
                       allow the compiler to undertake such code motion when it cannot be absolutely
                       certain that such a movement is correct, a special instruction to check for address
                       conflicts can be included in the architecture. The special instruction is left at the
                       original location of the load instruction (and acts like a guardian), and the load
                       is moved up across one or more stores.
                            When a speculated load is executed, the hardware saves the address of the
                       accessed memory location. If a subsequent store changes the location before the
                       check instruction, then the speculation has failed. If the location has not been
                       touched, then the speculation is successful. Speculation failure can be handled
                       in two ways. If only the load instruction was speculated, then it suffices to redo
                       the load at the point of the check instruction (which could supply the target register
                       in addition to the memory address). If additional instructions that depended on the
                       load were also speculated, then a fix-up sequence that reexecutes all the speculated
                       instructions starting with the load is needed. In this case, the check instruction
                       specifies the address where the fix-up code is located.
                            In this section, we have seen a variety of hardware assist mechanisms. Such
                       mechanisms are key to achieving good support with the compiler-intensive
                       approaches of Chapter 3 and this appendix. In addition, several of them can be eas-
                       ily integrated in the hardware-intensive approaches of Chapter 3 and provide addi-
                       tional benefits.

              H.6      The Intel IA-64 Architecture and Itanium Processor
                       This section is an overview of the Intel IA-64 architecture, the most advanced
                       VLIW-style processor, and its implementation in the Itanium processor.

                       The Intel IA-64 Instruction Set Architecture
                       The IA-64 is a RISC-style, register-register instruction set, but with many novel
                       features designed to support compiler-based exploitation of ILP. Our focus here
                       is on the unique aspects of the IA-64 ISA. Most of these aspects have been dis-
                       cussed already in this appendix, including predication, compiler-based parallelism
                       detection, and support for memory reference speculation.
           H.6    The Intel IA-64 Architecture and Itanium Processor        ■   H-33

    When they announced the IA-64 architecture, HP and Intel introduced the term
EPIC (Explicitly Parallel Instruction Computer) to distinguish this new architec-
tural approach from the earlier VLIW architectures and from other RISC architec-
tures. Although VLIW and EPIC architectures share many features, the EPIC
approach includes several concepts that extend the earlier VLIW approach. These
extensions fall into two main areas:

1. EPIC has greater flexibility in indicating parallelism among instructions and in
   instruction formats. Rather than relying on a fixed instruction format where all
   operations in the instruction must be capable of being executed in parallel and
   where the format is completely rigid, EPIC uses explicit indicators of possible
   instruction dependence as well as a variety of instruction formats. This EPIC
   approach can express parallelism more flexibly than the more rigid VLIW
   method and can reduce the increases in code size caused by the typically inflex-
   ible VLIW instruction format.
2. EPIC has more extensive support for software speculation than the earlier
   VLIW schemes that had only minimal support.

In addition, the IA-64 architecture includes a variety of features to improve perfor-
mance, such as register windows and a rotating floating-point register (FPR) stack.

The IA-64 Register Model
The components of the IA-64 register state are

■   128 64-bit general-purpose registers, which as we will see shortly are actually
    65 bits wide
■   128 82-bit floating-point registers, which provide two extra exponent bits over
    the standard 80-bit IEEE format
■   64 1-bit predicate registers
■   8 64-bit branch registers, which are used for indirect branches
■   A variety of registers used for system control, memory mapping, performance
    counters, and communication with the OS

    The integer registers are configured to help accelerate procedure calls using a
register stack mechanism similar to that developed in the Berkeley RISC-I proces-
sor and used in the SPARC architecture. Registers 0 to 31 are always accessible
and are addressed as 0 to 31. Registers 32 to 128 are used as a register stack,
and each procedure is allocated a set of registers (from 0 to 96) for its use. The new
register stack frame is created for a called procedure by renaming the registers in
hardware; a special register called the current frame pointer (CFM) points to the set
of registers to be used by a given procedure. The frame consists of two parts:
the local area and the output area. The local area is used for local storage, while
H-34   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       the output area is used to pass values to any called procedure. The alloc instruc-
                       tion specifies the size of these areas. Only the integer registers have register stack
                       support.
                           On a procedure call, the CFM pointer is updated so that R32 of the called pro-
                       cedure points to the first register of the output area of the called procedure. This
                       update enables the parameters of the caller to be passed into the addressable reg-
                       isters of the callee. The callee executes an alloc instruction to allocate both the
                       number of required local registers, which include the output registers of the caller,
                       and the number of output registers needed for parameter passing to a called pro-
                       cedure. Special load and store instructions are available for saving and restoring the
                       register stack, and special hardware (called the register stack engine) handles over-
                       flow of the register stack.
                           In addition to the integer registers, there are three other sets of registers: the
                       floating-point registers, the predicate registers, and the branch registers. The
                       floating-point registers are used for floating-point data, and the branch registers
                       are used to hold branch destination addresses for indirect branches. The predication
                       registers hold predicates, which control the execution of predicated instructions;
                       we describe the predication mechanism later in this section.
                           Both the integer and floating-point registers support register rotation for reg-
                       isters 32 to 128. Register rotation is designed to ease the task of allocating registers
                       in software-pipelined loops, a problem that we discussed in Section H.3. In addi-
                       tion, when combined with the use of predication, it is possible to avoid the need for
                       unrolling and for separate prologue and epilogue code for a software-pipelined
                       loop. This capability reduces the code expansion incurred to use software pipelin-
                       ing and makes the technique usable for loops with smaller numbers of iterations,
                       where the overheads would traditionally negate many of the advantages.

                       Instruction Format and Support for Explicit Parallelism
                       The IA-64 architecture is designed to achieve the major benefits of a VLIW
                       approach—implicit parallelism among operations in an instruction and fixed for-
                       matting of the operation fields—while maintaining greater flexibility than a VLIW
                       normally allows. This combination is achieved by relying on the compiler to detect
                       ILP and schedule instructions into parallel instruction slots, but adding flexibility
                       in the formatting of instructions and allowing the compiler to indicate when an
                       instruction cannot be executed in parallel with its successors.
                           The IA-64 architecture uses two different concepts to achieve the benefits of
                       implicit parallelism and ease of instruction decode. Implicit parallelism is achieved
                       by placing instructions into instruction groups, while the fixed formatting of mul-
                       tiple instructions is achieved through the introduction of a concept called a bundle,
                       which contains three instructions. Let’s start by defining an instruction group.
                           An instruction group is a sequence of consecutive instructions with no register
                       data dependences among them (there are a few minor exceptions). All the instruc-
                       tions in a group could be executed in parallel, if sufficient hardware resources
                       existed and if any dependences through memory were preserved. An instruction
                       group can be arbitrarily long, but the compiler must explicitly indicate the
                      H.6    The Intel IA-64 Architecture and Itanium Processor               ■   H-35

          Execution         Instruction    Instruction
          unit slot         type           description          Example instructions
          I-unit                 A         Integer ALU          Add, subtract, and, or, compare
                                 I         Non-ALU              integer Integer and multimedia shifts,
                                                                bit tests, moves
          M-unit                 A         Integer ALU          Add, subtract, and, or, compare
                                M          Memory access        Loads and stores for integer/FP
                                                                registers
          F-unit                 F         Floating point       Floating-point instructions
          B-unit                 B         Branches             Conditional branches, calls, loop
                                                                branches
          L+X                 L+X          Extended             Extended immediates, stops and
                                                                no-ops

          Figure H.6 The five execution unit slots in the IA-64 architecture and what instruc-
          tions types they may hold are shown. A-type instructions, which correspond to integer
          ALU instructions, may be placed in either an I-unit or M-unit slot. L + X slots are special,
          as they occupy two instruction slots; L + X instructions are used to encode 64-bit imme-
          diates and a few special instructions. L + X instructions are executed either by the I-unit
          or the B-unit.

          boundary between one instruction group and another. This boundary is indicated
          by placing a stop between two instructions that belong to different groups. To
          understand how stops are indicated, we must first explain how instructions are
          placed into bundles.
              IA-64 instructions are encoded in bundles, which are 128 bits wide. Each bun-
          dle consists of a 5-bit template field and three instructions, each 41 bits in length.
          (Actually, the 41-bit quantities are not truly instructions, since they can only be
          interpreted in conjunction with the template field. The name syllable is sometimes
          used for these operations. For simplicity, we will continue to use the term “instruc-
          tion.”) To simplify the decoding and instruction issue process, the template field of
          a bundle specifies what types of execution units each instruction in the bundle
          requires. Figure H.6 shows the five different execution unit types and describes
          what instruction classes they may hold, together with some examples.
              The 5-bit template field within each bundle describes both the presence of any
          stops associated with the bundle and the execution unit type required by each
          instruction within the bundle. Figure H.7 shows the possible formats that the tem-
          plate field encodes and the position of any stops it specifies. The bundle formats
          can specify only a subset of all possible combinations of instruction types and
          stops. To see how the bundle works, let’s consider an example.

Example   Unroll the array increment example, x[i] = x[i] + s, seven times and place the
          instructions into bundles, first ignoring pipeline latencies (to minimize the number
          of bundles) and then scheduling the code to minimize stalls. In scheduling the code
          assume one bundle executes per clock and that any stalls cause the entire bundle to
H-36   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       Figure H.7 The 24 possible template values (8 possible values are reserved) and the
                       instruction slots and stops for each format. Stops are indicated by heavy lines and may
                       appear within and/or at the end of the bundle. For example, template 9 specifies that the
                       instruction slots are M, M, and I (in that order) and that the only stop is between this bun-
                       dle and the next. Template 11 has the same type of instruction slots but also includes a
                       stop after the first slot. The L + X format is used when slot 1 is L and slot 2 is X.

                       be stalled. Use the pipeline latencies from Figure 3.2. Use MIPS instruction mne-
                       monics for simplicity.

              Answer   The two different versions are shown in Figure H.8. Although the latencies are dif-
                       ferent from those in Itanium, the most common bundle, MMF, must be issued by
                       itself in Itanium, just as our example assumes.
                                          H.6    The Intel IA-64 Architecture and Itanium Processor           ■   H-37

Figure H.8 The IA-64 instructions, including bundle bits and stops, for the unrolled version of x[i] 5 x[i] + s, when
unrolled seven times and scheduled (a) to minimize the number of instruction bundles and (b) to minimize the
number of cycles (assuming that a hazard stalls an entire bundle). Blank entries indicate unused slots, which are
encoded as no-ops. The absence of stops indicates that some bundles could be executed in parallel. Minimizing the
number of bundles yields 9 bundles versus the 11 needed to minimize the number of cycles. The scheduled version
executes in just over half the number of cycles. Version (a) fills 85% of the instruction slots, while (b) fills 70%. The
number of empty slots in the scheduled code and the use of bundles may lead to code sizes that are much larger than
other RISC architectures. Note that the branch in the last bundle in both sequences depends on the DADD in the same
bundle. In the IA-64 instruction set, this sequence would be coded as a setting of a predication register and a branch
that would be predicated on that register. Normally, such dependent operations could not occur in the same bundle,
but this case is one of the exceptions mentioned earlier.
H-38   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       Instruction Set Basics
                       Before turning to the special support for speculation, we briefly discuss the major
                       instruction encodings and survey the instructions in each of the five primary
                       instruction classes (A, I, M, F, and B). Each IA-64 instruction is 41 bits in length.
                       The high-order 4 bits, together with the bundle bits that specify the execution unit
                       slot, are used as the major opcode. (That is, the 4-bit opcode field is reused across
                       the execution field slots, and it is appropriate to think of the opcode as being 4 bits
                       plus the M, F, I, B, L + X designation.) The low-order 6 bits of every instruction are
                       used for specifying the predicate register that guards the instruction (see the next
                       subsection).
                           Figure H.9 summarizes most of the major instruction formats, other than the
                       multimedia instructions, and gives examples of the instructions encoded for each
                       format.

                       Predication and Speculation Support
                       The IA-64 architecture provides comprehensive support for predication: Nearly
                       every instruction in the IA-64 architecture can be predicated. An instruction is
                       predicated by specifying a predicate register, whose identity is placed in the lower
                       6 bits of each instruction field. Because nearly all instructions can be predicated,
                       both if conversion and code motion have lower overhead than they would with
                       only limited support for conditional instructions. One consequence of full predi-
                       cation is that a conditional branch is simply a branch with a guarding predicate!
                           Predicate registers are set using compare or test instructions. A compare
                       instruction specifies one of ten different comparison tests and two predicate reg-
                       isters as destinations. The two predicate registers are written either with the result
                       of the comparison (0 or 1) and the complement, or with some logical function that
                       combines the two tests (such as and) and the complement. This capability allows
                       multiple comparisons to be done in one instruction.
                           Speculation support in the IA-64 architecture consists of separate support for
                       control speculation, which deals with deferring exception for speculated instruc-
                       tions, and memory reference speculation, which supports speculation of load
                       instructions.
                           Deferred exception handling for speculative instructions is supported by pro-
                       viding the equivalent of poison bits. For the general-purpose registers (GPRs),
                       these bits are called NaTs (Not a Thing), and this extra bit makes the GPRs effec-
                       tively 65 bits wide. For the FP registers this capability is obtained using a special
                       value, NaTVal (Not a Thing Value); this value is encoded using a significand of
                       0 and an exponent outside of the IEEE range. Only speculative load instructions
                       generate such values, but all instructions that do not affect memory will cause a
                       NaT or NaTVal to be propagated to the result register. (There are both speculative
                       and non-speculative loads; the latter can only raise immediate exceptions and can-
                       not defer them.) Floating-point exceptions are not handled through this mechanism
                       but instead use floating-point status registers to record exceptions.
                                           H.6      The Intel IA-64 Architecture and Itanium Processor            ■      H-39

                                                                    Extra
Instruction      Number                                            opcode      GPRs/      Immediate
   type         of formats      Representative instructions          bits      FPRs         bits          Other/comment
     A               8         Add, subtract, and, or                 9           3            0
                               Shift left and add                     7           3            0          2-bit shift count
                               ALU immediates                         9           2            8
                               Add immediate                          3           2           14
                               Add immediate                          0           2           22
                               Compare                                4           2            0          2 predicate
                                                                                                          register
                                                                                                          destinations
                               Compare immediate                      3           1            8          2 predicate
                                                                                                          register
                                                                                                          destinations
      I             29         Shift R/L variable                     9           3            0          Many multimedia
                                                                                                          instructions use
                                                                                                          this format.
                               Test bit                               6           3       6-bit field     2 predicate
                                                                                           specifier      register
                                                                                                          destinations
                               Move to BR                             6           1      9-bit branch     Branch register
                                                                                           predict        specifier
     M              46         Integer/FP load and store, line        10          2            0          Speculative/
                               prefetch                                                                   nonspeculative
                               Integer/FP load and store, and         9           2            8          Speculative/
                               line prefetch and post-                                                    nonspeculative
                               increment by immediate
                               Integer/FP load prefetch and           10          3                       Speculative/
                               register postincrement                                                     nonspeculative
                               Integer/FP speculation check           3           1        21 in two
                                                                                             fields
     B               9         PC-relative branch, counted            7           0           21
                               branch
                               PC-relative call                       4           0           21          1 branch register
     F              15         FP arithmetic                          2           4
                               FP compare                             2           2                       2 6-bit predicate
                                                                                                          regs
   L+X               4         Move immediate long                    2           1           64

Figure H.9 A summary of some of the instruction formats of the IA-64 ISA. The major opcode bits and the guarding
predication register specifier add 10 bits to every instruction. The number of formats indicated for each instruction
class in the second column (a total of 111) is a strict interpretation: A different use of a field, even of the same size, is
considered a different format. The number of formats that actually have different field sizes is one-third to one-half as
large. Some instructions have unused bits that are reserved; we have not included those in this table. Immediate bits
include the sign bit. The branch instructions include prediction bits, which are used when the predictor does not have
a valid prediction. Only one of the many formats for the multimedia instructions is shown in this table.
H-40   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                            A deferred exception can be resolved in two different ways. First, if a non-
                       speculative instruction, such as a store, receives a NaT or NaTVal as a source
                       operand, it generates an immediate and unrecoverable exception. Alternatively,
                       a chk.s instruction can be used to detect the presence of NaT or NaTVal and
                       branch to a routine designed by the compiler to recover from the speculative
                       operation. Such a recovery approach makes more sense for memory reference
                       speculation.
                            The inability to store the contents of instructions with a NaT or NaTVal set
                       would make it impossible for the OS to save the state of the processor. Thus,
                       IA-64 includes special instructions to save and restore registers that do not
                       cause an exception for a NaT or NaTVal and also save and restore the
                       NaT bits.
                            Memory reference support in the IA-64 uses a concept called advanced loads.
                       An advanced load is a load that has been speculatively moved above store instruc-
                       tions on which it is potentially dependent. To speculatively perform a load, the ld.
                       a (for advanced load) instruction is used. Executing this instruction creates an entry
                       in a special table, called the ALAT. The ALAT stores both the register destination
                       of the load and the address of the accessed memory location. When a store is exe-
                       cuted, an associative lookup against the active ALAT entries is performed. If there
                       is an ALAT entry with the same memory address as the store, the ALAT entry is
                       marked as invalid.
                            Before any nonspeculative instruction (i.e., a store) uses the value generated by
                       an advanced load or a value derived from the result of an advanced load, an explicit
                       check is required. The check specifies the destination register of the advanced load.
                       If the ALAT for that register is still valid, the speculation was legal and the only
                       effect of the check is to clear the ALAT entry. If the check fails, the action taken
                       depends on which of two different types of checks was employed. The first type of
                       check is an instruction ld.c, which simply causes the data to be reloaded from
                       memory at that point. An ld.c instruction is used when only the load is advanced.
                       The alternative form of a check, chk.a, specifies the address of a fix-up routine
                       that is used to reexecute the load and any other speculated code that depended on
                       the value of the load.

                       The Itanium 2 Processor
                       The Itanium 2 processor is the second implementation of the IA-64 architecture.
                       The first version, Itanium 1, became available in 2001 with an 800 MHz clock.
                       The Itanium 2, first delivered in 2003, had a maximum clock rate in 2005 of
                       1.6 GHz. The two processors are very similar, with some differences in the pipeline
                       structure and greater differences in the memory hierarchies. The Itanium 2 is about
                       four times faster than the Itanium 1. This performance improvement comes from a
                       doubling of the clock rate, a more aggressive memory hierarchy, additional func-
                       tional units that improve instruction throughput, more complete bypassing, a
               H.6   The Intel IA-64 Architecture and Itanium Processor        ■    H-41

shorter pipeline that reduces some stalls, and a more mature compiler system. Dur-
ing roughly the same period that elapsed from the Itanium 1 to Itanium 2, the Pen-
tium processors improved by slightly more than a factor of three. The greater
improvement for the Itanium is reasonable given the novelty of the architecture
and software system versus the more established IA-32 implementations.
    The Itanium 2 can fetch and issue two bundles, or up to six instructions, per
clock. The Itanium 2 uses a three-level memory hierarchy all on-chip. The first
level uses split instruction and data caches, each 16 KB; floating-point data are
not placed in the first-level cache. The second and third levels are unified caches
of 256 KB and of 3 MB to 9 MB, respectively.

Functional Units and Instruction Issue
There are 11 functional units in the Itanium 2 processor: two I-units, four M-units
(two for loads and two for stores), three B-units, and two F-units. All the functional
units are pipelined. Figure H.10 gives the pipeline latencies for some typical
instructions. In addition, when a result is bypassed from one unit to another, there
is usually at least one additional cycle of delay.
    Itanium 2 can issue up to six instructions per clock from two bundles. In the
worst case, if a bundle is split when it is issued, the hardware could see as few as
four instructions: one from the first bundle to be executed and three from the sec-
ond bundle. Instructions are allocated to functional units based on the bundle bits,
ignoring the presence of no-ops or predicated instructions with untrue predicates.
In addition, when issue to a functional unit is blocked because the next instruction
to be issued needs an already committed unit, the resulting bundle is split. A split
bundle still occupies one of the two bundle slots, even if it has only one instruction
remaining.

Instruction                                                                        Latency
Integer load                                                                         1
Floating-point load                                                                 5–9
Correctly predicted taken branch                                                    0–3
Mispredicted branch                                                                  6
Integer ALU operations                                                               0
FP arithmetic                                                                        4

Figure H.10 The latency of some typical instructions on Itanium 2. The latency is
defined as the smallest number of intervening instructions between two dependent
instructions. Integer load latency assumes a hit in the first-level cache. FP loads always
bypass the primary cache, so the latency is equal to the access time of the second-level
cache. There are some minor restrictions for some of the functional units, but these pri-
marily involve the execution of infrequent instructions.
H-42   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                           The Itanium 2 processor uses an eight-stage pipeline divided into four major
                       parts:

                       ■   Front-end (stages IPG and Rotate)—Prefetches up to 32 bytes per clock (two
                           bundles) into a prefetch buffer, which can hold up to eight bundles (24 instruc-
                           tions). Branch prediction is done using a multilevel adaptive predictor like
                           those described in Chapter 3.
                       ■   Instruction delivery (stages EXP and REN)—Distributes up to six instructions
                           to the 11 functional units. Implements register renaming for both rotation and
                           register stacking.
                       ■   Operand delivery (REG)—Accesses the register file, performs register bypass-
                           ing, accesses and updates a register scoreboard, and checks predicate depen-
                           dences. The scoreboard is used to detect when individual instructions can
                           proceed, so that a stall of one instruction (for example, due to an unpredictable
                           event like a cache miss) in a bundle need not cause the entire bundle to stall. (As
                           we saw in Figure H.8, stalling the entire bundle leads to poor performance
                           unless the instructions are carefully scheduled.)
                       ■   Execution (EXE, DET, and WRB)—Executes instructions through ALUs and
                           load-store units, detects exceptions and posts NaTs, retires instructions, and
                           performs write-back.

                            Both the Itanium 1 and the Itanium 2 have many of the features more com-
                       monly associated with the dynamically scheduled pipelines described in
                       Chapter 3: dynamic branch prediction, register renaming, scoreboarding, a pipeline
                       with a number of stages before execution (to handle instruction alignment, renam-
                       ing, etc.), and several stages following execution to handle exception detection.
                       Although these mechanisms are generally simpler than those in an advanced
                       dynamically scheduled superscalar, the overall effect is that the Itanium proces-
                       sors, which rely much more on compiler technology, seem to be as complex as
                       the dynamically scheduled processors we saw in Chapter 3!
                            One might ask why such features are included in a processor that relies primar-
                       ily on compile time techniques for finding and exploiting parallelism. There are
                       two main motivations. First, dynamic techniques are sometimes significantly bet-
                       ter, and omitting them would hurt performance significantly. The inclusion of
                       dynamic branch prediction is such a case.
                            Second, caches are absolutely necessary to achieve high performance, and with
                       caches come cache misses, which are both unpredictable and which in current pro-
                       cessors take a relatively long time. In the early VLIW processors, the entire pro-
                       cessor would freeze when a cache miss occurred, retaining the lockstep parallelism
                       initially specified by the compiler. Such an approach is totally unrealistic in a mod-
                       ern processor where cache misses can cost tens to hundreds of cycles. Allowing
                       some instructions to continue while others are stalled, however, requires the intro-
                       duction of some form of dynamic scheduling, in this case scoreboarding. In addi-
                       tion, if a stall is likely to be long, then antidependences are likely to prevent much
                                                                                     H.7     Concluding Remarks        ■   H-43

                           9000

                           8000
                                                                                               Itanium 2
                           7000                                                                Pentium 4
                                                                                               AMD Athlon 64
                           6000
                                                                                               Power5
              SPEC Ratio

                           5000

                           4000

                           3000

                           2000

                           1000

                             0
                                  wupwise galgel   mesa   swim   sixtrack      gcc    gzip   crafty     gap    twolf

Figure H.11 The performance of four multiple-issue processors for five SPECfp and SPECint benchmarks. The
clock rates of the four processors are Itanium 2 at 1.5 GHz, Pentium 4 Extreme Edition at 3.8 GHz, AMD Athlon 64
at 2.8 GHz, and the IBM Power5 at 1.9 GHz.

                                         progress while waiting for the cache miss; hence, the Itanium implementations also
                                         introduce register renaming.

                                         Itanium 2 Performance
                                         Figure H.11 shows the performance of a 1.5 GHz Itanium 2 versus a Pentium 4, an
                                         AMD Athlon processor, and an IBM Power5 for five SPECint and five SPECfp
                                         benchmarks. Overall, the Itanium 2 is slightly slower than the Power5 for the full
                                         set of SPEC floating-point benchmarks and about 35% faster than the AMD Athlon
                                         or Pentium 4. On SPECint, the Itanium 2 is 15% faster than the Power5, while both
                                         the AMD Athlon and Pentium 4 are about 15% faster than the Itanium 2. The Ita-
                                         nium 2 and Power5 are much higher power and have larger die sizes. In fact, the
                                         Power5 contains two processors, only one of which is active during normal SPEC
                                         benchmarks, and still it has less than half the transistor count of the Itanium. If we
                                         were to reduce the die size, transistor count, and power of the Power5 by eliminat-
                                         ing one of the processors, the Itanium would be by far the largest and highest-
                                         power processor.

                           H.7           Concluding Remarks
                                         When the design of the IA-64 architecture began, it was a joint effort of Hewlett-
                                         Packard and Intel and many of the designers had benefited from experience with
                                         early VLIW processors as well of years of research building on the early concepts.
                                         The clear goal for the IA-64 architecture was to achieve levels of ILP as good or
H-44   ■   Appendix H Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC

                       better than what had been achieved with hardware-based approaches, while also
                       allowing a much simpler hardware implementation. With a simpler hardware
                       implementation, designers hoped that much higher clock rates could be achieved.
                       Indeed, when the IA-64 architecture and the first Itanium were announced, they
                       were announced as the successor to the RISC approaches with clearly superior
                       advantages.
                           Unfortunately, the practical reality has been quite different. The IA-64 and Ita-
                       nium implementations appear to be at least as complicated as the dynamically
                       based speculative processors, and neither approach has a significant and consistent
                       performance advantage. The fact that the Itanium designs have also not been more
                       power efficient has led to a situation where the Itanium design has been adopted by
                       only a small number of customers primarily interested in FP performance.
                           Intel had planned for IA-64 to be its new 64-bit architecture as well. But the
                       combination of its mediocre integer performance (especially in Itanium 1) and
                       large die size, together with AMD’s introduction of a 64-bit version of the IA-
                       32 architecture, forced Intel to extend the address space of IA-32. The availability
                       of a larger address space IA-32 processor with strong integer performance has fur-
                       ther reduced the interest in IA-64 and Itanium. Most recently, Intel has introduced
                       the name IPF to replace IA-64, since the former name made less sense once the
                       older x86 architecture was extended to 64 bits.

                       Reference
                       Wilson, R.P., Lam, M.S., 1995. Efficient context-sensitive pointer analysis for C programs. In: Proc.
                         ACM SIGPLAN’95 Conf. on Programming Language Design and Implementation, June 18–21,
                         1995, La Jolla, Calif, pp. 1–12.
I.1   Introduction                                                       I-2
I.2   Interprocessor Communication: The Critical Performance Issue       I-3
I.3   Characteristics of Scientific Applications                         I-6
I.4   Synchronization: Scaling Up                                      I-12
I.5   Performance of Scientific Applications on Shared-Memory
            Multiprocessors                                            I-21
I.6   Performance Measurement of Parallel Processors with Scientific
            Applications                                               I-33
I.7   Implementing Cache Coherence                                     I-34
I.8   The Custom Cluster Approach: Blue Gene/L                         I-41
I.9   Concluding Remarks                                               I-44
