I
    Large-Scale Multiprocessors
    and Scientific Applications

    Hennessy and Patterson should move MPPs to Chapter 11.

                                    Jim Gray, Microsoft Research
       when asked about the coverage of massively parallel processors
                                 (MPPs) for the third edition in 2000

     Unfortunately for companies in the MPP business, the third edition
         had only ten chapters and the MPP business did not grow as
           anticipated when the first and second edition were written.
I-2   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                 I.1      Introduction
                          The primary application of large-scale multiprocessors is for true parallel program-
                          ming, as opposed to multiprogramming or transaction-oriented computing where
                          independent tasks are executed in parallel without much interaction. In true parallel
                          computing, a set of tasks execute in a collaborative fashion on one application.
                          The primary target of parallel computing is scientific and technical applications.
                          In contrast, for loosely coupled commercial applications, such as Web servers
                          and most transaction-processing applications, there is little communication among
                          tasks. For such applications, loosely coupled clusters are generally adequate and
                          most cost-effective, since intertask communication is rare.
                              Because true parallel computing involves cooperating tasks, the nature of com-
                          munication between those tasks and how such communication is supported in the
                          hardware is of vital importance in determining the performance of the application.
                          The next section of this appendix examines such issues and the characteristics of
                          different communication models.
                              In comparison to sequential programs, whose performance is largely dictated
                          by the cache behavior and issues related to instruction-level parallelism, parallel
                          programs have several additional characteristics that are important to performance,
                          including the amount of parallelism, the size of parallel tasks, the frequency and
                          nature of intertask communication, and the frequency and nature of synchroniza-
                          tion. These aspects are affected both by the underlying nature of the application as
                          well as by the programming style. Section I.3 reviews the important characteristics
                          of several scientific applications to give a flavor of these issues.
                              As we saw in Chapter 5, synchronization can be quite important in achieving
                          good performance. The larger number of parallel tasks that may need to synchro-
                          nize makes contention involving synchronization a much more serious problem
                          in large-scale multiprocessors. Section I.4 examines methods of scaling up the
                          synchronization mechanisms of Chapter 5.
                              Section I.5 explores the detailed performance of shared-memory parallel appli-
                          cations executing on a moderate-scale shared-memory multiprocessor. As we will
                          see, the behavior and performance characteristics are quite a bit more complicated
                          than those in small-scale shared-memory multiprocessors. Section I.6 discusses
                          the general issue of how to examine parallel performance for different sized
                          multiprocessors. Section I.7 explores the implementation challenges of distributed
                          shared-memory cache coherence, the key architectural approach used in moderate-
                          scale multiprocessors. Sections I.7 and I.8 rely on a basic understanding of inter-
                          connection networks, and the reader should at least quickly review Appendix F
                          before reading these sections.
                              Section I.8 explores the design of one of the newest and most exciting large-
                          scale multiprocessors in recent times, Blue Gene. Blue Gene is a cluster-based mul-
                          tiprocessor, but it uses a custom, highly dense node designed specifically for this
                          function, as opposed to the nodes of most earlier cluster multiprocessors that used a
                          node architecture similar to those in a desktop or smaller-scale multiprocessor
         I.2   Interprocessor Communication: The Critical Performance Issue         ■   I-3

      node. By using a custom node design, Blue Gene achieves a significant reduction
      in the cost, physical size, and power consumption of a node. Blue Gene/L, a 64 K-
      node version, was the world’s fastest computer in 2006, as measured by the linear
      algebra benchmark, Linpack.

I.2   Interprocessor Communication: The Critical
      Performance Issue
      In multiprocessors with larger processor counts, interprocessor communication
      becomes more expensive, since the distance between processors increases.
      Furthermore, in truly parallel applications where the threads of the application
      must communicate, there is usually more communication than in a loosely coupled
      set of distinct processes or independent transactions, which characterize many
      commercial server applications. These factors combine to make efficient interpro-
      cessor communication one of the most important determinants of parallel perfor-
      mance, especially for the scientific market.
          Unfortunately, characterizing the communication needs of an application and
      the capabilities of an architecture is complex. This section examines the key hard-
      ware characteristics that determine communication performance, while the next
      section looks at application behavior and communication needs.
          Three performance metrics are critical in any hardware communication
      mechanism:

      1. Communication bandwidth—Ideally, the communication bandwidth is limited
         by processor, memory, and interconnection bandwidths, rather than by some
         aspect of the communication mechanism. The interconnection network deter-
         mines the maximum communication capacity of the system. The bandwidth
         in or out of a single node, which is often as important as total system bandwidth,
         is affected both by the architecture within the node and by the communication
         mechanism. How does the communication mechanism affect the communica-
         tion bandwidth of a node? When communication occurs, resources within the
         nodes involved in the communication are tied up or occupied, preventing other
         outgoing or incoming communication. When this occupancy is incurred for
         each word of a message, it sets an absolute limit on the communication band-
         width. This limit is often lower than what the network or memory system can
         provide. Occupancy may also have a component that is incurred for each com-
         munication event, such as an incoming or outgoing request. In the latter case,
         the occupancy limits the communication rate, and the impact of the occupancy
         on overall communication bandwidth depends on the size of the messages.
      2. Communication latency—Ideally, the latency is as low as possible. As
         Appendix F explains:
                Communication latency ¼ Sender overhead + Time of flight
                                        + Transmission time + Receiver overhead
I-4   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                             assuming no contention. Time of flight is fixed and transmission time is deter-
                             mined by the interconnection network. The software and hardware overheads in
                             sending and receiving messages are largely determined by the communication
                             mechanism and its implementation. Why is latency crucial? Latency affects
                             both performance and how easy it is to program a multiprocessor. Unless
                             latency is hidden, it directly affects performance either by tying up processor
                             resources or by causing the processor to wait.
                             Overhead and occupancy are closely related, since many forms of overhead also
                             tie up some part of the node, incurring an occupancy cost, which in turn limits
                             bandwidth. Key features of a communication mechanism may directly affect
                             overhead and occupancy. For example, how is the destination address for a
                             remote communication named, and how is protection implemented? When
                             naming and protection mechanisms are provided by the processor, as in a shared
                             address space, the additional overhead is small. Alternatively, if these mecha-
                             nisms must be provided by the operating system for each communication, this
                             increases the overhead and occupancy costs of communication, which in turn
                             reduce bandwidth and increase latency.
                          3. Communication latency hiding—How well can the communication mechanism
                             hide latency by overlapping communication with computation or with other
                             communication? Although measuring this is not as simple as measuring the first
                             two metrics, it is an important characteristic that can be quantified by measuring
                             the running time on multiprocessors with the same communication latency but
                             different support for latency hiding. Although hiding latency is certainly a good
                             idea, it poses an additional burden on the software system and ultimately on the
                             programmer. Furthermore, the amount of latency that can be hidden is applica-
                             tion dependent. Thus, it is usually best to reduce latency wherever possible.

                             Each of these performance measures is affected by the characteristics of the
                          communications needed in the application, as we will see in the next section.
                          The size of the data items being communicated is the most obvious characteristic,
                          since it affects both latency and bandwidth directly, as well as affecting the efficacy
                          of different latency-hiding approaches. Similarly, the regularity in the communi-
                          cation patterns affects the cost of naming and protection, and hence the commu-
                          nication overhead. In general, mechanisms that perform well with smaller as
                          well as larger data communication requests, and irregular as well as regular com-
                          munication patterns, are more flexible and efficient for a wider class of applica-
                          tions. Of course, in considering any communication mechanism, designers must
                          consider cost as well as performance.

                          Advantages of Different Communication Mechanisms
                          The two primary means of communicating data in a large-scale multiprocessor are
                          message passing and shared memory. Each of these two primary communication
    I.2   Interprocessor Communication: The Critical Performance Issue      ■   I-5

mechanisms has its advantages. For shared-memory communication, the advan-
tages include

■   Compatibility with the well-understood mechanisms in use in centralized
    multiprocessors, which all use shared-memory communication. The OpenMP
    consortium (see www.openmp.org for description) has proposed a standardized
    programming interface for shared-memory multiprocessors. Although mes-
    sage passing also uses a standard, MPI or Message Passing Interface, this stan-
    dard is not used either in shared-memory multiprocessors or in loosely coupled
    clusters in use in throughput-oriented environments.
■   Ease of programming when the communication patterns among processors are
    complex or vary dynamically during execution. Similar advantages simplify
    compiler design.
■   The ability to develop applications using the familiar shared-memory model,
    focusing attention only on those accesses that are performance critical.
■   Lower overhead for communication and better use of bandwidth when commu-
    nicating small items. This arises from the implicit nature of communication and
    the use of memory mapping to implement protection in hardware, rather than
    through the I/O system.
■   The ability to use hardware-controlled caching to reduce the frequency of
    remote communication by supporting automatic caching of all data, both
    shared and private. As we will see, caching reduces both latency and contention
    for accessing shared data. This advantage also comes with a disadvantage,
    which we mention below.

The major advantages for message-passing communication include the following:

■   The hardware can be simpler, especially by comparison with a scalable shared-
    memory implementation that supports coherent caching of remote data.
■   Communication is explicit, which means it is simpler to understand. In shared-
    memory models, it can be difficult to know when communication is occurring
    and when it is not, as well as how costly the communication is.
■   Explicit communication focuses programmer attention on this costly aspect
    of parallel computation, sometimes leading to improved structure in a multi-
    processor program.
■   Synchronization is naturally associated with sending messages, reducing the
    possibility for errors introduced by incorrect synchronization.
■   It makes it easier to use sender-initiated communication, which may have some
    advantages in performance.
■   If the communication is less frequent and more structured, it is easier to
    improve fault tolerance by using a transaction-like structure. Furthermore,
I-6   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                              the less tight coupling of nodes and explicit communication make fault isola-
                              tion simpler.
                          ■   The very largest multiprocessors use a cluster structure, which is inherently
                              based on message passing. Using two different communication models may
                              introduce more complexity than is warranted.

                          Of course, the desired communication model can be created in software on top of a
                          hardware model that supports either of these mechanisms. Supporting message
                          passing on top of shared memory is considerably easier: Because messages essen-
                          tially send data from one memory to another, sending a message can be implemen-
                          ted by doing a copy from one portion of the address space to another. The major
                          difficulties arise from dealing with messages that may be misaligned and of arbi-
                          trary length in a memory system that is normally oriented toward transferring
                          aligned blocks of data organized as cache blocks. These difficulties can be over-
                          come either with small performance penalties in software or with essentially no
                          penalties, using a small amount of hardware support.
                               Supporting shared memory efficiently on top of hardware for message passing
                          is much more difficult. Without explicit hardware support for shared memory, all
                          shared-memory references need to involve the operating system to provide address
                          translation and memory protection, as well as to translate memory references into
                          message sends and receives. Loads and stores usually move small amounts of data,
                          so the high overhead of handling these communications in software severely limits
                          the range of applications for which the performance of software-based shared
                          memory is acceptable. For these reasons, it has never been practical to use message
                          passing to implement shared memory for a commercial system.

                 I.3      Characteristics of Scientific Applications
                          The primary use of scalable shared-memory multiprocessors is for true parallel
                          programming, as opposed to multiprogramming or transaction-oriented comput-
                          ing. The primary target of parallel computing is scientific and technical applica-
                          tions. Thus, understanding the design issues requires some insight into the
                          behavior of such applications. This section provides such an introduction.

                          Characteristics of Scientific Applications
                          Our scientific/technical parallel workload consists of two applications and two
                          computational kernels. The kernels are fast Fourier transformation (FFT) and an
                          LU decomposition, which were chosen because they represent commonly used
                          techniques in a wide variety of applications and have performance characteristics
                          typical of many parallel scientific applications. In addition, the kernels have small
                          code segments whose behavior we can understand and directly track to specific
                          architectural characteristics. Like many scientific applications, I/O is essentially
                          nonexistent in this workload.
                            I.3   Characteristics of Scientific Applications     ■   I-7

    The two applications that we use in this appendix are Barnes and Ocean, which
represent two important but very different types of parallel computation. We
briefly describe each of these applications and kernels and characterize their basic
behavior in terms of parallelism and communication. We describe how the prob-
lem is decomposed for a distributed shared-memory multiprocessor; certain data
decompositions that we describe are not necessary on multiprocessors that have
a single, centralized memory.

The FFT Kernel
The FFT is the key kernel in applications that use spectral methods, which arise in
fields ranging from signal processing to fluid flow to climate modeling. The FFT appli-
cation we study here is a one-dimensional version of a parallel algorithm for a complex
number FFT. It has a sequential execution
                                  pffiffiffi       time for n data points of n log n. The algo-
rithm uses a high radix (equal to n) that minimizes communication. The measure-
ments shown in this appendix are collected for a million-point input data set.
    There are three primary data structures: the input and output arrays of the data
being transformed and the roots of unity matrix, which is precomputed and only
read during the execution. All arrays are organized as square matrices. The six
steps in the algorithm are as follows:

1. Transpose data matrix.
2. Perform 1D FFT on each row of data matrix.
3. Multiply the roots of unity matrix by the data matrix and write the result in the
   data matrix.
4. Transpose data matrix.
5. Perform 1D FFT on each row of data matrix.
6. Transpose data matrix.

The data matrices and the roots of unity matrix are partitioned among processors in
contiguous chunks of rows, so that each processor’s partition falls in its own local
memory. The first row of the roots of unity matrix is accessed heavily by all pro-
cessors and is often replicated, as we do, during the first step of the algorithm just
shown. The data transposes ensure good locality during the individual FFT steps,
which would otherwise access nonlocal data.
    The only communication is in the transpose phases, which require all-to-all
communication of large amounts of data. Contiguous subcolumns in the rows
assigned to a processor are grouped into blocks, which are transposed and placed
into the proper location of the destination matrix. Every processor transposes one
block locally and sends one block to each of the other processors in the system.
Although there is no reuse of individual words in the transpose, with long cache
blocks it makes sense to block the transpose to take advantage of the spatial locality
afforded by long blocks in the source matrix.
I-8   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          The LU Kernel
                          LU is an LU factorization of a dense matrix and is representative of many dense
                          linear algebra computations, such as QR factorization, Cholesky factorization,
                          and eigenvalue methods. For a matrix of size n ? n the running time is n3 and
                          the parallelism is proportional to n2. Dense LU factorization can be performed
                          efficiently by blocking the algorithm, using the techniques in Chapter 2, which
                          leads to highly efficient cache behavior and low communication. After blocking
                          the algorithm, the dominant computation is a dense matrix multiply that occurs in
                          the innermost loop. The block size is chosen to be small enough to keep the cache
                          miss rate low and large enough to reduce the time spent in the less parallel parts
                          of the computation. Relatively small block sizes (8 ? 8 or 16 ? 16) tend to satisfy
                          both criteria.
                              Two details are important for reducing interprocessor communication. First,
                          the blocks of the matrix are assigned to processors using a 2D tiling: The Bn ? Bn
                          (where each block is B ? B) matrix of blocks is allocated by laying a grid of size
                          p ? p over the matrix of blocks in a cookie-cutter fashion until all the blocks are
                          allocated to a processor. Second, the dense matrix multiplication is performed
                          by the processor that owns the destination block. With this blocking and allocation
                          scheme, communication during the reduction is both regular and predictable. For
                          the measurements in this appendix, the input is a 512 ? 512 matrix and a block of
                          16 ? 16 is used.
                              A natural way to code the blocked LU factorization of a 2D matrix in a shared
                          address space is to use a 2D array to represent the matrix. Because blocks are allo-
                          cated in a tiled decomposition, and a block is not contiguous in the address space
                          in a 2D array, it is very difficult to allocate blocks in the local memories of the
                          processors that own them. The solution is to ensure that blocks assigned to a
                          processor are allocated locally and contiguously by using a 4D array (with the first
                          two dimensions specifying the block number in the 2D grid of blocks, and the next
                          two specifying the element in the block).

                          The Barnes Application
                          Barnes is an implementation of the Barnes-Hut n-body algorithm solving a
                          problem in galaxy evolution. N-body algorithms simulate the interaction among
                          a large number of bodies that have forces interacting among them. In this
                          instance, the bodies represent collections of stars and the force is gravity. To
                          reduce the computational time required to model completely all the individual
                          interactions among the bodies, which grow as n2, n-body algorithms take advan-
                          tage of the fact that the forces drop off with distance. (Gravity, for example,
                          drops off as 1/d2, where d is the distance between the two bodies.) The
                          Barnes-Hut algorithm takes advantage of this property by treating a collection
                          of bodies that are “far away” from another body as a single point at the center of
                          mass of the collection and with mass equal to the collection. If the body is far
                          enough from any body in the collection, then the error introduced will be
                           I.3   Characteristics of Scientific Applications    ■   I-9

negligible. The collections are structured in a hierarchical fashion, which can be
represented in a tree. This algorithm yields an n log n running time with par-
allelism proportional to n.
     The Barnes-Hut algorithm uses an octree (each node has up to eight children)
to represent the eight cubes in a portion of space. Each node then represents the
collection of bodies in the subtree rooted at that node, which we call a cell.
Because the density of space varies and the leaves represent individual bodies,
the depth of the tree varies. The tree is traversed once per body to compute
the net force acting on that body. The force calculation algorithm for a body starts
at the root of the tree. For every node in the tree it visits, the algorithm determines
if the center of mass of the cell represented by the subtree rooted at the node is
“far enough away” from the body. If so, the entire subtree under that node is
approximated by a single point at the center of mass of the cell, and the force
that this center of mass exerts on the body is computed. On the other hand, if
the center of mass is not far enough away, the cell must be “opened” and each
of its subtrees visited. The distance between the body and the cell, together with
the error tolerances, determines which cells must be opened. This force calcula-
tion phase dominates the execution time. This appendix takes measurements
using 16K bodies; the criterion for determining whether a cell needs to be opened
is set to the middle of the range typically used in practice.
     Obtaining effective parallel performance on Barnes-Hut is challenging because
the distribution of bodies is nonuniform and changes over time, making partition-
ing the work among the processors and maintenance of good locality of reference
difficult. We are helped by two properties: (1) the system evolves slowly, and (2)
because gravitational forces fall off quickly, with high probability, each cell
requires touching a small number of other cells, most of which were used on
the last time step. The tree can be partitioned by allocating each processor a subtree.
Many of the accesses needed to compute the force on a body in the subtree will be
to other bodies in the subtree. Since the amount of work associated with a subtree
varies (cells in dense portions of space will need to access more cells), the size of
the subtree allocated to a processor is based on some measure of the work it has to
do (e.g., how many other cells it needs to visit), rather than just on the number of
nodes in the subtree. By partitioning the octree representation, we can obtain good
load balance and good locality of reference, while keeping the partitioning cost
low. Although this partitioning scheme results in good locality of reference, the
resulting data references tend to be for small amounts of data and are unstructured.
Thus, this scheme requires an efficient implementation of shared-memory
communication.

The Ocean Application
Ocean simulates the influence of eddy and boundary currents on large-scale flow
in the ocean. It uses a restricted red-black Gauss-Seidel multigrid technique to
solve a set of elliptical partial differential equations. Red-black Gauss-Seidel is
an iteration technique that colors the points in the grid so as to consistently update
I-10   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          each point based on previous values of the adjacent neighbors. Multigrid methods
                          solve finite difference equations by iteration using hierarchical grids. Each grid in
                          the hierarchy has fewer points than the grid below and is an approximation to the
                          lower grid. A finer grid increases accuracy and thus the rate of convergence,
                          while requiring more execution time, since it has more data points. Whether to
                          move up or down in the hierarchy of grids used for the next iteration is deter-
                          mined by the rate of change of the data values. The estimate of the error at every
                          time step is used to decide whether to stay at the same grid, move to a coarser
                          grid, or move to a finer grid. When the iteration converges at the finest level, a
                          solution has been reached. Each iteration has n2 work for an n ? n grid and the
                          same amount of parallelism.
                              The arrays representing each grid are dynamically allocated and sized to the
                          particular problem. The entire ocean basin is partitioned into square subgrids
                          (as close as possible) that are allocated in the portion of the address space corre-
                          sponding to the local memory of the individual processors, which are assigned
                          responsibility for the subgrid. For the measurements in this appendix we use an
                          input that has 130 ? 130 grid points. There are five steps in a time iteration. Since
                          data are exchanged between the steps, all the processors present synchronize at the
                          end of each step before proceeding to the next. Communication occurs when the
                          boundary points of a subgrid are accessed by the adjacent subgrid in nearest-
                          neighbor fashion.

                          Computation/Communication for the Parallel Programs
                          A key characteristic in determining the performance of parallel programs is the
                          ratio of computation to communication. If the ratio is high, it means the application
                          has lots of computation for each datum communicated. As we saw in Section I.2,
                          communication is the costly part of parallel computing; therefore, high
                          computation-to-communication ratios are very beneficial. In a parallel processing
                          environment, we are concerned with how the ratio of computation to communica-
                          tion changes as we increase either the number of processors, the size of the prob-
                          lem, or both. Knowing how the ratio changes as we increase the processor count
                          sheds light on how well the application can be sped up. Because we are often inter-
                          ested in running larger problems, it is vital to understand how changing the data set
                          size affects this ratio.
                              To understand what happens quantitatively to the computation-to-
                          communication ratio as we add processors, consider what happens separately to
                          computation and to communication as we either add processors or increase prob-
                          lem size. Figure I.1 shows that as we add processors, for these applications, the
                          amount of computation per processor falls proportionately and the amount of com-
                          munication per processor falls more slowly. As we increase the problem size, the
                          computation scales as the O( ) complexity of the algorithm dictates. Communica-
                          tion scaling is more complex and depends on details of the algorithm; we describe
                          the basic phenomena for each application in the caption of Figure I.1.
                                                          I.3   Characteristics of Scientific Applications       ■   I-11

                                                                                    Scaling of computation-to-
Application     Scaling of computation       Scaling of communication                     communication
FFT                      n log n                          n                                      log n
                            p                             p
                            n                            pffiffiffi                                     pffiffiffi
LU                                                         n                                       n
                            p                            pffiffiffi                                     pffiffiffi
                                                           p                                       p
                                                              pffiffiffi                                      pffiffiffi
Barnes                   n log n                               nð log nÞ                                 n
                            p
                                              approximately        pffiffiffi                   approximately pffiffiffi
                                                                    p                                    p
                            n                            pffiffiffi                                    pffiffiffi
Ocean                                                      n                                      n
                            p                            pffiffiffi                                    pffiffiffi
                                                           p                                      p

Figure I.1 Scaling of computation, of communication, and of the ratio are critical factors in determining perfor-
mance on parallel multiprocessors. In this table, p is the increased processor count and n is the increased dataset
size. Scaling is on a per-processor basis. The computation scales up with n at the rate given by O( ) analysis and scales
down linearly as p is increased. Communication scaling is more complex. In FFT, all data points must interact, so com-
munication increases with n and decreases with p. In LU and Ocean, communication is proportional to thepboundary ffiffiffi
of a block, so it scales with dataset size at a rate proportional to the side of a square with n points, namely, n; for the
                                                                                 pffiffiffi
same reason communication in these two applications scales inversely to p. Barnes has the most complex scaling
properties. Because of the fall-off p
                                    offfiffiffiinteraction between bodies, the basic number of interactions among bodies that
require communication scales as n. An additional factor of log n is needed to maintain the relationships among the
                                                                                    pffiffiffi
bodies. As processor count is increased, communication scales inversely to p.

                                    The overall computation-to-communication ratio is computed from the indi-
                                vidual growth rate in computation and communication. In general, this ratio rises
                                slowly with an increase in dataset size and decreases as we add processors. This
                                reminds us that performing a fixed-size problem with more processors leads to
                                increasing inefficiencies because the amount of communication among processors
                                grows. It also tells us how quickly we must scale dataset size as we add processors
                                to keep the fraction of time in communication fixed. The following example illus-
                                trates these trade-offs.

                Example         Suppose we know that for a given multiprocessor the Ocean application spends
                                20% of its execution time waiting for communication when run on four processors.
                                Assume that the cost of each communication event is independent of processor
                                count, which is not true in general, since communication costs rise with processor
                                count. How much faster might we expect Ocean to run on a 32-processor machine
                                with the same problem size? What fraction of the execution time is spent on com-
                                munication in this case? How much larger a problem should we run if we want the
                                fraction of time spent communicating to be the same?
                                                                                    pffiffiffi pffiffiffi
                  Answer        The computation-to-communication ratio for Ocean is n= p, so if the problem
                                                                                         pffiffiffi
                                size is the same, the communication
                                                                pffiffiffi frequency scales by p. This means that
                                communication time increases by 8. We can use a variation on Amdahl’s law,
I-12   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          recognizing that the computation is decreased but the communication time is
                          increased. If T4 is the total execution time for four processors, then the execution
                          time for 32 processors is
                                    T32 ¼ Compute time + Communication time
                                          0:8 ? T4                pffiffiffi
                                        ¼          + ð0:2 ? T4 Þ ? 8
                                              8
                                        ¼ 0:1 ? T4 + 0:57 ? T4 ¼ 0:67 ? T4
                          Hence, the speedup is
                                                T4     T4
                                    Speedup ¼      ¼          ¼ 1:49
                                                T32 0:67 ? T4
                          and the fraction of time spent in communication goes from 20% to 0.57/
                          0.67 ¼ 85%.
                              For the fraction of the communication time to remain the same, we must keep
                          the computation-to-communication ratio the same, so the problem size must scale
                          at the same rate as the processor count. Notice that, because we have changed the
                          problem size, we cannot fairly compare the speedup of the original problem and the
                          scaled problem. We will return to the critical issue of scaling applications for mul-
                          tiprocessors in Section I.6.

                 I.4      Synchronization: Scaling Up
                          In this section, we focus first on synchronization performance problems in larger
                          multiprocessors and then on solutions for those problems.

                          Synchronization Performance Challenges
                          To understand why the simple spin lock scheme presented in Chapter 5 does not
                          scale well, imagine a large multiprocessor with all processors contending for the
                          same lock. The directory or bus acts as a point of serialization for all the processors,
                          leading to lots of contention, as well as traffic. The following example shows how
                          bad things can be.

              Example     Suppose there are 10 processors on a bus and each tries to lock a variable simul-
                          taneously. Assume that each bus transaction (read miss or write miss) is 100
                          clock cycles long. You can ignore the time of the actual read or write of a lock
                          held in the cache, as well as the time the lock is held (they won’t matter much!).
                          Determine the number of bus transactions required for all 10 processors to
                          acquire the lock, assuming they are all spinning when the lock is released at time
                          0. About how long will it take to process the 10 requests? Assume that the bus is
                                                   I.4   Synchronization: Scaling Up     ■   I-13

         totally fair so that every pending request is serviced before a new request and that
         the processors are equally fast.

Answer   When i processes are contending for the lock, they perform the following sequence
         of actions, each of which generates a bus transaction:

            i load linked operations to access the lock
            i store conditional operations to try to lock the lock
            1 store (to release the lock)

         Thus, for i processes, there are a total of 2i + 1 bus transactions. Note that this
         assumes that the critical section time is negligible, so that the lock is released before
         any other processors whose store conditional failed attempt another load linked.
            Thus, for n processes, the total number of bus operations is
                                    X
                                    n
                                          ð2i + 1Þ ¼ nðn + 1Þ + n ¼ n2 + 2n
                                    i¼1

         For 10 processes there are 120 bus transactions requiring 12,000 clock cycles or
         120 clock cycles per lock acquisition!

         The difficulty in this example arises from contention for the lock and serialization
         of lock access, as well as the latency of the bus access. (The fairness property of the
         bus actually makes things worse, since it delays the processor that claims the lock
         from releasing it; unfortunately, for any bus arbitration scheme some worst-case
         scenario does exist.) The key advantages of spin locks—that they have low over-
         head in terms of bus or network cycles and offer good performance when locks are
         reused by the same processor—are both lost in this example. We will consider
         alternative implementations in the next section, but before we do that, let’s con-
         sider the use of spin locks to implement another common high-level synchroniza-
         tion primitive.

         Barrier Synchronization
         One additional common synchronization operation in programs with parallel
         loops is a barrier. A barrier forces all processes to wait until all the processes
         reach the barrier and then releases all of the processes. A typical implementation
         of a barrier can be done with two spin locks: one to protect a counter that tallies
         the processes arriving at the barrier and one to hold the processes until the last
         process arrives at the barrier. To implement a barrier, we usually use the ability to
         spin on a variable until it satisfies a test; we use the notation spin(condi-
         tion) to indicate this. Figure I.2 is a typical implementation, assuming that
         lock and unlock provide basic spin locks and total is the number of pro-
         cesses that must reach the barrier.
I-14   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                                  lock (counterlock);/* ensure update atomic */
                                  if (count==0) release=0;/* first=>reset release */
                                  count = count + 1;/* count arrivals */
                                  unlock(counterlock);/* release lock */
                                  if (count==total) {/* all arrived */
                                        count=0;/* reset counter */
                                        release=1;/* release processes */
                                  }
                                  else {/* more to come */
                                        spin (release==1);/* wait for arrivals */
                                  }

                          Figure I.2 Code for a simple barrier. The lock counterlock protects the counter so
                          that it can be atomically incremented. The variable count keeps the tally of how many
                          processes have reached the barrier. The variable release is used to hold the processes
                          until the last one reaches the barrier. The operation spin (release==1) causes a
                          process to wait until all processes reach the barrier.

                              In practice, another complication makes barrier implementation slightly
                          more complex. Frequently a barrier is used within a loop, so that processes
                          released from the barrier would do some work and then reach the barrier again.
                          Assume that one of the processes never actually leaves the barrier (it stays at
                          the spin operation), which could happen if the OS scheduled another process,
                          for example. Now it is possible that one process races ahead and gets to the
                          barrier again before the last process has left. The “fast” process then traps
                          the remaining “slow” process in the barrier by resetting the flag release.
                          Now all the processes will wait infinitely at the next instance of this barrier
                          because one process is trapped at the last instance, and the number of processes
                          can never reach the value of total.
                              The important observation in this example is that the programmer did
                          nothing wrong. Instead, the implementer of the barrier made some assump-
                          tions about forward progress that cannot be assumed. One obvious solution
                          to this is to count the processes as they exit the barrier (just as we did on
                          entry) and not to allow any process to reenter and reinitialize the barrier until
                          all processes have left the prior instance of this barrier. This extra step would
                          significantly increase the latency of the barrier and the contention, which as
                          we will see shortly are already large. An alternative solution is a sense-
                          reversing barrier, which makes use of a private per-process variable,
                          local_sense, which is initialized to 1 for each process. Figure I.3 shows
                          the code for the sense-reversing barrier. This version of a barrier is safely
                          usable; as the next example shows, however, its performance can still be
                          quite poor.
                                                    I.4   Synchronization: Scaling Up      ■   I-15

                  local_sense =! local_sense; /* toggle local_sense */
                  lock (counterlock);/* ensure update atomic */
                  count=count+1;/* count arrivals */
                  if (count==total) {/* all arrived */
                        count=0;/* reset counter */
                        release=local_sense;/* release processes */
                  }
                  unlock (counterlock);/* unlock */
                  spin (release==local_sense);/* wait for signal */
                  }

          Figure I.3 Code for a sense-reversing barrier. The key to making the barrier reusable is
          the use of an alternating pattern of values for the flag release, which controls the exit
          from the barrier. If a process races ahead to the next instance of this barrier while some
          other processes are still in the barrier, the fast process cannot trap the other processes,
          since it does not reset the value of release as it did in Figure I.2.

Example   Suppose there are 10 processors on a bus and each tries to execute a barrier simul-
          taneously. Assume that each bus transaction is 100 clock cycles, as before. You can
          ignore the time of the actual read or write of a lock held in the cache as the time to
          execute other nonsynchronization operations in the barrier implementation. Deter-
          mine the number of bus transactions required for all 10 processors to reach the bar-
          rier, be released from the barrier, and exit the barrier. Assume that the bus is totally
          fair, so that every pending request is serviced before a new request and that the
          processors are equally fast. Don’t worry about counting the processors out of
          the barrier. How long will the entire process take?

 Answer   We assume that load linked and store conditional are used to implement lock and
          unlock. Figure I.4 shows the sequence of bus events for a processor to traverse the
          barrier, assuming that the first process to grab the bus does not have the lock. There
          is a slight difference for the last process to reach the barrier, as described in the
          caption.
              For the ith process, the number of bus transactions is 3i + 4. The last process to
          reach the barrier requires one less. Thus, for n processes, the number of bus trans-
          actions is
                                                    !
                                       X
                                       n
                                                               3n2 + 11n
                                              ð3i + 4Þ ? 1 ¼             ?1
                                        i¼1
                                                                   2

          For 10 processes, this is 204 bus cycles or 20,400 clock cycles! Our barrier
          operation takes almost twice as long as the 10-processor lock-unlock sequence.
I-16    ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                         Number of
                          times for
Event                     process i      Corresponding source line                      Comment
LL counterlock                i          lock (counterlock);                            All processes try for lock.
Store conditional             i          lock (counterlock);                            All processes try for lock.
LD count                      1          count = count + 1;                             Successful process.
Load linked                 i?1          lock (counterlock);                            Unsuccessful process; try again.
SD count                      1          count = count + 1;                             Miss to get exclusive access.
SD counterlock                1          unlock(counterlock);                           Miss to get the lock.
LD release                    2          spin (release==local_sense);/                  Read release: misses initially and
                                                                                        when finally written.

Figure I.4 Here are the actions, which require a bus transaction, taken when the ith process reaches the barrier.
The last process to reach the barrier requires one less bus transaction, since its read of release for the spin will hit in
the cache!

                                  As we can see from these examples, synchronization performance can be a
                              real bottleneck when there is substantial contention among multiple processes.
                              When there is little contention and synchronization operations are infrequent,
                              we are primarily concerned about the latency of a synchronization primitive—
                              that is, how long it takes an individual process to complete a synchronization
                              operation. Our basic spin lock operation can do this in two bus cycles: one to
                              initially read the lock and one to write it. We could improve this to a single bus
                              cycle by a variety of methods. For example, we could simply spin on the swap
                              operation. If the lock were almost always free, this could be better, but if the
                              lock were not free, it would lead to lots of bus traffic, since each attempt to
                              lock the variable would lead to a bus cycle. In practice, the latency of our spin
                              lock is not quite as bad as we have seen in this example, since the write miss
                              for a data item present in the cache is treated as an upgrade and will be cheaper
                              than a true read miss.
                                   The more serious problem in these examples is the serialization of each pro-
                              cess’s attempt to complete the synchronization. This serialization is a problem
                              when there is contention because it greatly increases the time to complete the
                              synchronization operation. For example, if the time to complete all 10 lock
                              and unlock operations depended only on the latency in the uncontended case,
                              then it would take 1000 rather than 15,000 cycles to complete the synchroniza-
                              tion operations. The barrier situation is as bad, and in some ways worse, since it
                              is highly likely to incur contention. The use of a bus interconnect exacerbates
                              these problems, but serialization could be just as serious in a directory-based
                              multiprocessor, where the latency would be large. The next subsection presents
                              some solutions that are useful when either the contention is high or the processor
                              count is large.
                                         I.4   Synchronization: Scaling Up         ■   I-17

Synchronization Mechanisms for Larger-Scale Multiprocessors
What we would like are synchronization mechanisms that have low latency in
uncontended cases and that minimize serialization in the case where contention
is significant. We begin by showing how software implementations can improve
the performance of locks and barriers when contention is high; we then explore two
basic hardware primitives that reduce serialization while keeping latency low.

Software Implementations
The major difficulty with our spin lock implementation is the delay due to conten-
tion when many processes are spinning on the lock. One solution is to artificially
delay processes when they fail to acquire the lock. The best performance is
obtained by increasing the delay exponentially whenever the attempt to acquire
the lock fails. Figure I.5 shows how a spin lock with exponential back-off is imple-
mented. Exponential back-off is a common technique for reducing contention in
shared resources, including access to shared networks and buses (see Sections
F.4 to F.8). This implementation still attempts to preserve low latency when con-
tention is small by not delaying the initial spin loop. The result is that if many pro-
cesses are waiting, the back-off does not affect the processes on their first attempt
to acquire the lock. We could also delay that process, but the result would be poorer

                       DADDUI R3,R0,#1      ;R3 = initial delay
       lockit:         LL       R2,0(R1)    ;load linked
                       BNEZ     R2,lockit ;not available-spin
                       DADDUI R2,R2,#1      ;get locked value
                       SC       R2,0(R1)    ;store conditional
                       BNEZ     R2,gotit    ;branch if store succeeds
                       DSLL     R3,R3,#1    ;increase delay by factor of 2
                       PAUSE    R3          ;delays by value in R3
                       J        lockit
         gotit:        use data protected by lock

Figure I.5 A spin lock with exponential back-off. When the store conditional fails, the
process delays itself by the value in R3. The delay can be implemented by decrementing
a copy of the value in R3 until it reaches 0. The exact timing of the delay is multiproces-
sor dependent, although it should start with a value that is approximately the time to
perform the critical section and release the lock. The statement pause R3 should cause
a delay of R3 of these time units. The value in R3 is increased by a factor of 2 every time
the store conditional fails, which causes the process to wait twice as long before trying
to acquire the lock again. The small variations in the rate at which competing processors
execute instructions are usually sufficient to ensure that processes will not continually
collide. If the natural perturbation in execution time was insufficient, R3 could be initial-
ized with a small random value, increasing the variance in the successive delays and
reducing the probability of successive collisions.
I-18   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          performance when the lock was in use by only two processes and the first one hap-
                          pened to find it locked.
                               Another technique for implementing locks is to use queuing locks. Queuing
                          locks work by constructing a queue of waiting processors; whenever a processor
                          frees up the lock, it causes the next processor in the queue to attempt access. This
                          eliminates contention for a lock when it is freed. We show how queuing locks oper-
                          ate in the next section using a hardware implementation, but software implementa-
                          tions using arrays can achieve most of the same benefits. Before we look at
                          hardware primitives, let’s look at a better mechanism for barriers.
                               Our barrier implementation suffers from contention both during the gather
                          stage, when we must atomically update the count, and at the release stage, when
                          all the processes must read the release flag. The former is more serious because it
                          requires exclusive access to the synchronization variable and thus creates much
                          more serialization; in comparison, the latter generates only read contention. We
                          can reduce the contention by using a combining tree, a structure where multiple
                          requests are locally combined in tree fashion. The same combining tree can be used
                          to implement the release process, reducing the contention there.
                               Our combining tree barrier uses a predetermined n-ary tree structure. We use
                          the variable k to stand for the fan-in; in practice, k ¼ 4 seems to work well. When
                          the kth process arrives at a node in the tree, we signal the next level in the tree.
                          When a process arrives at the root, we release all waiting processes. As in our ear-
                          lier example, we use a sense-reversing technique. A tree-based barrier, as shown in
                          Figure I.6, uses a tree to combine the processes and a single signal to release the
                          barrier. Some MPPs (e.g., the T3D and CM-5) have also included hardware sup-
                          port for barriers, but more recent machines have relied on software libraries for this
                          support.

                          Hardware Primitives
                          In this subsection, we look at two hardware synchronization primitives. The first
                          primitive deals with locks, while the second is useful for barriers and a number of
                          other user-level operations that require counting or supplying distinct indices. In
                          both cases, we can create a hardware primitive where latency is essentially iden-
                          tical to our earlier version, but with much less serialization, leading to better scaling
                          when there is contention.
                              The major problem with our original lock implementation is that it introduces a
                          large amount of unneeded contention. For example, when the lock is released all
                          processors generate both a read and a write miss, although at most one processor
                          can successfully get the lock in the unlocked state. This sequence happens on each
                          of the 10 lock/unlock sequences, as we saw in the example on page I-12.
                              We can improve this situation by explicitly handing the lock from one waiting
                          processor to the next. Rather than simply allowing all processors to compete every
                          time the lock is released, we keep a list of the waiting processors and hand the lock
                          to one explicitly, when its turn comes. This sort of mechanism has been called a
                          queuing lock. Queuing locks can be implemented either in hardware, which we
                                         I.4   Synchronization: Scaling Up        ■   I-19

 struct node{/* a node in the combining tree */
        int counterlock; /* lock for this node */
        int count; /* counter for this node */
        int parent; /* parent in the tree = 0..P-1 except for root */
 };
 struct node tree [0..P–1]; /* the tree of nodes */
 int local_sense; /* private per processor */
 int release; /* global release flag */

 /* function to implement barrier */
 barrier (int mynode, int local_sense) {
        lock (tree[mynode].counterlock); /* protect count */
        tree[mynode].count=tree[mynode].count+1;
                /* increment count */
        if (tree[mynode].count==k) {/* all arrived at mynode */
                if (tree[mynode].parent >=0) {
                        barrier(tree[mynode].parent);
                } else{
                        release = local_sense;
                };
                tree[mynode].count = 0; /* reset for the next time */
        unlock (tree[mynode].counterlock); /* unlock */
        spin (release==local_sense); /* wait */
 };
 /* code executed by a processor to join barrier */
 local_sense =! local_sense;
 barrier (mynode);

Figure I.6 An implementation of a tree-based barrier reduces contention consider-
ably. The tree is assumed to be prebuilt statically using the nodes in the array tree. Each
node in the tree combines k processes and provides a separate counter and lock, so that
at most k processes contend at each node. When the kth process reaches a node in the
tree, it goes up to the parent, incrementing the count at the parent. When the count in
the parent node reaches k, the release flag is set. The count in each node is reset by the
last process to arrive. Sense-reversing is used to avoid races as in the simple barrier. The
value of tree[root].parent should be set to ?1 when the tree is initially built.

describe here, or in software using an array to keep track of the waiting processes.
The basic concepts are the same in either case. Our hardware implementation
assumes a directory-based multiprocessor where the individual processor caches
are addressable. In a bus-based multiprocessor, a software implementation would
be more appropriate and would have each processor using a different address for
the lock, permitting the explicit transfer of the lock from one process to another.
    How does a queuing lock work? On the first miss to the lock variable, the
miss is sent to a synchronization controller, which may be integrated with the
memory controller (in a bus-based system) or with the directory controller. If
the lock is free, it is simply returned to the processor. If the lock is unavailable,
I-20   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          the controller creates a record of the node’s request (such as a bit in a vector) and
                          sends the processor back a locked value for the variable, which the processor then
                          spins on. When the lock is freed, the controller selects a processor to go ahead
                          from the list of waiting processors. It can then either update the lock variable
                          in the selected processor’s cache or invalidate the copy, causing the processor
                          to miss and fetch an available copy of the lock.

              Example     How many bus transactions and how long does it take to have 10 processors lock
                          and unlock the variable using a queuing lock that updates the lock on a miss? Make
                          the other assumptions about the system the same as those in the earlier example on
                          page I-12.

                Answer    For n processors, each will initially attempt a lock access, generating a bus trans-
                          action; one will succeed and free up the lock, for a total of n + 1 transactions for the
                          first processor. Each subsequent processor requires two bus transactions, one to
                          receive the lock and one to free it up. Thus, the total number of bus transactions
                          is (n + 1) + 2(n ? 1) ¼ 3n ? 1. Note that the number of bus transactions is now linear
                          in the number of processors contending for the lock, rather than quadratic, as it was
                          with the spin lock we examined earlier. For 10 processors, this requires 29 bus
                          cycles or 2900 clock cycles.

                          There are a couple of key insights in implementing such a queuing lock capability.
                          First, we need to be able to distinguish the initial access to the lock, so we can per-
                          form the queuing operation, and also the lock release, so we can provide the lock to
                          another processor. The queue of waiting processes can be implemented by a variety
                          of mechanisms. In a directory-based multiprocessor, this queue is akin to the shar-
                          ing set, and similar hardware can be used to implement the directory and queuing
                          lock operations. One complication is that the hardware must be prepared to reclaim
                          such locks, since the process that requested the lock may have been context-
                          switched and may not even be scheduled again on the same processor.
                              Queuing locks can be used to improve the performance of our barrier operation.
                          Alternatively, we can introduce a primitive that reduces the amount of time needed
                          to increment the barrier count, thus reducing the serialization at this bottleneck,
                          which should yield comparable performance to using queuing locks. One primitive
                          that has been introduced for this and for building other synchronization operations
                          is fetch-and-increment, which atomically fetches a variable and increments its
                          value. The returned value can be either the incremented value or the fetched value.
                          Using fetch-and-increment we can dramatically improve our barrier implementa-
                          tion, compared to the simple code-sensing barrier.

              Example     Write the code for the barrier using fetch-and-increment. Making the same assump-
                          tions as in our earlier example and also assuming that a fetch-and-increment oper-
                          ation, which returns the incremented value, takes 100 clock cycles, determine the
                          time for 10 processors to traverse the barrier. How many bus cycles are required?
I.5    Performance of Scientific Applications on Shared-Memory Multiprocessors         ■   I-21

                  local_sense =! local_sense; /* toggle local_sense */
                  fetch_and_increment(count);/* atomic update */
                  if (count==total) {/* all arrived */
                         count=0;/* reset counter */
                         release=local_sense;/* release processes */
                  }
                  else {/* more to come */
                         spin (release==local_sense);/* wait for signal */
                  }

            Figure I.7 Code for a sense-reversing barrier using fetch-and-increment to do the
            counting.

Answer      Figure I.7 shows the code for the barrier. For n processors, this implementation
            requires n fetch-and-increment operations, n cache misses to access the count,
            and n cache misses for the release operation, for a total of 3n bus transactions.
            For 10 processors, this is 30 bus transactions or 3000 clock cycles. Like the queue-
            ing lock, the time is linear in the number of processors. Of course, fetch-and-
            increment can also be used in implementing the combining tree barrier, reducing
            the serialization at each node in the tree.

            As we have seen, synchronization problems can become quite acute in largerscale
            multiprocessors. When the challenges posed by synchronization are combined
            with the challenges posed by long memory latency and potential load imbalance
            in computations, we can see why getting efficient usage of large-scale parallel pro-
            cessors is very challenging.

 I.5        Performance of Scientific Applications on
            Shared-Memory Multiprocessors
            This section covers the performance of the scientific applications from
            Section I.3 on both symmetric shared-memory and distributed shared-memory
            multiprocessors.

            Performance of a Scientific Workload on a Symmetric
            Shared-Memory Multiprocessor
            We evaluate the performance of our four scientific applications on a symmetric
            shared-memory multiprocessor using the following problem sizes:

            ■   Barnes-Hut—16 K bodies run for six time steps (the accuracy control is set to
                1.0, a typical, realistic value)
I-22   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          ■   FFT—1 million complex data points
                          ■   LU—A 512 ? 512 matrix is used with 16 ? 16 blocks
                          ■   Ocean—A 130 ? 130 grid with a typical error tolerance

                          In looking at the miss rates as we vary processor count, cache size, and block
                          size, we decompose the total miss rate into coherence misses and normal uni-
                          processor misses. The normal uniprocessor misses consist of capacity, conflict,
                          and compulsory misses. We label these misses as capacity misses because that
                          is the dominant cause for these benchmarks. For these measurements, we
                          include as a coherence miss any write misses needed to upgrade a block from
                          shared to exclusive, even though no one is sharing the cache block. This mea-
                          surement reflects a protocol that does not distinguish between a private and
                          shared cache block.
                               Figure I.8 shows the data miss rates for our four applications, as we increase the
                          number of processors from 1 to 16, while keeping the problem size constant. As we
                          increase the number of processors, the total amount of cache increases, usually
                          causing the capacity misses to drop. In contrast, increasing the processor count
                          usually causes the amount of communication to increase, in turn causing the coher-
                          ence misses to rise. The magnitude of these two effects differs by application.
                               In FFT, the capacity miss rate drops (from nearly 7% to just over 5%) but the
                          coherence miss rate increases (from about 1% to about 2.7%), leading to a constant
                          overall miss rate. Ocean shows a combination of effects, including some that relate
                          to the partitioning of the grid and how grid boundaries map to cache blocks. For a
                          typical 2D grid code the communication-generated misses are proportional to the
                          boundary of each partition of the grid, while the capacity misses are proportional to
                          the area of the grid. Therefore, increasing the total amount of cache while keeping
                          the total problem size fixed will have a more significant effect on the capacity miss
                          rate, at least until each subgrid fits within an individual processor’s cache. The sig-
                          nificant jump in miss rate between one and two processors occurs because of con-
                          flicts that arise from the way in which the multiple grids are mapped to the caches.
                          This conflict is present for direct-mapped and two-way set associative caches, but
                          fades at higher associativities. Such conflicts are not unusual in array-based appli-
                          cations, especially when there are multiple grids in use at once. In Barnes and LU,
                          the increase in processor count has little effect on the miss rate, sometimes causing
                          a slight increase and sometimes causing a slight decrease.
                               Increasing the cache size usually has a beneficial effect on performance, since it
                          reduces the frequency of costly cache misses. Figure I.9 illustrates the change in
                          miss rate as cache size is increased for 16 processors, showing the portion of the
                          miss rate due to coherence misses and to uniprocessor capacity misses. Two effects
                          can lead to a miss rate that does not decrease—at least not as quickly as we might
                          expect—as cache size increases: inherent communication and plateaus in the miss
                          rate. Inherent communication leads to a certain frequency of coherence misses that
                          are not significantly affected by increasing cache size. Thus, if the cache size is
                          increased while maintaining a fixed problem size, the coherence miss rate
I.5   Performance of Scientific Applications on Shared-Memory Multiprocessors                                                                 ■   I-23

                                                            FFT                                                               LU
                                      8%                                                                     2%

                                                                                                 Miss rate
                                      7%                                                                     1%
                                      6%                                                                     0%
                                                                                                                   1     2     4     8   16
                                      5%

                          Miss rate
                                                                                                                       Processor count
                                      4%
                                      3%
                                      2%
                                                                                                                             Ocean
                                      1%
                                                                                                             20%
                                      0%
                                               1        2       4        8    16                             18%
                                                                                                             16%
                                                   Processor count
                                                                                                             14%

                                                                                            Miss rate
                                                                                                             12%
                                                        Barnes                                               10%
                                      1%
                     Miss rate
                                                                                                              8%
                                                                                                             6%
                                      0%                                                                     4%
                                           1        2       4        8       16                              2%
                                               Processor count                                               0%
                                                                                                                   1     2     4     8   16
                                                                                                                       Processor count

                                                                    Coherence miss rate   Capacity miss rate

           Figure I.8 Data miss rates can vary in nonobvious ways as the processor count is
           increased from 1 to 16. The miss rates include both coherence and capacity miss rates.
           The compulsory misses in these benchmarks are all very small and are included in the
           capacity misses. Most of the misses in these applications are generated by accesses to
           data that are potentially shared, although in the applications with larger miss rates (FFT
           and Ocean), it is the capacity misses rather than the coherence misses that comprise the
           majority of the miss rate. Data are potentially shared if they are allocated in a portion of
           the address space used for shared data. In all except Ocean, the potentially shared data
           are heavily shared, while in Ocean only the boundaries of the subgrids are actually
           shared, although the entire grid is treated as a potentially shared data object. Of course,
           since the boundaries change as we increase the processor count (for a fixed-size prob-
           lem), different amounts of the grid become shared. The anomalous increase in capacity
           miss rate for Ocean in moving from 1 to 2 processors arises because of conflict misses in
           accessing the subgrids. In all cases except Ocean, the fraction of the cache misses
           caused by coherence transactions rises when a fixed-size problem is run on an increas-
           ing number of processors. In Ocean, the coherence misses initially fall as we add pro-
           cessors due to a large number of misses that are write ownership misses to data that
           are potentially, but not actually, shared. As the subgrids begin to fit in the aggregate
           cache (around 16 processors), this effect lessens. The single-processor numbers include
           write upgrade misses, which occur in this protocol even if the data are not actually
           shared, since they are in the shared state. For all these runs, the cache size is 64 KB,
           two-way set associative, with 32-byte blocks. Notice that the scale on the y-axis for each
           benchmark is different, so that the behavior of the individual benchmarks can be seen
           clearly.
I-24   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                                                                FFT
                                                   10%
                                                                                                                   LU
                                                    8%                                                2.5%

                                       Miss rate
                                                    6%                                                2.0%

                                                                                          Miss rate
                                                    4%                                                1.5%

                                                    2%                                                1.0%

                                                    0%                                                 0%
                                                          32   64 128 256                                    32   64 128 256
                                                          Cache size (KB)                                    Cache size (KB)

                                                                                                                  Ocean
                                                                                                      14%
                                                               Barnes
                                                                                                      12%
                                                   2.0%
                                                                                                      10%

                                                                                          Miss rate
                                                                                                       8%
                                       Miss rate

                                                   1.5%
                                                                                                       6%

                                                   1.0%                                                4%
                                                                                                       2%
                                                    0%                                                 0%
                                                          32   64 128 256                                    32   64 128 256
                                                          Cache size (KB)                                    Cache size (KB)

                                                                  Coherence miss rate   Capacity miss rate

                          Figure I.9 The miss rate usually drops as the cache size is increased, although coher-
                          ence misses dampen the effect. The block size is 32 bytes and the cache is two-way set
                          associative. The processor count is fixed at 16 processors. Observe that the scale for each
                          graph is different.

                          eventually limits the decrease in cache miss rate. This effect is most obvious in
                          Barnes, where the coherence miss rate essentially becomes the entire miss rate.
                              A less important effect is a temporary plateau in the capacity miss rate that
                          arises when the application has some fraction of its data present in cache but some
                          significant portion of the dataset does not fit in the cache or in caches that are
                          slightly bigger. In LU, a very small cache (about 4 KB) can capture the pair of
                          16 ? 16 blocks used in the inner loop; beyond that, the next big improvement in
                          capacity miss rate occurs when both matrices fit in the caches, which occurs when
                          the total cache size is between 4 MB and 8 MB. This effect, sometimes called a
                          working set effect, is partly at work between 32 KB and 128 KB for FFT, where
                          the capacity miss rate drops only 0.3%. Beyond that cache size, a faster decrease in
                          the capacity miss rate is seen, as a major data structure begins to reside in the cache.
                          These plateaus are common in programs that deal with large arrays in a structured
                          fashion.
                              Increasing the block size is another way to change the miss rate in a cache. In
                          uniprocessors, larger block sizes are often optimal with larger caches. In
I.5   Performance of Scientific Applications on Shared-Memory Multiprocessors                                       ■   I-25

           multiprocessors, two new effects come into play: a reduction in spatial locality
           for shared data and a potential increase in miss rate due to false sharing. Several
           studies have shown that shared data have lower spatial locality than unshared
           data. Poorer locality means that, for shared data, fetching larger blocks is less
           effective than in a uniprocessor because the probability is higher that the block
           will be replaced before all its contents are referenced. Likewise, increasing the
           basic size also increases the potential frequency of false sharing, increasing
           the miss rate.
               Figure I.10 shows the miss rates as the cache block size is increased for a 16-
           processor run with a 64 KB cache. The most interesting behavior is in Barnes,
           where the miss rate initially declines and then rises due to an increase in the number
           of coherence misses, which probably occurs because of false sharing. In the other
           benchmarks, increasing the block size decreases the overall miss rate. In Ocean and
           LU, the block size increase affects both the coherence and capacity miss rates about
           equally. In FFT, the coherence miss rate is actually decreased at a faster rate than
           the capacity miss rate. This reduction occurs because the communication in FFT is
           structured to be very efficient. In less optimized programs, we would expect more

                                                FFT
                                    14%
                                                                                                      LU
                                    12%
                                                                                         4%
                                    10%
                        Miss rate

                                    8%                                                   3%

                                                                             Miss rate
                                    6%                                                   2%
                                    4%
                                                                                         1%
                                    2%
                                    0%                                                   0%
                                          16   32   64 128                                     16   32   64 128
                                          Block size (bytes)                                   Block size (bytes)

                                                                                                    Ocean
                                                                                         14%
                                                                                         12%
                                                                                         10%
                                               Barnes
                                                                             Miss rate

                                                                                         8%
                                    1%
                                                                                         6%
                        Miss rate

                                                                                         4%
                                                                                         2%
                                    0%                                                   0%
                                          16   32   64 128                                     16   32   64 128
                                          Block size (bytes)                                   Block size (bytes)

                                                    Coherence miss rate   Capacity miss rate

           Figure I.10 The data miss rate drops as the cache block size is increased. All these
           results are for a 16-processor run with a 64 KB cache and two-way set associativity. Once
           again we use different scales for each benchmark.
I-26   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                                                                   7.0

                                                                           FFT
                                                                   6.0
                                                                           LU
                                                                           Barnes
                                                                   5.0     Ocean

                                        Bytes per data reference
                                                                   4.0

                                                                   3.0

                                                                   2.0

                                                                   1.0

                                                                   0.0
                                                                      16      32                         64   128
                                                                                    Block size (bytes)

                          Figure I.11 Bus traffic for data misses climbs steadily as the block size in the data
                          cache is increased. The factor of 3 increase in traffic for Ocean is the best argument
                          against larger block sizes. Remember that our protocol treats ownership or upgrade
                          misses the same as other misses, slightly increasing the penalty for large cache blocks;
                          in both Ocean and FFT, this simplification accounts for less than 10% of the traffic.

                          false sharing and less spatial locality for shared data, resulting in more behavior
                          like that of Barnes.
                              Although the drop in miss rates with longer blocks may lead you to believe
                          that choosing a longer block size is the best decision, the bottleneck in bus-based
                          multiprocessors is often the limited memory and bus bandwidth. Larger blocks
                          mean more bytes on the bus per miss. Figure I.11 shows the growth in bus traffic
                          as the block size is increased. This growth is most serious in the programs that
                          have a high miss rate, especially Ocean. The growth in traffic can actually lead to
                          performance slowdowns due both to longer miss penalties and to increased bus
                          contention.

                          Performance of a Scientific Workload on a Distributed-Memory
                          Multiprocessor
                          The performance of a directory-based multiprocessor depends on many of the same
                          factors that influence the performance of bus-based multiprocessors (e.g., cache
                          size, processor count, and block size), as well as the distribution of misses to var-
                          ious locations in the memory hierarchy. The location of a requested data item
                          depends on both the initial allocation and the sharing patterns. We start by exam-
                          ining the basic cache performance of our scientific/technical workload and then
                          look at the effect of different types of misses.
 I.5   Performance of Scientific Applications on Shared-Memory Multiprocessors           ■   I-27

                 Because the multiprocessor is larger and has longer latencies than our
            snooping-based multiprocessor, we begin with a slightly larger cache (128 KB)
            and a larger block size of 64 bytes.
                 In distributed-memory architectures, the distribution of memory requests
            between local and remote is key to performance because it affects both the con-
            sumption of global bandwidth and the latency seen by requests. Therefore, for
            the figures in this section, we separate the cache misses into local and remote
            requests. In looking at the figures, keep in mind that, for these applications, most
            of the remote misses that arise are coherence misses, although some capacity mis-
            ses can also be remote, and in some applications with poor data distribution such
            misses can be significant.
                 As Figure I.12 shows, the miss rates with these cache sizes are not affected
            much by changes in processor count, with the exception of Ocean, where the miss
            rate rises at 64 processors. This rise results from two factors: an increase in map-
            ping conflicts in the cache that occur when the grid becomes small, which leads to a
            rise in local misses, and an increase in the number of the coherence misses, which
            are all remote.
                 Figure I.13 shows how the miss rates change as the cache size is increased,
            assuming a 64-processor execution and 64-byte blocks. These miss rates decrease
            at rates that we might expect, although the dampening effect caused by little or no
            reduction in coherence misses leads to a slower decrease in the remote misses than
            in the local misses. By the time we reach the largest cache size shown, 512 KB, the
            remote miss rate is equal to or greater than the local miss rate. Larger caches would
            amplify this trend.
                 We examine the effect of changing the block size in Figure I.14. Because these
            applications have good spatial locality, increases in block size reduce the miss rate,
            even for large blocks, although the performance benefits for going to the largest
            blocks are small. Furthermore, most of the improvement in miss rate comes from
            a reduction in the local misses.
                 Rather than plot the memory traffic, Figure I.15 plots the number of bytes
            required per data reference versus block size, breaking the requirement into local
            and global bandwidth. In the case of a bus, we can simply aggregate the demands of
            each processor to find the total demand for bus and memory bandwidth. For a scal-
            able interconnect, we can use the data in Figure I.15 to compute the required per-
            node global bandwidth and the estimated bisection bandwidth, as the next example
            shows.

Example     Assume a 64-processor multiprocessor with 1 GHz processors that sustain one
            memory reference per processor clock. For a 64-byte block size, the remote miss
            rate is 0.7%. Find the per-node and estimated bisection bandwidth for FFT.
            Assume that the processor does not stall for remote memory requests; this might
            be true if, for example, all remote data were prefetched. How do these bandwidth
            requirements compare to various interconnection technologies?
I-28   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                                                                FFT
                                                      6%
                                                                                                                         LU
                                                      5%
                                                                                                        1.0%
                                                      4%

                                          Miss rate

                                                                                            Miss rate
                                                      3%
                                                                                                        0.5%
                                                      2%
                                                      1%
                                                      0%                                                0.0%
                                                           8   16   32   64                                     8   16    32   64
                                                           Processor count                                      Processor count

                                                                                                                    Ocean
                                                                                                           8%

                                                                                                           6%
                                                               Barnes

                                                                                               Miss rate
                                       Miss rate

                                                   0.5%                                                    4%

                                                                                                           2%

                                                   0.0%                                                    0%
                                                           8   16   32   64                                     8   16    32   64
                                                           Processor count                                      Processor count

                                                                         Local misses   Remote misses

                          Figure I.12 The data miss rate is often steady as processors are added for these
                          benchmarks. Because of its grid structure, Ocean has an initially decreasing miss rate,
                          which rises when there are 64 processors. For Ocean, the local miss rate drops from 5%
                          at 8 processors to 2% at 32, before rising to 4% at 64. The remote miss rate in Ocean,
                          driven primarily by communication, rises monotonically from 1% to 2.5%. Note that, to
                          show the detailed behavior of each benchmark, different scales are used on the y-axis.
                          The cache for all these runs is 128 KB, two-way set associative, with 64-byte blocks.
                          Remote misses include any misses that require communication with another node,
                          whether to fetch the data or to deliver an invalidate. In particular, in this figure and other
                          data in this section, the measurement of remote misses includes write upgrade misses
                          where the data are up to date in the local memory but cached elsewhere and, therefore,
                          require invalidations to be sent. Such invalidations do indeed generate remote traffic,
                          but may or may not delay the write, depending on the consistency model.

                             FFT performs all-to-all communication, so the bisection bandwidth is equal to
                          the number of processors times the per-node bandwidth, or about 64 ? 448 MB/
                          sec ¼ 28.7 GB/sec. The SGI Origin 3000 with 64 processors has a bisection band-
                          width of about 50 GB/sec. No standard networking technology comes close.

                Answer    The per-node bandwidth is simply the number of data bytes per reference times the
                          reference rate: 0.7% ? 1 GB/sec ? 64 ¼ 448 MB/sec. This rate is somewhat higher
                          than the hardware sustainable transfer rate for the CrayT3E (using a block prefetch)
I.5   Performance of Scientific Applications on Shared-Memory Multiprocessors                                                  ■   I-29

                                                        FFT                                                        LU
                                       10%                                                       2.5%

                                        8%                                                       2.0%

                           Miss rate

                                                                                   Miss rate
                                        6%                                                       1.5%

                                        4%                                                       1.0%

                                        2%                                                       0.5%

                                        0%                                                       0.0%
                                              32    64 128 256 512                                      32    64 128 256 512
                                                   Cache size (KB)                                           Cache size (KB)

                                                                                                                 Ocean
                                                                                                 20%
                                                       Barnes
                                       1.5%
                                                                                                 15%

                                                                                     Miss rate
                    Miss rate

                                       1.0%                                                      10%

                                       0.5%                                                       5%

                                       0.0%                                                       0%
                                              32    64 128 256 512                                      32    64 128 256 512
                                                   Cache size (KB)                                      Cache size (KB)

                                                                 Local misses   Remote misses

           Figure I.13 Miss rates decrease as cache sizes grow. Steady decreases are seen in the
           local miss rate, while the remote miss rate declines to varying degrees, depending on
           whether the remote miss rate had a large capacity component or was driven primarily
           by communication misses. In all cases, the decrease in the local miss rate is larger than
           the decrease in the remote miss rate. The plateau in the miss rate of FFT, which we men-
           tioned in the last section, ends once the cache exceeds 128 KB. These runs were done
           with 64 processors and 64-byte cache blocks.

           and lower than that for an SGI Origin 3000 (1.6 GB/processor pair). The FFT
           per-node bandwidth demand exceeds the bandwidth sustainable from the fastest
           standard networks by more than a factor of 5.

           The previous example looked at the bandwidth demands. The other key issue for a
           parallel program is remote memory access time, or latency. To get insight into this,
           we use a simple example of a directory-based multiprocessor. Figure I.16 shows
           the parameters we assume for our simple multiprocessor model. It assumes that the
           time to first word for a local memory access is 85 processor cycles and that the path
           to local memory is 16 bytes wide, while the network interconnect is 4 bytes wide.
           This model ignores the effects of contention, which are probably not too serious in
           the parallel benchmarks we examine, with the possible exception of FFT, which
           uses all-to-all communication. Contention could have a serious performance
           impact in other workloads.
I-30   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                                                                  FFT
                                                     12%
                                                                                                                        LU
                                                     10%
                                                                                                           4%
                                                      8%

                                         Miss rate
                                                                                                           3%

                                                                                               Miss rate
                                                      6%
                                                                                                           2%
                                                      4%

                                                      2%                                                   1%

                                                      0%                                                   0%
                                                            16   32   64 128                                     16   32   64 128
                                                            Block size (bytes)                                   Block size (bytes)

                                                                 Barnes                                               Ocean

                                                     0.3%                                                  15%

                                                                                               Miss rate
                                                                                                           10%
                                      Miss rate

                                                     0.2%

                                                     0.1%                                                  5%

                                                     0.0%                                                  0%
                                                            16   32   64 128                                     16   32   64 128
                                                            Block size (bytes)                                   Block size (bytes)

                                                                            Local misses   Remote misses

                          Figure I.14 Data miss rate versus block size assuming a 128 KB cache and 64 pro-
                          cessors in total. Although difficult to see, the coherence miss rate in Barnes actually
                          rises for the largest block size, just as in the last section.

                              Figure I.17 shows the cost in cycles for the average memory reference,
                          assuming the parameters in Figure I.16. Only the latencies for each reference
                          type are counted. Each bar indicates the contribution from cache hits, local
                          misses, remote misses, and three-hop remote misses. The cost is influenced
                          by the total frequency of cache misses and upgrades, as well as by the distri-
                          bution of the location where the miss is satisfied. The cost for a remote mem-
                          ory reference is fairly steady as the processor count is increased, except for
                          Ocean. The increasing miss rate in Ocean for 64 processors is clear in
                          Figure I.12. As the miss rate increases, we should expect the time spent on
                          memory references to increase also.
                              Although Figure I.17 shows the memory access cost, which is the dominant
                          multiprocessor cost in these benchmarks, a complete performance model would
                          need to consider the effect of contention in the memory system, as well as the
                          losses arising from synchronization delays.
I.5   Performance of Scientific Applications on Shared-Memory Multiprocessors                                                                                 ■   I-31

                                                                FFT                                                                        LU
                                                   6.0                                                                        0.6

                        Bytes per data reference

                                                                                                   Bytes per data reference
                                                   5.0                                                                        0.5

                                                   4.0                                                                        0.4
                                                   3.0                                                                        0.3
                                                   2.0                                                                        0.2

                                                   1.0                                                                        0.1
                                                   0.0                                                                        0.0
                                                         16   32   64 128                                                           16   32   64 128
                                                         Block size (bytes)                                                         Block size (bytes)

                                                                                                                                         Ocean
                                                                                                                              7.0
                                                              Barnes
                                                                                                                              6.0
                        Bytes per data reference

                                                                                                   Bytes per data reference
                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                              5.0
                                                   0.3                                                                        4.0
                                                   0.2                                                                        3.0
                                                                                                                              2.0
                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                   0.0                                                                        0.0
                                                         16   32   64 128                                                           16   32   64 128
                                                         Block size (bytes)                                                         Block size (bytes)

                                                                                 Local         Global

           Figure I.15 The number of bytes per data reference climbs steadily as block size is
           increased. These data can be used to determine the bandwidth required per node both
           internally and globally. The data assume a 128 KB cache for each of 64 processors.

                                                                              Processor clock cycles                                     Processor clock cycles
           Characteristic                                                        ≤16 processors                                            17–64 processors
           Cache hit                                                                     1                                                               1
           Cache miss to local memory                                                    85                                                              85
           Cache miss to remote home                                                     125                                                         150
           directory
           Cache miss to remotely cached                                                 140                                                         170
           data (three-hop miss)

           Figure I.16 Characteristics of the example directory-based multiprocessor. Misses
           can be serviced locally (including from the local directory), at a remote home node,
           or using the services of both the home node and another remote node that is caching
           an exclusive copy. This last case is called a three-hop miss and has a higher cost because
           it requires interrogating both the home directory and a remote cache. Note that this
           simple model does not account for invalidation time but does include some factor
           for increasing interconnect time. These remote access latencies are based on those
           in an SGI Origin 3000, the fastest scalable interconnect system in 2001, and assume a
           500 MHz processor.
I-32   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                                                                                        FFT                                                                              LU
                                                                      5.5                                                                               5.5

                                                                                                                         Average cycles per reference
                                       Average cycles per reference
                                                                      5.0                                                                               5.0
                                                                      4.5                                                                               4.5
                                                                      4.0                                                                               4.0
                                                                      3.5                                                                               3.5
                                                                      3.0                                                                               3.0
                                                                      2.5                                                                               2.5
                                                                      2.0                                                                               2.0
                                                                      1.5                                                                               1.5
                                                                      1.0                                                                               1.0
                                                                      0.5                                                                               0.5
                                                                      0.0                                                                               0.0
                                                                            8     16          32    64                                                        8     16        32    64
                                                                                Processor count                                                                   Processor count

                                                                                    Barnes                                                                            Ocean
                                                                      5.5                                                                               5.5

                                                                                                                         Average cycles per reference
                                                                      5.0                                                                               5.0
                             Average cycles per memory

                                                                      4.5                                                                               4.5
                                                                      4.0                                                                               4.0
                                                                      3.5                                                                               3.5
                                     reference

                                                                      3.0                                                                               3.0
                                                                      2.5                                                                               2.5
                                                                      2.0                                                                               2.0
                                                                      1.5                                                                               1.5
                                                                      1.0                                                                               1.0
                                                                      0.5                                                                               0.5
                                                                      0.0                                                                               0.0
                                                                            8     16          32    64                                                        8     16        32    64
                                                                                Processor count                                                                   Processor count

                                                                            Cache hit         Local miss   Remote miss   Three-hop miss to remote cache

                          Figure I.17 The effective latency of memory references in a DSM multiprocessor
                          depends both on the relative frequency of cache misses and on the location of
                          the memory where the accesses are served. These plots show the memory access cost
                          (a metric called average memory access time in Chapter 2) for each of the benchmarks
                          for 8, 16, 32, and 64 processors, assuming a 512 KB data cache that is two-way set asso-
                          ciative with 64-byte blocks. The average memory access cost is composed of four dif-
                          ferent types of accesses, with the cost of each type given in Figure I.16. For the Barnes
                          and LU benchmarks, the low miss rates lead to low overall access times. In FFT, the
                          higher access cost is determined by a higher local miss rate (1–4%) and a significant
                          three-hop miss rate (1%). The improvement in FFT comes from the reduction in local
                          miss rate from 4% to 1%, as the aggregate cache increases. Ocean shows the biggest
                          change in the cost of memory accesses, and the highest overall cost at 64 processors.
                          The high cost is driven primarily by a high local miss rate (average 1.6%). The memory
                          access cost drops from 8 to 16 processors as the grids more easily fit in the individual
                          caches. At 64 processors, the dataset size is too small to map properly and both local
                          misses and coherence misses rise, as we saw in Figure I.12.
I.6    Performance Measurement of Parallel Processors with Scientific Applications        ■   I-33

      I.6     Performance Measurement of Parallel Processors
              with Scientific Applications
              One of the most controversial issues in parallel processing has been how to mea-
              sure the performance of parallel processors. Of course, the straightforward answer
              is to measure a benchmark as supplied and to examine wall-clock time. Measuring
              wall-clock time obviously makes sense; in a parallel processor, measuring CPU
              time can be misleading because the processors may be idle but unavailable for
              other uses.
                   Users and designers are often interested in knowing not just how well a mul-
              tiprocessor performs with a certain fixed number of processors, but also how the
              performance scales as more processors are added. In many cases, it makes sense to
              scale the application or benchmark, since if the benchmark is unscaled, effects aris-
              ing from limited parallelism and increases in communication can lead to results
              that are pessimistic when the expectation is that more processors will be used to
              solve larger problems. Thus, it is often useful to measure the speedup as processors
              are added both for a fixed-size problem and for a scaled version of the problem,
              providing an unscaled and a scaled version of the speedup curves. The choice
              of how to measure the uniprocessor algorithm is also important to avoid anomalous
              results, since using the parallel version of the benchmark may understate the
              uniprocessor performance and thus overstate the speedup.
                   Once we have decided to measure scaled speedup, the question is how to scale
              the application. Let’s assume that we have determined that running a benchmark of
              size n on p processors makes sense. The question is how to scale the benchmark to
              run on m ? p processors. There are two obvious ways to scale the problem:
              (1) keeping the amount of memory used per processor constant, and (2) keeping
              the total execution time, assuming perfect speedup, constant. The first method,
              called memory-constrained scaling, specifies running a problem of size m ? n
              on m ? p processors. The second method, called time-constrained scaling, requires
              that we know the relationship between the running time and the problem size, since
              the former is kept constant. For example, suppose the running time of the appli-
              cation with data size n on p processors is proportional to n2/p. Then, with time-
              constrained scaling, the problem to run is the problem whose ideal running time
                  ffi ? p processors is still n /p. The problem with this ideal running time has size
                                             2
              on
              pffiffiffim
                 m ? n.

Example       Suppose we have a problem whose execution time for a problem of size n is pro-
              portional to n3. Suppose the actual running time on a 10-processor multiprocessor
              is 1 hour. Under the time-constrained and memory-constrained scaling models,
              find the size of the problem to run and the effective running time for a
              100-processor multiprocessor.

  Answer      For the time-constrained p
                                       problem,
                                         ffiffiffiffiffi  the ideal running time is the same, 1 hour,
              so the problem size is 3 10?n or 2.15 times larger than the original. For
I-34   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          memory-constrained scaling, the size of the problem is 10n and the ideal execution
                          time is 103/10, or 100 hours! Since most users will be reluctant to run a problem on
                          an order of magnitude more processors for 100 times longer, this size problem is
                          probably unrealistic.

                               In addition to the scaling methodology, there are questions as to how the pro-
                          gram should be scaled when increasing the problem size affects the quality of the
                          result. Often, we must change other application parameters to deal with this effect.
                          As a simple example, consider the effect of time to convergence for solving a dif-
                          ferential equation. This time typically increases as the problem size increases,
                          since, for example, we often require more iterations for the larger problem. Thus,
                          when we increase the problem size, the total running time may scale faster than the
                          basic algorithmic scaling would indicate.
                               For example, suppose that the number of iterations grows as the log of the prob-
                          lem size. Then, for a problem whose algorithmic running time is linear in the size of
                          the problem, the effective running time actually grows proportional to n log n. If we
                          scaled from a problem of size m on 10 processors, purely algorithmic scaling would
                          allow us to run a problem of size 10 m on 100 processors. Accounting for the
                          increase in iterations means that a problem of size k ? m, where k log k ¼ 10, will
                          have the same running time on 100 processors. This problem size yields a scaling
                          of 5.72 m, rather than 10 m.
                               In practice, scaling to deal with error requires a good understanding of the
                          application and may involve other factors, such as error tolerances (for example,
                          it affects the cell-opening criteria in Barnes-Hut). In turn, such effects often signif-
                          icantly affect the communication or parallelism properties of the application as
                          well as the choice of problem size.
                               Scaled speedup is not the same as unscaled (or true) speedup; confusing the two
                          has led to erroneous claims (e.g., see the discussion in Section I.6). Scaled speedup
                          has an important role, but only when the scaling methodology is sound and the
                          results are clearly reported as using a scaled version of the application. Singh,
                          Hennessy, and Gupta [1993] described these issues in detail.

                 I.7      Implementing Cache Coherence
                          In this section, we explore the challenge of implementing cache coherence,
                          starting first by dealing with the challenges in a snooping coherence protocol,
                          which we simply alluded to in Chapter 5. Implementing a directory protocol
                          adds some additional complexity to a snooping protocol, primarily arising from
                          the absence of broadcast, which forces the use of a different mechanism to
                          resolve races. Furthermore, the larger processor count of a directory-based
                          multiprocessor means that we cannot retain assumptions of unlimited buffering
                          and must find new ways to avoid deadlock, Let’s start with the snooping
                          protocols.
                                    I.7   Implementing Cache Coherence           ■   I-35

    As we mentioned in Chapter 5, the challenge of implementing misses in a
snooping coherence protocol without a bus lies in finding a way to make the multi-
step miss process appear atomic. Both an upgrade miss and a write miss require the
same basic processing and generate the same implementation challenges; for sim-
plicity, we focus on upgrade misses. Here are the steps in handling an upgrade
miss:

1. Detect the miss and compose an invalidate message for transmission to other
   caches.
2. When access to the broadcast communication link is available, transmit the
   message.
3. When the invalidates have been processed, the processor updates the state of the
   cache block and then proceeds with the write that caused the upgrade miss.

There are two related difficulties that can arise. First, how will two processors, P1
and P2, that attempt to upgrade the same cache block at the same time resolve the
race? Second, when at step 3, how does a processor know when all invalidates have
been processed so that it can complete the step?
     The solution to finding a winner in the race lies in the ordering imposed by the
broadcast communication medium. The communication medium must broadcast
any cache miss to all the nodes. If P1 and P2 attempt to broadcast at the same time,
we must ensure that either P1’s message will reach P2 first or P2’s will reach P1 first.
This property will be true if there is a single channel through which all ingoing and
outgoing requests from a node must pass through and if the communication network
does not accept a message unless it can guarantee delivery (i.e., it is effectively circuit
switched, see Appendix F). If both P1 and P2 initiate their attempts to broadcast an
invalidate simultaneously, then the network can accept only one of these operations
and delay the other. This ordering ensures that either P1 or P2 will complete its com-
munication in step 2 first. The network can explicitly signal when it accepts a mes-
sage and can guarantee it will be the next transmission; alternatively, a processor can
simply watch the network for its own request, knowing that once the request is seen,
it will be fully transmitted to all processors before any subsequent messages.
     Now, suppose P1 wins the race to transmit its invalidate; once it knows it has
won the race, it can continue with step 3 and complete the miss handling. There is a
potential problem, however, for P2. When P2 undertook step 1, it believed that the
block was in the shared state, but for P1 to advance at step 3, it must know that P2
has processed the invalidate, which must change the state of the block at P2 to inva-
lid! One simple solution is for P2 to notice that it has lost the race, by observing that
P1’s invalidate is broadcast before its own invalidate. P2 can then invalidate the
block and generate a write miss to get the data. P1 will see its invalidate before
P2’s, so it will change the block to modified and update the data, which guarantees
forward progress and avoids deadlock. When P1 sees the subsequent invalidate to a
block in the Modified state (a possibility that cannot arise in our basic protocol
discussed in Chapter 5), it knows that it was the winner of a race. It can simply
I-36   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          ignore the invalidate, knowing that it will be followed by a write miss, or it can
                          write the block back to memory and make its state invalid.
                               Another solution is to give precedence to incoming requests over outgoing
                          requests, so that before P2 can transmit its invalidate it must handle any pending inval-
                          idates or write misses. If any of those misses are for blocks with the same address as a
                          pending outgoing message, the processor must be prepared to restart the write oper-
                          ation, since the incoming request may cause the state of the block to change. Notice
                          that P1 knows that the invalidates will be processed once it has successfully completed
                          the broadcast, since precedence is given to invalidate messages over outgoing
                          requests. (Because it does not employ broadcast, a processor using a directory protocol
                          cannot know when an invalidate is received; instead, explicit acknowledgments are
                          required, as we discuss in the next section. Indeed, as we will see, it cannot even know
                          it has won the race to become the owner until its request is acknowledged.)
                               Reads will also require a multiple-step process, since we need to get the data
                          back from memory or a remote cache (in a write-back cache system), but reads do
                          not introduce fundamentally new problems beyond what exists for writes.
                               There are, however, a few additional tricky edge cases that must be handled cor-
                          rectly. For example, in a write-back cache, a processor can generate a read miss that
                          requires a write-back, which it could delay, while giving the read miss priority. If a
                          snoop request appears for the cache block that is to be written back, the processor must
                          discover this and send the data back. Failure to do so can create a deadlock situation. A
                          similar tricky situation exists when a processor generates a write miss, which will
                          make a block exclusive, but, before the processor receives the data and can update
                          the block, other processors generate read misses for that block. The read misses cannot
                          be processed until the writing processor receives the data and updates the block.
                               One of the more difficult problems occurs in a write-back cache where the data
                          for a read or write miss can come either from memory or from one of the processor
                          caches, but the requesting processor will not know a priori where the data will
                          come from. In most bus-based systems, a single global signal is used to indicate
                          whether any processor has the exclusive (and hence the most up-to-date) copy; oth-
                          erwise, the memory responds. These schemes can work with a pipelined intercon-
                          nection by requiring that processors signal whether they have the exclusive copy
                          within a fixed number of cycles after the miss is broadcast.
                               In a modern multiprocessor, however, it is essentially impossible to bound the
                          amount of time required for a snoop request to be processed. Instead, a mechanism
                          is required to determine whether the memory has an up-to-date copy. One solution
                          is to add coherence bits to the memory, indicating whether the data are exclusive in
                          a remote cache. This mechanism begins to move toward the directory approach,
                          whose implementation challenges we consider next.

                          Implementing Cache Coherence in a DSM Multiprocessor
                          Implementing a directory-based cache coherence protocol requires overcoming
                          all the problems related to nonatomic actions for a snooping protocol without
                                   I.7   Implementing Cache Coherence         ■   I-37

the use of broadcast (see Chapter 5), which forced a serialization on competing
writes and also ensured the serialization required for the memory consistency
model. Avoiding the need to broadcast is a central goal for a directory-based
system, so another method for ensuring serialization is necessary.
     The serialization of requests for exclusive access to a memory block is eas-
ily enforced since those requests will be serialized when they reach the unique
directory for the specified block. If the directory controller simply ensures that
one request is completely serviced before the next is begun, writes will be seri-
alized. Because the requesters cannot know ahead of time who will win the
race and because the communication is not a broadcast, the directory must sig-
nal to the winner when it completes the processing of the winner’s request.
This is done by a message that supplies the data on a write miss or by an
explicit acknowledgment message that grants ownership in response to an
invalidation request.
     What about the loser in this race? The simplest solution is for the system to send
a negative acknowledge, or NAK, which requires that the requesting node regen-
erate its request. (This is the equivalent of a collision in the broadcast network in a
snooping scheme, which requires that one of the transmitting nodes retry its com-
munication.) We will see in the next section why the NAK approach, as opposed to
buffering the request, is attractive.
     Although the acknowledgment that a requesting node has ownership is com-
pleted when the write miss or ownership acknowledgment message is transmit-
ted, we still do not know that the invalidates have been received and processed by
the nodes that were in the sharing set. All memory consistency models eventually
require (either before the next cache miss or at a synchronization point, for exam-
ple) that a processor knows that all the invalidates for a write have been pro-
cessed. In a snooping scheme, the nature of the broadcast network provides
this assurance.
     How can we know when the invalidates are complete in a directory scheme?
The only way to know that the invalidates have been completed is to have the des-
tination nodes of the invalidate messages (the members of the sharing set) explic-
itly acknowledge the invalidation messages sent from the directory. Who should
they be acknowledged to? There are two possibilities. In the first the acknowledg-
ments can be sent to the directory, which can count them, and when all acknowl-
edgments have been received, confirm this with a single message to the original
requester. Alternatively, when granting ownership, the directory can tell the reg-
ister how many acknowledgments to expect. The destinations of the invalidate
messages can then send an acknowledgment directly to the requester, whose iden-
tity is provided by the directory. Most existing implementations use the latter
scheme, since it reduces the possibility of creating a bottleneck at a directory.
Although the requirement for acknowledgments is an additional complexity in
directory protocols, this requirement arises from the avoidance of a serialization
mechanism, such as the snooping broadcast operation, which in itself is the limit
to scalability.
I-38   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          Avoiding Deadlock from Limited Buffering
                          A new complication in the implementation is introduced by the potential scale of a
                          directory-based multiprocessor. In Chapter 5, we assumed that the network could
                          always accept a coherence message and that the request would be acted upon at
                          some point. In a much larger multiprocessor, this assumption of unlimited buffer-
                          ing may be unreasonable. What happens when the network does not have unlimited
                          buffering? The major implication of this limit is that a cache or directory controller
                          may be unable to complete a message send. This could lead to deadlock.
                              The potential deadlock arises from three properties, which characterize many
                          deadlock situations:

                          1. More than one resource is needed to complete a transaction: Message buffers
                             are needed to generate requests, create replies and acknowledgments, and
                             accept replies.
                          2. Resources are held until a nonatomic transaction completes: The buffer used to
                             create the reply cannot be freed until the reply is accepted, for reasons we will
                             see shortly.
                          3. There is no global partial order on the acquisition of resources: Nodes can gen-
                             erate requests and replies at will.

                          These characteristics lead to deadlock, and avoiding deadlock requires breaking
                          one of these properties. Freeing up resources without completing a transaction
                          is difficult, since the transaction must be completely backed out and cannot be left
                          half-finished. Hence, our approach will be to try to resolve the need for multiple
                          resources. We cannot simply eliminate this need, but we can try to ensure that the
                          resources will always be available.
                              One way to ensure that a transaction can always complete is to guarantee that
                          there are always buffers to accept messages. Although this is possible for a small
                          multiprocessor with processors that block on a cache miss or have a small number
                          of outstanding misses, it may not be very practical in a directory protocol, since a
                          single write could generate many invalidate messages. In addition, features such as
                          prefetch and multiple outstanding misses increase the amount of buffering
                          required. There is an alternative strategy, which most systems use and which
                          ensures that a transaction will not actually be initiated until we can guarantee that
                          it has the resources to complete. The strategy has four parts:

                          1. A separate network (physical or virtual) is used for requests and replies, where a
                             reply is any message that a controller waits for in transitioning between states.
                             This ensures that new requests cannot block replies that will free up buffers.
                          2. Every request that expects a reply allocates space to accept the reply when the
                             request is generated. If no space is available, the request waits. This ensures that
                             a node can always accept a reply message, which will allow the replying node to
                             free its buffer.
                                   I.7   Implementing Cache Coherence         ■   I-39

3. Any controller can reject with a NAK any request, but it can never NAK a reply.
   This prevents a transaction from starting if the controller cannot guarantee that it
   has buffer space for the reply.
4. Any request that receives a NAK in response is simply retried.

   To see that there are no deadlocks with the four properties above, we must
ensure that all replies can be accepted and that every request is eventually ser-
viced. Since a cache controller or directory controller always allocates a buffer to
handle the reply before issuing a request, it can always accept the reply when it
returns. To see that every request is eventually serviced, we need only show that
any request could be completed. Since every request starts with a read or write
miss at a cache, it is sufficient to show that any read or write miss is eventually
serviced. Since the write miss case includes the actions for a read miss as a sub-
set, we focus on showing the write misses are serviced. The simplest situation is
when the block is uncached; since that case is subsumed by the case when the
block is shared, we focus on the shared and exclusive cases. Let’s consider the
case where the block is shared:

■   The CPU attempts to do a write and generates a write miss that is sent to the
    directory. For simplicity, we can assume that the processor is stalled. Although
    it may issue further requests, it should not issue a request for the same cache
    block until the first one is completed. Requests for independent blocks can be
    handled separately.
■   The write miss is sent to the directory controller for this memory block. Note
    that although one cache controller handles all the requests for a given cache
    block, regardless of its memory contents, the directory controller handles
    requests for different blocks as independent events (assuming sufficient buff-
    ering, which is allocated before the directory issues any further messages on
    behalf of the request). The only conflict at the directory controller is when
    two requests arrive for the same block. The controller must wait for the first
    operation to be completed. It can simply NAK the second request or buffer
    it, but it should not service the second request for a given memory block until
    the first is completed.
■   Now consider what happens at the directory controller: Suppose the write
    miss is the next thing to arrive at the directory controller. The controller
    sends out the invalidates, which can always be accepted after a limited
    delay by the cache controller. Note that one possibility is that the cache
    controller has an outstanding miss for the same block. This is the dual case
    to the snooping scheme, and we must once again break the tie by forcing
    the cache controller to accept and act on the directory request. Depending
    on the exact timing, this cache controller will either get the cache line
    later from the directory or will receive a NAK and have to restart the
    process.
I-40   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                             The case where the block is exclusive is somewhat trickier. Our analysis begins
                          when the write miss arrives at the directory controller for processing. There are two
                          cases to consider:

                          ■   The directory controller sends a fetch/invalidate message to the processor
                              where it arrives to find the block in the exclusive state. The cache controller
                              sends a data write-back to the home directory and makes its state invalid. This
                              reply arrives at the home directory controller, which can always accept the
                              reply, since it preallocated the buffer. The directory controller sends back
                              the data to the requesting processor, which can always accept the reply; after
                              the cache is updated, the requesting cache controller notifies the processor.
                          ■   The directory controller sends a fetch/invalidate message to the node indicated
                              as owner. When the message arrives at the owner node, it finds that this cache
                              controller has taken a read or write miss that caused the block to be replaced. In
                              this case, the cache controller has already sent the block to the home directory
                              with a data write-back and made the data unavailable. Since this is exactly the
                              effect of the fetch/invalidate message, the protocol operates correctly in this
                              case as well.

                             We have shown that our coherence mechanism operates correctly when the
                          cache and directory controller can accept requests for operation on cache blocks
                          for which they have no outstanding operations in progress, when replies are
                          always accepted, and when requests can be NAKed and forced to retry. Like
                          the case of the snooping protocol, the cache controller must be able to break ties,
                          and it always does so by favoring the instructions from the directory. The ability to
                          NAK requests is what allows an implementation with finite buffering to avoid
                          deadlock.

                          Implementing the Directory Controller
                          To implement a cache coherence scheme, the cache controller must have the same
                          abilities it needed in the snooping case, namely, the capability of handling requests
                          for independent blocks while awaiting a response to a request from the local pro-
                          cessor. The incoming requests are still processed in order, and each one is com-
                          pleted before beginning the next. Should a cache controller receive too many
                          requests in a short period of time, it can NAK them, knowing that the directory
                          will subsequently regenerate the request.
                               The directory must also be multithreaded and able to handle requests for mul-
                          tiple blocks independently. This situation is somewhat different than having the
                          cache controller handle incoming requests for independent blocks, since the direc-
                          tory controller will need to begin processing one request while an earlier one is still
                          underway. The directory controller cannot wait for one to complete before servic-
                          ing the next request, since this could lead to deadlock. Instead, the directory con-
                          troller must be reentrant; that is, it must be capable of suspending its execution
                           I.8 The Custom Cluster Approach: Blue Gene/L              ■   I-41

      while waiting for a reply and accepting another transaction. The only place this
      must occur is in response to read or write misses, while waiting for a response from
      the owner. This leads to three important observations:

      1. The state of the controller need only be saved and restored while either a fetch
         operation from a remote location or a fetch/invalidate is outstanding.
      2. The implementation can bound the number of outstanding transactions being
         handled in the directory by simply NAKing read or write miss requests that
         could cause the number of outstanding requests to be exceeded.
      3. If instead of returning the data through the directory, the owner node forwards
         the data directly to the requester (as well as returning it to the directory), we can
         eliminate the need for the directory to handle more than one outstanding
         request. This motivation, in addition to the reduction of latency, is the reason
         for using the forwarding style of protocol. There are other complexities from
         forwarding protocols that arise when requests arrive closely spaced in time.

         The major remaining implementation difficulty is to handle NAKs. One alter-
      native is for each processor to keep track of its outstanding transactions so it
      knows, when the NAK is received, what the requested transaction was. The alter-
      native is to bundle the original request into the NAK, so that the controller receiv-
      ing the NAK can determine what the original request was. Because every request
      allocates a slot to receive a reply and a NAK is a reply, NAKs can always be
      received. In fact, the buffer holding the return slot for the request can also hold
      information about the request, allowing the processor to reissue the request if it
      is NAKed.
          In practice, great care is required to implement these protocols correctly and to
      avoid deadlock. The key ideas we have seen in this section—dealing with nona-
      tomicity and finite buffering—are critical to ensuring a correct implementation.
      Designers have found that both formal and informal verification techniques are
      helpful for ensuring that implementations are correct.

I.8   The Custom Cluster Approach: Blue Gene/L
      Blue Gene/L (BG/L) is a scalable message-passing supercomputer whose design
      offers unprecedented computing density as measured by compute power per watt.
      By focusing on power efficiency, BG/L also achieves unmatched throughput per
      cubic foot. High computing density, combined with cost-effective nodes and exten-
      sive support for RAS, allows BG/L to efficiently scale to very large processor counts.
          BG/L is a distributed-memory, message-passing computer but one that is quite
      different from the cluster-based, often throughput-oriented computers that rely on
      commodity technology in the processors, interconnect, and, sometimes, the pack-
      aging and system-level organization. BG/L uses a special customized processing
      node that contains two processors (derived from low-power, lower-clock-rate
      PowerPC 440 chips used in the embedded market), caches, and interconnect logic.
I-42   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                          A complete computing node is formed by adding SDRAM chips, which are the
                          only commodity semiconductor parts in the BG/L design.
                               BG/L consists of up to 64 K nodes organized into 32 racks each containing 1 K
                          nodes in about 50 cubic feet. Each rack contains two double-sided boards with 512
                          nodes each. Due to the high density within a board and rack, 85% of the intercon-
                          nect is within a single rack, greatly reducing the complexity and latency associated
                          with connections between racks. Furthermore, the compact size of a rack, which is
                          enabled by the low power and high density of each node, greatly improves effi-
                          ciency, since the interconnection network for connections within a single rack
                          are integrated into the single compute chip that comprises each node.
                               Appendix F discusses the main BL/G interconnect network, which is a three-
                          dimensional torus. There are four other networks: Gigabit Ethernet, connected at
                          designated I/O nodes; a JTAG network used for test; a barrier network; and a global
                          collective network. The barrier network contains four independent channels and
                          can be used for performing a global or or a global and across all the processors
                          with latency of less than 1.5 microseconds. The global collective network connects
                          all the processors in a tree and is used for global operations. It supports a variety of
                          integer reductions directly, avoiding the need to involve the processor, and leading
                          to times for large-scale reductions that are 10 to 100 times faster than in typical
                          supercomputers. The collective network can also be used to broadcast a single
                          value efficiently. Support for the collective network as well as the torus is included
                          in the chip that forms of the heart of each processing node.

                          The Blue Gene/L Computing Node
                          Each BG/L node consists of a single processing chip and several SDRAM chips.
                          The BG/L processing chip, shown in Figure I.18, contains the following:

                          1. Two PowerPC 440 CPUs, each a two-issue superscalar with a seven-stage
                             pipeline and speculative out-order issue capability, clocked at a modest
                             (and power-saving) 700 MHz. Each CPU has separate 32 KB I and D caches
                             that are nonbblocking with up to four outstanding misses. Cache coherence
                             must be enforced in software. Each CPU also contains a pair of floating-point
                             coprocessors, each with its own FP register set and each capable of issuing a
                             multiply-add each clock cycle, supporting a special SIMD instruction set
                             capability that includes complex arithmetic using a pair of registers and
                             128-bit operands.
                          2. Separate fully associative L2 caches, each with 2 KB of data and a 128-byte
                             block size, that act essentially like prefetch buffers. The L2 cache controllers
                             recognize streamed data access and also handle prefetch from L3 or main mem-
                             ory. They have low latency (11 cycles) and provide high bandwidth (5 bytes per
                             clock). The L2 prefetch buffer can supply 5.5 GB/sec to the L1 caches.
                          3. A 4 MB L3 cache implemented with embedded DRAM. Each L2 buffer is con-
                             nected by a bus supplying 11 GB/sec of bandwidth from the L3 cache.
                      I.8 The Custom Cluster Approach: Blue Gene/L                                                               ■     I-43

                               5.5 GB/sec
                                                                      256
                                                                   11 GB/sec

                                            L2 prefetch buffer
              32K/32K L1

               PPC 440                                                           Shared L3
                CPU                                                             directory for                       4 MB

                               128
                                                                                 embedded                         embedded
             Double-issue                                                          DRAM                            DRAM
                FPU                                                256

                                                                                                   1024 144 ECC
                                                                                  Includes                        L3 cache
                            Snoop                                                   error                            or

                                                                                                   22 GB/sec
                                                                                 correction                       memory
                                                                                   control

                                            L2 prefetch buffer
              32K/32K L1

                               128
                                                                   256             (ECC)
               PPC 440
                CPU
                                                                         256
             Double-issue                                                11 GB/sec
                FPU
                                                                         128

        Ethernet      JTAG                                       Torus     Collective           Global               DDR
          Gbit       access                                                                   interrupt/            control
                                                                                               lockbox             with ECC

                                                                                                                          5.5 GB/sec

        Gigabit        IEEE                   6 out and                    3 out and        4 global              144-bit-wide
        Ethernet      1149.1                6 in, each at                 3 in, each at    barriers or               DDR
                     (JTAG)                  1.4 GB/sec                   2.8 GB/sec       interrupts             256/ 512 MB
                                                 link                          link

Figure I.18 The BG/L processing node. The unfilled boxes are the PowerPC processors
with added floating-point units. The solid gray boxes are network interfaces, and the
shaded lighter gray boxes are part of the memory system, which is supplemented by
DDR RAMS.

4. A memory bus supporting 256 to 512 MB of DDR DRAMS and providing
   5.5 GB/sec of memory bandwidth to the L3 cache. This amount of memory
   might seem rather modest for each node, given that the node contains two pro-
   cessors, each with two FP units. Indeed Amdahl’s rule of thumb (1 MB per 1
   MIPS) and an assumption of 25% of peak performance would favor about 2.7
   times the memory per node. For floating-point-intensive applications where the
   computational need usually grows faster than linear in the memory size, the
   upper limit of 512 MB/node is probably reasonable.
5. Support logic for the five interconnection networks.

    By placing all the logic other than DRAMs into a single chip, BG/L achieves higher
density, lower power, and lower cost, making it possible to pack the processing nodes
extremely densely. The density in terms allows the interconnection networks to be low
latency, high bandwidth, and quite cost effective. The combination yields a supercom-
puter that scales very cost-effectively, yielding an order-of-magnitude improvement
I-44   ■   Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

Figure I.19 The 64 K-processor Blue Gene/L system.

                          in GFLOPs/watt over other approaches as well as significant improvements in
                          GFLOPS/$ for very large-scale multiprocessors.
                              For example, BG/L with 64 K nodes has a peak performance of 360 TF and
                          uses about 1.4 megawatts. To achieve 360 TF peak using the Power5 +, which
                          is the most power-efficient, high-end FP processor, would require about 23,500
                          processors (the dual processor can execute up to 8 FLOPs/clock at 1.9 GHz).
                          The power requirement for just the processors, without external cache, DRAM,
                          or interconnect, would be about 2.9 megawatts, or about double the power of
                          the entire BG/L system. Likewise, the smaller die size of the BG/L node and its
                          need for DRAMs as the only external chip produce significant cost savings versus
                          a node built using a high-end multiprocessor. Figure I.19 shows a photo of the 64K
                          node BG/L. The total size occupied by this 128K-processor multiprocessor is com-
                          parable to that occupied by earlier multiprocessors with 16K processors.

                 I.9      Concluding Remarks
                          The landscape of large-scale multiprocessors has changed dramatically over the
                          past five to ten years. While some form of clustering is now used for all the
                          largest-scale multiprocessors, calling them all “clusters” ignores significant differ-
                          ences in architecture, implementation style, cost, and performance. Bell and Gray
                                                                                  I.9   Concluding Remarks       ■   I-45

Terminology          Characteristics                                                          Examples
MPP                  Originally referred to a class of architectures characterized by large   Connection Machines CM-2
                     numbers of small, typically custom processors and usually using
                     an SIMD style architecture.
SMP (symmetric       Shared-memory multiprocessors with a symmetric relationship to           SUN Sunfire, NEC Earth
multiprocessor)      memory; also called UMA (uniform memory access). Scalable                Simulator
                     versions of these architectures used multistage interconnection
                     networks, typically configured with at most 64 to 128 processors.
DSM (distributed     A class of architectures that support scalable shared memory in a        SGI Origin and Altix, Cray
shared memory)       distributed fashion. These architectures are available both with and     T3E, Cray X1, IBM p5 590/5
                     without cache coherence and typically can support hundreds to
                     thousands of processors.
Cluster              A class of multiprocessors using message passing. The individual         See commodity and custom
                     nodes are either commodities or customized, likewise the                 clusters
                     interconnect.
Commodity            A class of clusters where the nodes are truly commodities,               “Beowulf” and other
cluster              typically headless workstations, motherboards, or blade servers,         “homemade” clusters
                     connected with a SAN or LAN usually accessible via an I/O bus.
Custom cluster       A cluster architecture where the nodes and the interconnect are          IBM Blue Gene, Cray XT3
                     customized and more tightly integrated than in a commodity
                     cluster. Also called distributed memory or message passing
                     multiprocessors.
Constellation        Large-scale multiprocessors that use clustering of smaller-scale         Larger SGI Origin/Altix,
                     multiprocessors, typically with a DSM or SMP architecture and 32         ASC Purple
                     or more processors.

Figure I.20 A classification of large-scale multiprocessors. The term MPP, which had the original meaning
described above, has been used more recently, and less precisely, to refer to all large-scale multiprocessors. None
of the commercial shipping multiprocessors is a true MPP in the original sense of the word, but such an approach
may make sense in the future. Both the SMP and DSM class includes multiprocessors with vector support. The term
constellation has been used in different ways; the above usage seems both intuitive and precise [Dongarra et al. 2005].

                             [2002] discussed this trend, arguing that clusters will dominate. While Dongarra
                             et al. [2005] agreed that some form of clustering is almost inevitable in the largest
                             multiprocessors, they developed a more nuanced classification that attempts to dis-
                             tinguish among a variety of different approaches.
                                 In Figure I.20 we summarize the range of terminology that has been used for
                             large-scale multiprocessors and focus on defining the terms from an architectural
                             and implementation perspective. Figure I.21 shows the hierarchical relationship of
                             these different architecture approaches. Although there has been some conver-
                             gence in architectural approaches over the past 15 years, the TOP500 list, which
                             reports the 500 fastest computers in the world as measured by the Linpack bench-
                             mark, includes commodity clusters, customized clusters, Symmetric Multiproces-
                             sors (SMPs), DSMs, and constellations, as well as processors that are both scalar
                             and vector.
I-46   ■     Appendix I Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications

                                                            Larger
                                                       multiprocessors

                            Shared address                                              Distributed
                                space                                                 address space

             Symmetric shared
              memory (SMP)              Distributed shared            Commodity clusters:             Custom
           Examples: IBM eServer,        memory (DSM)                 Beowulf and others              cluster
               SUN Sunfire

                                                             Cache coherent:                                        Uniform cluster:
                                                                ccNUMA:                                             IBM Blue Gene
                                                             SGI Origin/Altix

                                                        Noncache coherent:                                      Constellation cluster of
                                                           Cray T3E, X1                                            DSMs or SMPs
                                                                                                                SGI Altix, ASC Purple

Figure I.21 The space of large-scale multiprocessors and the relation of different classes.

                                       Nonetheless, there are some clearly emerging trends, which we can see by
                                    looking at the distribution of types of multiprocessors in the TOP500 list:

                                    1. Clusters represent a majority of the systems. The lower development effort for
                                       clusters has clearly been a driving force in making them more popular. The
                                       high-end multiprocessor market has not grown sufficiently large to support
                                       full-scale, highly customized designs as the dominant choice.
                                    2. The majority of the clusters are commodity clusters, often put together by users,
                                       rather than a system vendor designing a standard product.
                                    3. Although commodity clusters dominate in their representation, the top 25
                                       entries on the list are much more varied and include 9 custom clusters (primarily
                                       instances of Blue Gene or Cray XT3 systems), 2 constellations, 8 commodity
                                       clusters, 2 SMPs (one of which is the NEC Earth Simulator, which has nodes
                                       with vector processors), and 4 DSM multiprocessors.
                                    4. Vector processors, which once dominated the list, have almost disappeared.
                                    5. The IBM Blue Gene dominates the top 10 systems, showing the advantage of an
                                       approach the uses some commodity processor cores, but customizes many other
                                       functions and balances performance, power, and packaging density.
                                    6. Architectural convergence has been driven more by market effects (lack of
                                       growth, limited suppliers, etc.) than by a clear-cut consensus on the best archi-
                                       tectural approaches.
                                             I.9   Concluding Remarks     ■   I-47

     Software, both applications and programming languages and environments,
remains the big challenge for parallel computing, just as it was 30 years ago, when
multiprocessors such as the Illiac IV were being designed. The combination of ease
of programming with high parallel performance remains elusive. Until better pro-
gress is made on this front, convergence toward a single programming model and
underlying architectural approach (remembering that for uniprocessors we essen-
tially have one programming model and one architectural approach!) will be slow
or will be driven by factors other than proven architectural superiority.
J.1    Introduction                                       J-2
J.2    Basic Techniques of Integer Arithmetic             J-2
J.3    Floating Point                                    J-13
J.4    Floating-Point Multiplication                     J-17
J.5    Floating-Point Addition                           J-21
J.6    Division and Remainder                            J-27
J.7    More on Floating-Point Arithmetic                 J-32
J.8    Speeding Up Integer Addition                      J-37
J.9    Speeding Up Integer Multiplication and Division   J-44
J.10   Putting It All Together                           J-57
J.11   Fallacies and Pitfalls                            J-62
J.12   Historical Perspective and References             J-63
       Exercises                                         J-67
