Preface
You might be holding this book in a bookstore, asking yourself whether you should buy it. Or maybe you
are in your employer's library, wondering whether you should invest time in reading it. I know you don't
have time, so I'll cut to the chase. If you have ever asked yourself how to write higher-level programs in
C++, how to cope with the avalanche of irrelevant details that plague even the cleanest design, or how to
build reusable components that you don't have to hack into each time you take them to your next
application, then this book is for you.

Imagine the following scenario. You come from a design meeting with a couple of printed diagrams,
scribbled with your annotations. Okay, the event type passed between these objects is not char anymore;
it's int. You change one line of code. The smart pointers to Widget are too slow; they should go
unchecked. You change one line of code. The object factory needs to support the new Gadget class just
added by another department. You change one line of code.

You have changed the design. Compile. Link. Done.

Well, there is something wrong with this scenario, isn't there? A much more likely scenario is this: You
come from the meeting in a hurry because you have a pile of work to do. You fire a global search. You
perform surgery on code. You add code. You introduce bugs. You remove the bugs . . . that's the way a
programmer's job is, right? Although this book cannot possibly promise you the first scenario, it is
nonetheless a resolute step in that direction. It tries to present C++ as a newly discovered language for
software architects.

Traditionally, code is the most detailed and intricate aspect of a software system. Historically, in spite of
various levels of language support for design methodologies (such as object orientation), a significant gap
has persisted between the blueprints of a program and its code because the code must take care of the
ultimate details of the implementation and of many ancillary tasks. The intent of the design is, more often
than not, dissolved in a sea of quirks.

This book presents a collection of reusable design artifacts, called generic components, together with the
techniques that make them possible. These generic components bring their users the well-known benefits
of libraries, but in the broader space of system architecture. The coding techniques and the
implementations provided focus on tasks and issues that traditionally fall in the area of design, activities
usually done before coding. Because of their high level, generic components make it possible to map
intricate architectures to code in unusually expressive, terse, and easy-to-maintain ways.

Three elements are reunited here: design patterns, generic programming, and C++. These elements are
combined to achieve a very high rate of reuse, both horizontally and vertically. On the horizontal
dimension, a small amount of library code implements a combinatorial—and essentially open-ended—
number of structures and behaviors. On the vertical dimension, the generality of these components makes
them applicable to a vast range of programs.

This book owes much to design patterns, powerful solutions to ever-recurring problems in object-oriented
development. Design patterns are distilled pieces of good design—recipes for sound, reusable solutions to
problems that can be encountered in many contexts. Design patterns concentrate on providing a suggestive
lexicon for designs to be conveyed. They describe the problem, a time-proven solution with its variants,
and the consequences of choosing each variant of that solution. Design patterns go above and beyond
anything a programming language, no matter how advanced, could possibly express. By following and
combining certain design patterns, the components presented in this book tend to address a large category
of concrete problems.

Generic programming is a paradigm that focuses on abstracting types to a narrow collection of functional
requirements and on implementing algorithms in terms of these requirements. Because algorithms define a
strict and narrow interface to the types they operate on, the same algorithm can be used against a wide
collection of types. The implementations in this book use generic programming techniques to achieve a
minimal commitment to specificity, extraordinary terseness, and efficiency that rivals carefully hand
crafted code.

C++ is the only implementation tool used in this book. You will not find in this book code that implements
nifty windowing systems, complex networking libraries, or clever logging mechanisms. Instead, you will
find the fundamental components that make it easy to implement all of the above, and much more. C++
has the breadth necessary to make this possible. Its underlying C memory model ensures raw performance,
its support for polymorphism enables object-oriented techniques, and its templates unleash an incredible
code generation machine. Templates pervade all the code in the book because they allow close cooperation
between the user and the library. The user of the library literally controls the way code is generated, in
ways constrained by the library. The role of a generic component library is to allow user-specified types
and behaviors to be combined with generic components in a sound design. Because of the static nature of
the techniques used, errors in mixing and matching the appropriate pieces are usually caught during
compile time.

This book's manifest intent is to create generic components—preimplemented pieces of design whose main
characteristics are flexibility, versatility, and ease of use. Generic components do not form a framework. In
fact, their approach is complementary—whereas a framework defines interdependent classes to foster a
specific object model, generic components are lightweight design artifacts that are independent of each
other, yet can be mixed and matched freely. They can be of great help in implementing frameworks.
                                             Y
                                           FL

Audience
                                         AM

The intended audience of this book falls into two main categories. The first category is that of experienced
C++ programmers who want to master the most modern library writing techniques. The book presents new,
                                TE

powerful C++ idioms that have surprising capabilities, some of which weren't even thought possible. These
idioms are of great help in writing high-level libraries. Intermediate C++ programmers who want to go a
step further will certainly find the book useful, too, especially if they invest a bit of perseverance.
Although pretty hard-core C++ code is sometimes presented, it is thoroughly explained.

The second category consists of busy programmers who need to get the job done without undergoing a
steep learning investment. They can skim the most intricate details of implementation and concentrate on
using the provided library. Each chapter has an introductory explanation and ends with a Quick Facts
section. Programmers will find these features a useful reference in understanding and using the
components. The components can be understood in isolation, are very powerful yet safe, and are a joy to
use.

You need to have a solid working experience with C++ and, above all, the desire to learn more. A degree
of familiarity with templates and the Standard Template Library (STL) is desirable.

Having an acquaintance with design patterns (Gamma et al. 1995) is recommended but not mandatory. The
patterns and idioms applied in the book are described in detail. However, this book is not a pattern book—
it does not attempt to treat patterns in full generality. Because patterns are presented from the pragmatic
standpoint of a library writer, even readers interested mostly in patterns may find the perspective
refreshing, if constrained.

Loki

                                                   xi ®
                                                Team-Fly
The book describes an actual C++ library called Loki. Loki is the god of wit and mischief in Norse
mythology, and the author's hope is that the library's originality and flexibility will remind readers of the
playful Norse god. All the elements of the library live in the namespace Loki. The namespace is not
mentioned in the coding examples because it would have unnecessarily increased indentation and the size
of the examples. Loki is freely available; you can download it from http://www.awl.com/cseng/titles/0-
201-70431-5.

Except for its threading part, Loki is written exclusively in standard C++. This, alas, means that many
current compilers cannot cope with parts of it. I implemented and tested Loki using Metrowerks'
CodeWarrior Pro 6.0 and Comeau C++ 4.2.38, both on Windows. It is likely that KAI C++ wouldn't have
any problem with the code, either. As vendors release new, better compiler versions, you will be able to
exploit everything Loki has to offer.

Loki's code and the code samples presented throughout the book use a popular coding standard originated
by Herb Sutter. I'm sure you will pick it up easily. In a nutshell,

    •   Classes, functions, and enumerated types look LikeThis.
    •   Variables and enumerated values look likeThis.
    •   Member variables look likeThis_.
    •   Template parameters are declared with class if they can be only a user-defined type, and with
        typename if they can also be a primitive type.

Organization
The book consists of two major parts: techniques and components. Part I (Chapters 1 to 4) describes the
C++ techniques that are used in generic programming and in particular in building generic components. A
host of C++-specific features and techniques are presented: policy-based design, partial template
specialization, typelists, local classes, and more. You may want to read this part sequentially and return to
specific sections for reference.

Part II builds on the foundation established in Part I by implementing a number of generic components.
These are not toy examples; they are industrial-strength components used in real-world applications.
Recurring issues that C++ developers face in their day-to-day activity, such as smart pointers, object
factories, and functor objects, are discussed in depth and implemented in a generic way. The text presents
implementations that address basic needs and solve fundamental problems. Instead of explaining what a
body of code does, the approach of the book is to discuss problems, take design decisions, and implement
those decisions gradually.

    Chapter 1 presents policies—a C++ idiom that helps in creating flexible designs.

    Chapter 2 discusses general C++ techniques related to generic programming.

    Chapter 3 implements typelists, which are powerful type manipulation structures.

    Chapter 4 introduces an important ancillary tool: a small-object allocator.

    Chapter 5 introduces the concept of generalized functors, useful in designs that use the Command
    design pattern.

    Chapter 6 describes Singleton objects.

    Chapter 7 discusses and implements smart pointers.

    Chapter 8 describes generic object factories.

    Chapter 9 treats the Abstract Factory design pattern and provides implementations of it.

    Chapter 10 implements several variations of the Visitor design pattern in a generic manner.

    Chapter 11 implements several multimethod engines, solutions that foster various trade-offs.

The design themes cover many important situations that C++ programmers have to cope with on a regular
basis. I personally consider object factories (Chapter 8) a cornerstone of virtually any quality polymorphic
design. Also, smart pointers (Chapter 7) are an important component of many C++ applications, small and
large. Generalized functors (Chapter 5) have an incredibly broad range of applications. Once you have
generalized functors, many complicated design problems become very simple. The other, more specialized,
generic components, such as Visitor (Chapter 10) or multimethods (Chapter 11), have important niche
applications and stretch the boundaries of language support.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my parents for diligently taking care of the longest, toughest part of them all.

It should be stressed that this book, and much of my professional development, wouldn't have existed
without Scott Meyers. Since we met at the C++ World Conference in 1998, Scott has constantly helped me
do more and do better. Scott was the first person who enthusiastically encouraged me to develop my early
ideas. He introduced me to John Vlissides, catalyzing another fruitful cooperation; lobbied Herb Sutter to
accept me as a columnist for C++ Report; and introduced me to Addison-Wesley, practically forcing me
into starting this book, at a time when I still had trouble understanding New York sales clerks. Ultimately,
Scott helped me all the way through the book with reviews and advice, sharing with me all the pains of
writing, and none of the benefits.

Many thanks to John Vlissides, who, with his sharp insights, convinced me of the problems with my
solutions and suggested much better ones. Chapter 9 exists because John insisted that "things could be
done better."

Thanks to P. J. Plauger and Marc Briand for encouraging me to write for the C/C++ Users Journal, at a
time when I still believed that magazine columnists were inhabitants of another planet.

I am indebted to my editor, Debbie Lafferty, for her continuous support and sagacious advice.

My colleagues at RealNetworks, especially Boris Jerkunica and Jim Knaack, helped me very much by
fostering an atmosphere of freedom, emulation, and excellence. I am grateful to them all for that.

I also owe much to all participants in the comp.lang.c++.moderated and comp.std.c++ Usenet newsgroups.
These people greatly and generously contributed to my understanding of C++.

I would like to address thanks to the reviewers of early drafts of the manuscript: Mihail Antonescu, Bob
Archer (my most thorough reviewer of all), Allen Broadman, Ionut Burete, Mirel Chirita, Steve Clamage,
James O. Coplien, Doug Hazen, Kevlin Henney, John Hickin, Howard Hinnant, Sorin Jianu, Zoltan
Kormos, James Kuyper, Lisa Lippincott, Jonathan H. Lundquist, Petru Marginean, Patrick McKillen,
Florin Mihaila, Sorin Oprea, John Potter, Adrian Rapiteanu, Monica Rapiteanu, Brian Stanton, Adrian
Steflea, Herb Sutter, John Torjo, Florin Trofin, and Cristi Vlasceanu. They all have invested significant
efforts in reading and providing input, without which this book wouldn't have been half of what it is.

Thanks to Greg Comeau for providing me with his top-notch C++ compiler for free.

Last but not least, I would like to thank all my family and friends for their continuous encouragement and
support.,

