Appendix A. A Minimalist Multithreading Library
A multithreaded program has multiple points of execution at the same time. Practically, this means that in
a multithreaded program you can have multiple functions running at once. On a multiprocessor computer,
different threads might run literally simultaneously. On a single-processor machine, a multithreading-
capable operating system will apply time slicing—it chops each thread at short time intervals, suspends it,
and gives another thread some processor time. Multithreading gives the user the impression that multiple
things happen at once. For instance, a word processor can verify grammar while letting the user enter text.

Users don't like to see the hourglass cursor, so we programmers must write multithreaded programs.
Unfortunately, as pleasing as it is to users, multithreading is traditionally very hard to program, and even
harder to debug. Moreover, multithreading pervades application design. Making a library work safely in
the presence of multiple threads cannot be done from the outside; it must be built in, even if the library
does not use threads of its own.

It follows that the components provided in this book cannot ignore the threading issue. (Well, they actually
could, in which case most of them would be useless in the presence of multiple threads.) Because modern
applications increasingly use multithreaded execution, it would be a pity to sweep multithreading under the
rug out of laziness.

This appendix provides tools and techniques that establish a sound ground for writing portable
multithreaded object-oriented applications in C++. It does not provide a comprehensive introduction to
multithreaded programming—a fascinating domain in itself. Trying to discuss a complete threading library
en passant in this book would be a futile, doomed effort. The focus here is on figuring out the minimal
abstractions that allow us to write multithreaded components.

Loki's threading abilities are scarce compared with the host of amenities that a modern operating system
provides, because its concern is only to provide thread-safe components. On the bright side, the
synchronization concepts defined in this appendix are higher level than the traditional mutexes and
semaphores and might help in the design of any object-oriented multithreaded application.

A.1 A Critique of Multithreading
The advantages of multithreading on multiprocessor machines are obvious. But when executed on a single
processor, multithreading may seem a bit silly. Why would you want to slow down the processor with
time-slicing algorithms? Obviously, you won't get any net gain. No miracle can occur—there's still only
one processor, so overall multithreading will actually slightly reduce efficiency because of the additional
swapping and bookkeeping.

The reason that multithreading is important even on single-processor machines is efficient resource use. In
a typical modern computer, there are many more resources than the processor. You have devices such as
disk drives, modems, network cards, and printers. Because they are physically independent, these
resources can work at the same time. For instance, there is no reason why the processor cannot compute
while the disk spins and while the printer prints. However, this is exactly what would happen if your
application and operating system committed exclusively to a single-threaded execution model. And you
wouldn't be happy if your application didn't allow you to do anything while transferring data from the
Internet through the modem.

In the same vein, even the processor might be unused for extended periods of time. As you are editing a
3D image, the short intervals between your mouse moves and clicks are little eternities to the processor. It

would be nice if the drawing program could use those idle times to do something useful, such as ray
tracing or computing hidden lines.

The main alternative to multithreading is asynchronous execution. Asynchronous execution fosters a
callback model: You start an operation and register a function to be called when the operation completes.
The main disadvantage of asynchronous execution compared with using multithreading is that it leads to
state-rich programs. By using asynchronous execution, you cannot follow an algorithm from one point to
another; you can only store a state and let the callbacks change that state. Maintaining such state is
troublesome in all but the simplest operations.

True threads don't have this problem. Each thread has an implicit state given by its execution point (the
statement where the thread currently executes). You can easily follow what a thread does because it's just
like following a simple function. The execution point is exactly what you have to manage by hand in
asynchronous execution. (The main question in asynchronous programming is "Where am I now?") In
conclusion, multithreaded programs can follow the synchronous execution model, which is good.

On the other hand, threads are exposed to big problems as soon as they start sharing resources, such as data
in memory. Because threads can be interrupted at any time by other threads (yes, that's any time, including
in the middle of an assignment to a variable), operations that you thought were atomic are not.
Unorganized access of threads to a piece of data is always lethal to that data.

In single-threaded programming, data health is usually guaranteed at the entry and at the exit of a function.
For instance, the assignment operator (operator=) of a String class assumes the String object is
valid upon entry and at exit of the operator. With multithreaded programming, you must make sure that the
String object is valid even during the assignment operation, because another thread may interrupt an
assignment and do another operation against the String object. Whereas single-threaded programming
accustoms you to think of functions as atomic operations, in multithreaded programming you must state
explicitly which operations are atomic. In conclusion, multithreaded programs have big trouble sharing
resources, which is bad.

Most programming techniques for multithreading focus on providing synchronization objects that enable
you to serialize access to shared resources. Whenever you do an operation that must be atomic, you lock a
synchronization object. If other threads try to lock the same synchronization object, they are put on hold.
You modify the data (and leave it in a coherent state) and then unlock the synchronization object. At that
moment, some other thread will be able to lock the synchronization object and gain access to the data. This
effectively makes every thread work on consistent data.

The following sections define various locking objects. The synchronization objects provided herein are not
comprehensive, yet you can do a great deal of multithreaded programming by using them.

A.2 Loki's Approach
To deal with threading issues, Loki defines the ThreadingModel policy. ThreadingModel prescribes a
template with one argument. That argument is a C++ type for which you need to access threading
amenities:

template <typename T>
class SomeThreadingModel
{
   ...
};

The following sections progressively fill ThreadingModel with concepts and functionality. Loki defines a
single threading model that is the default for most of Loki.

A.3 Atomic Operations on Integral Types
Assuming x is a variable of type int, consider this statement:

++x;

It might seem awkward that a book focused on design analyzes a simple increment statement, but this is
the thing with multithreading—little issues affect big designs.

To increment x, the processor has to do three operations:

    1. Fetch the variable from memory.
    2. Increment the variable inside the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) of the processor. The ALU is the
       only place where an operation can take place; memory does not have arithmetic capabilities of its
       own.
    3. Write the variable back to memory.

Because the first operation reads, the second modifies, and the third writes the data, this troika is known as
a read-modify-write (RMW) operation.

Now suppose this increment happens in a multiprocessor architecture. To maximize efficiency, during the
modify part of the RMW operation the processor unlocks the memory bus. This way another processor can
access the memory while the first increments the variable, leading to better resource use.

Unfortunately, another processor can start an RMW operation against the same integer. For instance,
assume there are two increments on x, which initially has value 0, performed by two processors P1 and P2
in the following sequence:

    1. P1 locks the memory bus and fetches x.
    2. P1 unlocks the memory bus.
    3. P2 locks the memory bus and fetches x (which is still 0). At the same time, P1 increments x inside
       its ALU. The result is 1.
    4. P2 unlocks the memory bus.
    5. P1 locks the memory bus and writes 1 to x. At the same time, P2 increments x inside its ALU.
       Because P2 fetched a 0, the result is, again, 1.
    6. P1 unlocks the memory bus.
    7. P2 locks the memory bus and writes 1 to x.
    8. P2 unlocks the memory bus.

The net result is that although two increment operations have been applied to x starting from 0, the final
value is 1. This is an erroneous result. Worse, neither processor (thread) can figure out that the increment
failed and will retry it. In a multithreaded world, nothing is atomic—not even a simple increment of an
integer.

There are a number of ways to make the increment operation atomic. The most efficient way is to exploit
processor capabilities. Some processors offer locked-bus operations—the RMW operation takes place as
described previously, except that the memory bus is locked throughout the operation. This way, when P2
fetches x from memory, it will be after its increment by P1 has completed.

This low-level functionality is usually packaged by operating systems in C functions that provide atomic
increment and atomic decrement operations.

If an OS defines atomic operations, it usually does so for the integral type that has the width of the memory
bus—most of the time, int. The threading subsystem of Loki (file Threads.h) defines the type
IntType inside each ThreadingModel implementation.

The primitives for atomic operations, still inside ThreadingModel, are outlined in the following:

template <typename T>
class SomeThreadingModel
{
public:
   typedef int IntType; // or another type as dictated by the platform
   static IntType AtomicAdd(volatile IntType& lval, IntType val);
   static IntType AtomicSubtract(volatile IntType & lval, IntType val);
   ... similar definitions for AtomicMultiply, AtomicDivide,
   ... AtomicIncrement, AtomicDecrement ...
   static void AtomicAssign(volatile IntType & lval, IntType val);
   static void AtomicAssign(IntType & lval, volatile IntType & val);
};

These primitives get the value to change as the first parameter (notice the pass by non-const reference
and the use of volatile), and the other operand (absent in the case of unary operators) as the second
parameter. Each primitive returns a copy of the volatile destination. The returned value is very useful
when you're using these primitives because you can inspect the actual result of the operation. If you inspect
the volatile value after the operation,

volatile int counter;
...
SomeThreadingModel<Widget>::AtomicAdd(counter, 5);
if (counter == 10) ...

then your code does not inspect counter immediately after the addition because another thread can
modify counter between the call to AtomicAdd and the if statement. Most of the time, you need to see
what value counter has immediately after your call to AtomicAdd, in which case you write

if (AtomicAdd(counter, 5) == 10) ...

The two AtomicAssign functions are necessary because even the copy operation can be nonatomic. For
instance, if your machine bus is 32 bits wide and long has 64 bits, copying a long value involves two
memory accesses.

A.4 Mutexes
Edgar Dijkstra has proven that in the presence of multithreading, the thread scheduler of the operating
system must provide certain synchronization objects. Without them, writing correct multithreaded
applications is impossible.

Mutexes are fundamental synchronization objects that allow threads to access shared resources in an
ordered manner. This section defines the notion of a mutex. The rest of Loki does not use mutexes directly;
instead, it defines higher-level means of synchronization that can be easily implemented with mutexes.

Mutex is a collocation of Mutual Exclusive, a phrase that describes the functioning of this primitive object:
A mutex allows threads mutually exclusive access to a resource.

The basic functions of a mutex are Acquire and Release. Each thread that needs exclusive access to a
resource (such as a shared variable) acquires the mutex. Only one thread can acquire the mutex. After one
thread acquires it, all other threads that invoke Acquire block in a wait state (the function Acquire does
not return). When the thread that owns the mutex calls the Release function, the thread scheduler
chooses one of the threads that is in a wait state on the same mutex and gives that thread the ownership of
the mutex.

The observable effect is that mutexes are access serialization devices: The portion of code between a call
to mtx.Acquire() and a call to mtx.Release() is atomic with respect to the mtx object. Any other
attempt to acquire the mtx object must wait until the atomic operation finishes.

It follows that you should allocate one mutex object for each resource you want to share between threads.
The resources you might want to share include, notably, C++ objects. Every nonatomic operation with
these resources must start with acquiring the mutex and end with releasing the mutex. The nonatomic
operations that you might want to perform include, notably, non-const member functions of thread-safe
objects.

For instance, imagine you have a BankAccount class that provides functions such as Deposit and
Withdraw. These operations do more than add to and subtract from a double member variable; they also
log additional information regarding the transaction. If BankAccount is to be accessed from multiple
threads, the two operations must certainly be atomic. Here's how you can do this:

class BankAccount
{
public:
   void Deposit(double amount, const char* user)
   {
       mtx_.Acquire();
       ... perform deposit transaction ...
       mtx_.Release();
   }
   void Withdraw(double amount, const char* user)
   {
       mtx_.Acquire();
       ... perform withdrawal transaction ...
       mtx_.Release();
   }
   ...
private:
   Mutex mtx_;
   ...
};

As you probably have figured out (if you didn't know already), failing to call Release for each Acquire
you issue has deadly effects. You lock the mutex and leave it locked— all other threads trying to acquire it
block forever. In the previous code, you must implement Deposit and Withdraw very carefully with
regard to exceptions and premature returns.

To mitigate this problem, many C++ threading APIs define a Lock object that you can initialize with a
mutex. The Lock object's constructor calls Acquire, and its destructor calls Release. This way, if you
allocate a Lock object on the stack, you can count on correct pairing of Acquire and Release, even in
the presence of exceptions.

For portability reasons, Loki does not define mutexes on its own. It's likely you already use a
multithreading library that defines its own mutexes. It would be awkward to duplicate their functionality.
Instead, Loki relies on higher-level locking semantics that are implemented in terms of mutexes.

A.5 Locking Semantics in Object-Oriented Programming
Synchronization objects are associated with shared resources. In an object-oriented program, resources are
objects. Therefore, in an object-oriented program, synchronization objects are associated with application
objects.

It follows that each shared object should aggregate a synchronization object and lock it appropriately in
every mutating member function, much as the BankAccount example does. This is a correct way to
structure an object supporting multithreading. The structure fostering one synchronization object per object
is known as object-level locking.

However, sometimes the size and the overhead of storing one mutex per object are too big. In this case, a
synchronization strategy that keeps only one mutex per class can help.

Consider, for example, a String class. From time to time, you might need to perform a locking operation
on a String object. However, you don't want each String to carry a mutex object; that would make
Strings big and their copying costly. In this case, you can use a static mutex object for all Strings.
                                            Y
Whenever a String object performs a locking operation, that operation will block all locking operations
for all String objects. This strategy fosters class-level locking.
                                          FL

Loki defines two implementations of the ThreadingModel policy: ClassLevelLockable and
                                        AM

ObjectLevelLockable. They encapsulate class-level locking and object-level locking semantics,
respectively. The synopsis is presented here.
                                TE

template <typename Host>
class ClassLevelLockable
{
public:
   class Lock
   {
   public:
       Lock();
       Lock(Host& obj);
       ...
   };
   ...
};

template <typename Host>
class ObjectLevelLockable
{
public:
   class Lock
   {
   public:
       Lock(Host& obj);
       ...
   };
   ...
};

                                                   267 ®
                                                Team-Fly
Technically, Lock keeps a mutex locked. The difference between the two implementations is that you
cannot construct an ObjectLevelLockable<T>::Lock without passing a T object to it. The reason is
that ObjectLevelLockable uses per-object locking.

The Lock nested class locks the object (or the entire class, in the case of ClassLevelLockable) for the
lifetime of a Lock object.

In an application, you inherit one of the implementations of ThreadingModel. Then you use the inner class
Lock directly. For example,

class MyClass : public ClassLevelLockable <MyClass>
{
   ...
};
                  Table A.1. Implementations of ThreadingModel
Class Template      Semantics
SingleThreaded      No threading strategy at all. The Lock and ReadLock classes are
                    empty mock-ups.
ObjectLevelLockable Object-level locking semantics. One mutex per object is stored. The
                    Lock inner class locks the mutex (and implicitly the object).
ClassLevelLockable Class-level locking semantics. One mutex per class is stored. The Lock
                    inner class locks the mutex (and implicitly all objects of a type).

The exact locking strategy depends on the ThreadingModel implementation you choose to derive from.
Table A.1 summarizes the available implementations.

You can define synchronized member functions very easily, as outlined in the following example:

class BankAccount : public ObjectLevelLockable<BankAccount>
{
public:
   void Deposit(double amount, const char* user)
   {
       Lock lock(*this);
       ... perform deposit transaction ...
   }
   void Withdraw(double amount, const char* user)
   {
       Lock lock(*this);
       ... perform withdrawal transaction ...
   }
   ...
};

You no longer have any problem with premature returns and exceptions; the correct pairing of lock/unlock
operations on the mutex is guaranteed by language invariants.

The uniform interface supported by the dummy interface SingleThreaded gives syntactic consistency.
You can write your code assuming a multithreading environment, and then easily change design decisions
by modifying the threading model.

The ThreadingModel policy is used in Chapter 4 (Small-Object Allocation), Chapter 5 (Generalized
Functors), and Chapter 6 (Implementing Singletons).

A.6 Optional volatile Modifier
C++ provides the volatile type modifier, with which you should qualify each variable that you share
with multiple threads. However, in a single-threaded model, it's best not to use volatile because it
prevents the compiler from performing some important optimizations.

That's why Loki defines the inner class VolatileType. Inside SomeThreadingModel<Widget>,
VolatileType evaluates to volatile Widget for ClassLevelLockable and
ObjectLevelLockable, and to plain Widget for SingleThreaded. You can see VolatileType at
work in Chapter 6.

A.7 Semaphores, Events, and Other Good Things
Loki's support for multithreading stops here. General multithreading libraries provide a richer set of
synchronization objects and functions such as semaphores, events, and memory barriers. Also, the function
that starts a new thread is conspicuously absent from Loki—witness to the fact that Loki aims to be thread
safe but not to use threads itself.

It is possible that a future version of Loki will provide a complete threading model. Multithreading is a
domain that can greatly benefit from generic programming techniques. However, competition is heavy
here—check out ACE (Adaptive Communication Environment) for a great, very portable multithreading
library (Schmidt 2000).

A.8 Summary
Threads are absent from standard C++. However, synchronization issues in multithreaded programs
pervade application and library design. The trouble is, the threading models supported by various operating
systems are very different. Therefore, Loki defines a high-level synchronization mechanism having a
minimal interaction with a threading model provided from the outside.

The ThreadingModel policy and the three class templates that implement ThreadingModel define a
platform for building generic components that support different threading models. At compile time, you
can select support for object-level locking, class-level locking, or no locking at all.

The object-level locking strategy allocates one synchronization object per application object. The class-
level locking strategy allocates one synchronization object per class. The former strategy is faster; the
second uses a smaller amount of resources.

All implementations of ThreadingModel support a unique syntactic interface. This makes it easy for the
library and for client code to use a uniform syntax. You can adjust locking support for a class without
incurring changes to its implementation. For the same purpose, Loki defines a do-nothing implementation
that supports a single-threaded model.

