       Preface to the Second Edition

       Welcome to the second edition of TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 1. This book aims
       to provide a detailed, current look at the TCP/IP protocol suite. Instead of just
       describing how the protocols operate, we show the protocols in operation using
       a variety of analysis tools. This helps you better understand the design decisions
       behind the protocols and how they interact with each other, and it simultaneously
       exposes you to implementation details without your having to read through the
       implementation’s software source code or set up an experimental laboratory. Of
       course, reading source code or setting up a laboratory will only help to increase
       your understanding.
           Networking has changed dramatically in the past three decades. Originally a
       research project and object of curiosity, the Internet has become a global commu-
       nication fabric upon which governments, businesses, and individuals depend. The
       TCP/IP suite defines the underlying methods used to exchange information by
       every device on the Internet. After more than a decade of delay, the Internet and
       TCP/IP itself are now undergoing an evolution, to incorporate IPv6. Throughout
       the text we will discuss both IPv6 and the current IPv4 together, but we high-
       light the differences where they are important. Unfortunately, they do not directly
       interoperate, so some care and attention are required to appreciate the impact of
       the evolution.
           The book is intended for anyone wishing to better understand the current set
       of TCP/IP protocols and how they operate: network operators and administrators,
       network software developers, students, and users who deal with TCP/IP. We have
       included material that should be of interest to both new readers as well as those
       familiar with the material from the first edition. We hope you will find the cover-
       age of the new and older material useful and interesting.

Comments on the First Edition
       Nearly two decades have passed since the publication of the first edition of TCP/IP
       Illustrated, Volume 1. It continues to be a valuable resource for both students and
       professionals in understanding the TCP/IP protocols at a level of detail difficult to

                                                                                      xxvii
xxviii   Preface to the Second Edition

         obtain in competing texts. Today it remains among the best references for detailed
         information regarding the operation of the TCP/IP protocols. However, even the
         best books concerned with information and communications technology become
         dated after a time, and the TCP/IP Illustrated series is no exception. In this edition,
         I hope to thoroughly update the pioneering work of Dr. Stevens with coverage of
         new material while maintaining the exceptionally high standard of presentation
         and detail common to his numerous books.
              The first edition covers a broad set of protocols and their operation, ranging
         from the link layer all the way to applications and net work management. Today,
         covering this breadth of material comprehensively in a single volume would
         produce a very lengthy text indeed. For this reason, the second edition focuses
         specifically on the core protocols: those relatively low-level protocols used most
         frequently in providing the basic services of configuration, naming, data delivery,
         and security for the Internet. Detailed discussions of applications, routing, Web
         services, and other important topics are postponed to subsequent volumes.
              Considerable progress has been made in improving the robustness and com-
         pliance of TCP/IP implementations to their corresponding specifications since the
         publication of the first edition. While many of the examples in the first edition
         highlight implementation bugs or noncompliant behaviors, these problems have
         largely been addressed in currently available systems, at least for IPv4. This fact
         is not terribly surprising, given the greatly expanded use of the TCP/IP protocols
         in the last 18 years. Misbehaving implementations are a comparative rarity, which
         attests to a certain maturity of the protocol suite as a whole. The problems encoun-
         tered in the operation of the core protocols nowadays often relate to intentional
         exploitation of infrequently used protocol features, a form of security concern that
         was not a primary focus in the first edition but one that we spend considerable
         effort to address in the second edition.

The Internet Milieu of the Twenty-first Century
         The usage patterns and importance of the Internet have changed considerably
         since the publication of the first edition. The most obvious watershed event was
         the creation and subsequent intense commercialization of the World Wide Web
         starting in the early 1990s. This event greatly accelerated the availability of the
         Internet to large numbers of people with various (sometimes conflicting) motiva-
         tions. As such, the protocols and systems originally implemented in a small-scale
         environment of academic cooperation have been stressed by limited availability of
         addresses and an increase of security concerns.
              In response to the security threats, network and security administrators have
         introduced special control elements into the network. It is now common practice to
         place a firewall at the point of attachment to the Internet, for both large enterprises
         as well as small businesses and homes. As the demand for IP addresses and secu-
         rity has increased over the last decade, Network Address Translation (NAT) is now
         supported in virtually all current-generation routers and is in widespread use. It
                                                Preface to the Second Edition   xxix

has eased the pressure on Internet address availability by allowing sites to obtain
a comparatively small number of routable Internet addresses from their service
providers (one for each simultaneously online user), yet assign a very large num-
ber of addresses to local computers without further coordination. A consequence
of NAT deployment has been a slowing of the migration to IPv6 (which provides
for an almost incomprehensibly large number of addresses) and interoperability
problems with some older protocols.
     As the users of personal computers began to demand Internet connectivity
by the mid-1990s, the largest supplier of PC software, Microsoft, abandoned its
original policy of offering only proprietary alternatives to the Internet and instead
undertook an effort to embrace TCP/IP compatibility in most of its products.
Since then, personal computers running their Windows operating system have
come to dominate the mix of PCs presently connected to the Internet. Over time,
a significant rise in the number of Linux-based systems means that such systems
now threaten to displace Microsoft as the frontrunner. Other operating systems,
including Oracle Solaris and Berkeley’s BSD-based systems, which once repre-
sented the majority of Internet-connected systems, are now a comparatively small
component of the mix. Apple’s OS X (Mach-based) operating system has risen as
a new contender and is gaining in popularity, especially among portable com-
puter users. In 2003, portable computer (laptop) sales exceeded desktop sales as
the majority of personal computer types sold, and their proliferation has sparked
a demand for widely deployed, high-speed Internet access supported by wire-
less infrastructure. It is projected that the most common method for accessing the
Internet from 2012 and beyond will be smartphones. Tablet computers also repre-
sent an important growing contender.
     Wireless networks are now available at a large number of locations such as
restaurants, airports, coffeehouses, and other public places. They typically pro-
vide short-range free or pay-for-use (flat-rate) high-speed wireless Internet con-
nections using hardware compatible with commonly used office or home local
area network installations. A set of alternative “wireless broadband” technolo-
gies based on cellular telephone standards (e.g., LTE, HSPA, UMTS, EV-DO) are
becoming widely available in developed regions of the world (and some develop-
ing regions of the words that are “leapfrogging” to newer wireless technology),
offering longer-range operation, often at somewhat reduced bandwidths and with
volume-based pricing. Both types of infrastructure address the desire of users to
be mobile while accessing the Internet, using either portable computers or smaller
devices. In either case, mobile end users accessing the Internet over wireless net-
works pose two significant technical challenges to the TCP/IP protocol archi-
tecture. First, mobility affects the Internet’s routing and addressing structure by
breaking the assumption that hosts have addresses assigned to them based upon
the identity of their nearby router. Second, wireless links may experience outages
and therefore cause data to be lost for reasons other than those typical of wired
links (which generally do not lose data unless too much traffic is being injected
into the network).
xxx    Preface to the Second Edition

            Finally, the Internet has fostered the rise of so-called peer-to-peer applica-
       tions forming “overlay” networks. Peer-to-peer applications do not rely on a cen-
       tral server to accomplish a task but instead determine a set of peer computers with
       which they can communicate and interact to accomplish a task. The peer computers
       are operated by other end users and may come and go rapidly compared to a fixed
       server infrastructure. The “overlay” concept captures the fact that such interact-
       ing peers themselves form a network, overlaid atop the conventional TCP/IP-based
       network (which, one may observe, is itself an overlay above the underlying physi-
       cal links). The development of peer-to-peer applications, while of intense interest
       to those who study traffic flows and electronic commerce, has not had a profound
       impact on the core protocols described in Volume 1 per se, but the concept of overlay
       networks has become an important consideration for networking technology more
       generally.

Content Changes for the Second Edition
       Regarding content in the text, the most important changes from the first edition
       are a restructuring of the scope of the overall text and the addition of significant
       material on security. Instead of attempting to cover nearly all common protocols
       in use at every layer in the Internet, the present text focuses in detail first on the
       non-security core protocols in widespread use, or that are expected to be in wide-
       spread use in the near future: Ethernet (802.3), Wi-Fi (802.11), PPP, ARP, IPv4, IPv6,
       UDP, TCP, DHCP, and DNS. These protocols are likely to be encountered by sys-
       tem administrators and users alike.
           In the second edition, security is covered in two ways. First, in each appropriate
       chapter, a section devoted to describing known attacks and their countermeasures
       relating to the protocol described in the chapter is included. These descriptions
       are not presented as a recipe for constructing attacks but rather as a practical indi-
       cation of the kinds of problems that may arise when protocol implementations (or
       specifications, in some cases) are insufficiently robust. In today’s Internet, incom-
       plete specification or lax implementation practice can lead to mission-critical sys-
       tems being compromised by even relatively unsophisticated attacks.
           The second important discussion of security occurs in Chapter 18, where
       security and cryptography are studied in some detail, including protocols such as
       IPsec, TLS, DNSSEC, and DKIM. These protocols are now understood to be impor-
       tant for implementing any service or application expected to maintain integrity
       or secure operation. As the Internet has increased in commercial importance, the
       need for security (and the number of threats to it) has grown proportionally.
           Although IPv6 was not included in the first edition, there is now reason to
       believe that the use of IPv6 may increase significantly with the exhaustion of
       unallocated IPv4 address groups in February 2011. IPv6 was conceived largely
       to address the problems of IPv4 address depletion and, and while not nearly as
       common as IPv4 today, is becoming more important as a growing number of
       small devices (such as cellular telephones, household devices, and environmental
                                                        Preface to the Second Edition    xxxi

       sensors) become attached to the Internet. Events such as the World IPv6 Day (June
       8, 2011) helped to demonstrate that the Internet can continue to work even as the
       underlying protocols are modified and augmented in a significant way.
            A second consideration for the structure of the second edition is a deemphasis
       of the protocols that are no longer commonly used and an update of the descrip-
       tions of those that have been revised substantially since the publication of the
       first edition. The chapters covering RARP, BOOTP, NFS, SMTP, and SNMP have
       been removed from the book, and the discussion of the SLIP protocol has been
       abandoned in favor of expanded coverage of DHCP and PPP (including PPPoE).
       The function of IP forwarding (described in Chapter 9 in the first edition) has
       been integrated with the overall description of the IPv4 and IPv6 protocols in
       Chapter 5 of this edition. The discussion of dynamic routing protocols (RIP, OSPF,
       and BGP) has been removed, as the latter two protocols alone could each conceiv-
       ably merit a book-long discussion. Starting with ICMP, and continuing through IP,
       TCP, and UDP, the impact of operation using IPv4 versus IPv6 is discussed in any
       cases where the difference in operation is significant. There is no specific chapter
       devoted solely to IPv6; instead, its impact relative to each existing core protocol is
       described where appropriate. Chapters 15 and 25–30 of the first edition, which are
       devoted to Internet applications and their supporting protocols, have been largely
       removed; what remains only illustrates the operation of the underlying core pro-
       tocols where necessary.
            Several chapters covering new material have been added. The first chapter
       begins with a general introduction to networking issues and architecture, followed
       by a more Internet-specific orientation. The Internet’s addressing architecture is
       covered in Chapter 2. A new chapter on host configuration and how a system “gets
       on” the network appears as Chapter 6. Chapter 7 describes firewalls and Network
       Address Translation (NAT), including how NATs are used in partitioning address
       space between routable and nonroutable portions. The set of tools used in the first
       edition has been expanded to include Wireshark (a free network traffic monitor
       application with a graphical user interface).
            The target readership for the second edition remains identical to that of the
       first edition. No prior knowledge of networking concepts is required for approach-
       ing it, although the advanced reader should benefit from the level of detail and
       references. A rich collection of references is included in each chapter for the inter-
       ested reader to pursue.

Editorial Changes for the Second Edition
       The general flow of material in the second edition remains similar to that of the
       first edition. After the introductory material (Chapters 1 and 2), the protocols are
       presented in a bottom-up fashion to illustrate how the goal of network communi-
       cation presented in the introduction is realized in the Internet architecture. As in
       the first edition, actual packet traces are used to illustrate the operational details
       of the protocols, where appropriate. Since the publication of the first edition, freely
xxxii   Preface to the Second Edition

        available packet capture and analysis tools with graphical interfaces have become
        available, extending the capabilities of the tcpdump program used in the first
        edition. In the present text, tcpdump is used when the points to be illustrated
        are easily conveyed by examining the output of a text-based packet capture tool.
        In most other cases, however, screen shots of the Wireshark tool are used. Please
        be aware that some output listings, including snapshots of tcpdump output, are
        wrapped or simplified for clarity.
             The packet traces shown typically illustrate the behavior of one or more parts
        of the network depicted on the inside of the front book cover. It represents a broad-
        band-connected “home” environment (typically used for client access or peer-to-
        peer net working), a “public” environment (e.g., coffee shop), and an enterprise
        environment. The operating systems used for examples include Linux, Windows,
        FreeBSD, and Mac OS X. Various versions are used, as many different OS versions
        are in use on the Internet today.
             The structure of each chapter has been slightly modified from the first edi-
        tion. Each chapter begins with an introduction to the chapter topic, followed in
        some cases by historical notes, the details of the chapter, a summary, and a set of
        references. A section near the end of most chapters describes security concerns
        and attacks. The per-chapter references represent a change for the second edition.
        They should make each chapter more self-contained and require the reader to
        perform fewer “long-distance page jumps” to find a reference. Some of the refer-
        ences are now enhanced with WWW URLs for easier access online. In addition,
        the reference format for papers and books has been changed to a somewhat more
        compact form that includes the first initial of each author’s last name followed by
        the last two digits of the year (e.g., the former [Cerf and Kahn 1974] is now short-
        ened to [CK74]). For the numerous RFC references used, the RFC number is used
        instead of the author names. This follows typical RFC conventions and has the
        side benefit of grouping all the RFC references together in the reference lists.
             On a final note, the typographical conventions of the TCP/IP Illustrated series
        have been maintained faithfully. However, the present author elected to use an
        editor and typesetting package other than the Troff system used by Dr. Stevens
        and some other authors of the Addison-Wesley Professional Computing Series col-
        lection. Thus, the particular task of final copyediting could take advantage of the
        significant expertise of Barbara Wood, the copy editor generously made available
        to me by the publisher. We hope you will be pleased with the results.

        Berkeley, California                                                   Kevin R. Fall
        September 2011
       Adapted Preface
       to the First Edition

Introduction
       This book describes the TCP/IP protocol suite, but from a different perspective
       than other texts on TCP/IP. Instead of just describing the protocols and what they
       do, we’ll use a popular diagnostic tool to watch the protocols in action. Seeing how
       the protocols operate in varying circumstances provides a greater understanding
       of how they work and why certain design decisions were made. It also provides
       a look into the implementation of the protocols, without having to wade through
       thousands of lines of source code.
            When networking protocols were being developed in the 1960s through
       the 1980s, expensive, dedicated hardware was required to see the packets going
       “across the wire.” Extreme familiarity with the protocols was also required to
       comprehend the packets displayed by the hardware. Functionality of the hard-
       ware analyzers was limited to that built in by the hardware designers.
            Today this has changed dramatically with the ability of the ubiquitous work-
       station to monitor a local area network [Mogul 1990]. Just attach a workstation to
       your network, run some publicly available software, and watch what goes by on
       the wire. While many people consider this a tool to be used for diagnosing network
       problems, it is also a powerful tool for understanding how the network protocols
       operate, which is the goal of this book.
            This book is intended for anyone wishing to understand how the TCP/IP pro-
       tocols operate: programmers writing network applications, system administrators
       responsible for maintaining computer systems and networks utilizing TCP/IP,
       and users who deal with TCP/IP applications on a daily basis.

                                                                                     xxxiii
xxxiv   Adapted Preface to the First Edition

Typographical Conventions
        When we display interactive input and output we’ll show our typed input in a
        bold font, and the computer output like this. Comments are added in italics.

        bsdi % telnet svr4 discard                           connect to the discard server
        Trying 140.252.13.34...                              this line and next output by Telnet client
        Connected to svr4.

        Also, we always include the name of the system as part of the shell prompt (bsdi
        in this example) to show on which host the command was run.

            Note
            Throughout the text we’ll use indented, parenthetical notes such as this to
            describe historical points or implementation details.

        We sometimes refer to the complete description of a command on the Unix man-
        ual as in ifconfig(8). This notation, the name of the command followed by a
        number in parentheses, is the normal way of referring to Unix commands. The
        number in parentheses is the section number in the Unix manual of the “manual
        page” for the command, where additional information can be located. Unfortu-
        nately not all Unix systems organize their manuals the same, with regard to the
        section numbers used for various groupings of commands. We’ll use the BSD-
        style section numbers (which is the same for BSD-derived systems such as SunOS
        4.1.3), but your manuals may be organized differently.

Acknowledgments
        Although the author’s name is the only one to appear on the cover, the combined
        effort of many people is required to produce a quality text book. First and fore-
        most is the author’s family, who put up with the long and weird hours that go into
        writing a book. Thank you once again, Sally, Bill, Ellen, and David.
             The consulting editor, Brian Kernighan, is undoubtedly the best in the busi-
        ness. He was the first one to read various drafts of the manuscript and mark it up
        with his infinite supply of red pens. His attention to detail, his continual prodding
        for readable prose, and his thorough reviews of the manuscript are an immense
        resource to a writer.
             Technical reviewers provide a different point of view and keep the author
        honest by catching technical mistakes. Their comments, suggestions, and (most
        importantly) criticisms add greatly to the final product. My thanks to Steve Bel-
        lovin, Jon Crowcroft, Pete Haverlock, and Doug Schmidt for comments on the
        entire manuscript. Equally valuable comments were provided on portions of the
        manuscript by Dave Borman for his thorough review of all the TCP chapters, and
        to Bob Gilligan who should be listed as a coauthor for Appendix E.
                                          Adapted Preface to the First Edition   xxxv

    An author cannot work in isolation, so I would like to thank the following per-
sons for lots of small favors, especially by answering my numerous e-mail ques-
tions: Joe Godsil, Jim Hogue, Mike Karels, Paul Lucchina, Craig Partridge, Thomas
Skibo, and Jerry Toporek.
    This book is the result of my being asked lots of questions on TCP/IP for which
I could find no quick, immediate answer. It was then that I realized that the easi-
est way to obtain the answers was to run small tests, forcing certain conditions to
occur, and just watch what happens. I thank Peter Haverlock for asking the prob-
ing questions and Van Jacobson for providing so much of the publicly available
software that is used in this book to answer the questions.
    A book on networking needs a real network to work with along with access
to the Internet. My thanks to the National Optical Astronomy Observatories
(NOAO), especially Sidney Wolff, Richard Wolff, and Steve Grandi, for providing
access to their networks and hosts. A special thanks to Steve Grandi for answer-
ing lots of questions and providing accounts on various hosts. My thanks also to
Keith Bostic and Kirk McKusick at the U.C. Berkeley CSRG for access to the latest
4.4BSD system.
    Finally, it is the publisher that pulls everything together and does whatever is
required to deliver the final product to the readers. This all revolves around the
editor, and John Wait is simply the best there is. Working with John and the rest
of the professionals at Addison-Wesley is a pleasure. Their professionalism and
attention to detail show in the end result.
    Camera-ready copy of the book was produced by the author, a Troff die-hard,
using the Groff package written by James Clark.

Tucson, Arizona                                                  W. Richard Stevens
October 1993
This page intentionally left blank
