      4

      ARP: Address Resolution
      Protocol

4.1   Introduction
      We have seen that the IP protocol is designed to provide interoperability of packet
      switching across a large variety of physical network types. Doing so requires,
      among other things, converting between the addresses used by the network-layer
      software and those interpreted by the underlying network hardware. Generally,
      network interface hardware has one primary hardware address (e.g., a 48-bit value
      for an Ethernet or 802.11 wireless interface). Frames exchanged by the hardware
      must be addressed to the correct interface using the correct hardware addresses;
      otherwise, no data can be transferred. But a conventional IPv4 network works
      with its own addresses: 32-bit IPv4 addresses. Knowing a host’s IP address is
      insufficient for the system to send a frame to that host efficiently on networks
      where hardware addresses are used. The operating system software (i.e., the Eth-
      ernet driver) must know the destination’s hardware address to send data directly.
      For TCP/IP networks, the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) [RFC0826] provides a
      dynamic mapping between IPv4 addresses and the hardware addresses used by
      various network technologies. ARP is used with IPv4 only; IPv6 uses the Neigh-
      bor Discovery Protocol, which is incorporated into ICMPv6 (see Chapter 8).
          It is important to note here that the network-layer and link-layer addresses
      are assigned by different authorities. For network hardware, the primary address
      is defined by the manufacturer of the device and is stored in permanent mem-
      ory within the device, so it does not change. Thus, any protocol suite designed to
      operate with that particular hardware technology must make use of its particular
      types of addresses. This allows network-layer protocols of different protocol suites
      to operate at the same time. On the other hand, the IP address assigned to a network
      interface is installed by the user or network administrator and selected by that
      person to meet his or her needs. The IP addresses assigned to a portable device

      may, for example, be changed when it is moved. IP addresses are typically derived
      from a pool of addresses maintained near the network attachment point and are
      installed when systems are turned on or configured (see Chapter 6). When an Eth-
      ernet frame containing an IP datagram is sent from one host on a LAN to another,
      it is the 48-bit Ethernet address that determines to which interface(s) the frame is
      destined.
            Address resolution is the process of discovering the mapping from one address
      to another. For the TCP/IP protocol suite using IPv4, this is accomplished by run-
      ning the ARP. ARP is a generic protocol, in the sense that it is designed to sup-
      port mapping between a wide variety of address types. In practice, however, it
      is almost always used to map between 32-bit IPv4 addresses and Ethernet-style
      48-bit MAC addresses. This case, the one specified in [RFC0826], is also the one of
      interest to us. For this chapter, we shall use the terms Ethernet address and MAC
      address interchangeably.
            ARP provides a dynamic mapping from a network-layer address to a corre-
      sponding hardware address. We use the term dynamic because it happens auto-
      matically and adapts to changes over time without requiring reconfiguration
      by a system administrator. That is, if a host were to have its network interface
      card changed, thereby changing its hardware address (but retaining its assigned
      IP address), ARP would continue to operate properly after some delay. ARP
      operation is normally not a concern of either the application user or the system
      administrator.

          Note
          A related protocol that provides the reverse mapping from ARP, called RARP, was
          used by systems lacking a disk drive (normally diskless workstations or X termi-
          nals). It is rarely used today and requires manual configuration by the system
          administrator. See [RFC0903] for details.

4.2   An Example
      Whenever we use Internet services, such as opening a Web page with a browser,
      our local computer must determine how to contact the server in which we are
      interested. The most basic decision it makes is whether that service is local (part
      of the same IP subnetwork) or remote. If it is remote, a router is required to reach
      the destination. ARP operates only when reaching those systems on the same IP
      subnet. For this example, then, let us assume that we use a Web browser to contact
      the following URL:

      http://10.0.0.1

         Note that this URL contains an IPv4 address rather than the more common
      domain or host name. The reason for using the address here is to underscore the
                                                              Section 4.2 An Example      167

        fact that our demonstration of ARP is most relevant to systems sharing the same
        IPv4 prefix (see Chapter 2). Here, we use a URL containing an address identifying
        a local Web server and explore how direct delivery operates. Such local servers are
        becoming more common as embedded devices such as printers and VoIP adapters
        include built-in Web servers for configuration.

4.2.1   Direct Delivery and ARP
        In this section, we enumerate the steps taken in direct delivery, focusing on the
        operation of ARP. Direct delivery takes place when an IP datagram is sent to an
        IP address with the same IP prefix as the sender’s. It plays an important role in
        the general method of forwarding of IP datagrams (see Chapter 5). The following
        list captures the basic operation of direct delivery with IPv4, using the previous
        example:

            1. The application, in this case a Web browser, calls a special function to parse
               the URL to see if it contains a host name. Here it does not, so the application
               uses the 32-bit IPv4 address 10.0.0.1.
            2. The application asks the TCP protocol to establish a connection with 10.0.0.1.
            3. TCP attempts to send a connection request segment to the remote host by
               sending an IPv4 datagram to 10.0.0.1. (We shall see the details of how this is
               done in Chapter 15.)
            4. Because we are assuming that the address 10.0.0.1 is using the same net-
               work prefix as our sending host, the datagram can be sent directly to that
               address without going through a router.
            5. Assuming that Ethernet-compatible addressing is being used on the IPv4
               subnet, the sending host must convert the 32-bit IPv4 destination address
               into a 48-bit Ethernet-style address. Using the terminology from [RFC0826],
               a translation is required from the logical Internet address to its correspond-
               ing physical hardware address. This is the function of ARP. ARP works in
               its normal form only for broadcast networks, where the link layer is able to
               deliver a single message to all attached network devices. This is an impor-
               tant requirement imposed by the operation of ARP. On non-broadcast net-
               works (sometimes called NBMA for non-broadcast multiple access), other,
               more complex mapping protocols may be required [RFC2332].
            6. ARP sends an Ethernet frame called an ARP request to every host on the
               shared link-layer segment. This is called a link-layer broadcast. We show the
               broadcast domain in Figure 4-1 with a crosshatched box. The ARP request
               contains the IPv4 address of the destination host (10.0.0.1) and seeks an
               answer to the following question: “If you are configured with IPv4 address
               10.0.0.1 as one of your own, please respond to me with your MAC address.”

                            %URZVHU                               6HUYHU

                              7&3                                  7&3

                                          4XHULHU                               ????????
                                                                               WDUJHW?KRVW
                              ,3Y?                                 ,3Y?

                                                  $53                              $53

                            (WKHUQHW                             (WKHUQHW
                             'ULYHU                               'ULYHU

               (WKHUQHW
               6HJPHQW                                                           %URDGFDVW?'RPDLQ

                                       (WKHUQHW                     (WKHUQHW
                                        'ULYHU                       'ULYHU

                                                        $53
                                                                            1RQ?,3
                                        ,3Y?                                 +RVW
                                                        :URQJ
                                                        +RVW

Figure 4-1   Ethernet hosts in the same broadcast domain. ARP queries are sent using link-layer
                   broadcast frames that are received by all hosts. The single host with the assigned
                   address responds directly to the requesting host. Non-IP hosts must actively discard
                   ARP queries.

           7. With ARP, all systems in the same broadcast domain receive ARP requests.
              This includes systems that may not be running the IPv4 or IPv6 protocols at
              all but does not include systems on different VLANs, if they are supported
              (see Chapter 3 for details on VLANs). Provided there exists an attached sys-
              tem using the IPv4 address specified in the request, it alone responds with
              an ARP reply. This reply contains the IPv4 address (for matching with the
              request) and the corresponding MAC address. The reply does not ordinar-
              ily use broadcast but is directed only to the sender. The host receiving the
              ARP request also learns of the sender’s IPv4-to-MAC address mapping at
              this time and records it in memory for later use (see Section 4.3).
          8. The ARP reply is then received by the original sender of the request, and
             the datagram that forced the ARP request/reply to be exchanged can now
             be sent.
                                                          Section 4.3 ARP Cache     169

          9. The sender now sends the datagram directly to the destination host by
             encapsulating it in an Ethernet frame and using the Ethernet address
             learned by the ARP exchange as the destination Ethernet address. Because
             the Ethernet address refers only to the correct destination host, no other
             hosts or routers receive the datagram. Thus, when only direct delivery is
             used, no router is required.

          ARP is used in multi-access link-layer networks running IPv4, where each
      host has its own primary hardware address. Point-to-point links such as PPP (see
      Chapter 3) do not use ARP. When these links are established (normally by action
      of the user or a system boot), the system is told of the addresses in use at each
      end of the link. Because hardware addresses are not involved, there is no need for
      address resolution or ARP.

4.3   ARP Cache
      Essential to the efficient operation of ARP is the maintenance of an ARP cache
      (or table) on each host and router. This cache maintains the recent mappings
      from network-layer addresses to hardware addresses for each interface that uses
      address resolution. When IPv4 addresses are mapped to hardware addresses, the
      normal expiration time of an entry in the cache is 20 minutes from the time the
      entry was created, as described in [RFC1122].
          We can examine the ARP cache with the arp command on Linux or in Win-
      dows. The -a option displays all entries in the cache for either system. Running
      arp on Linux yields the following type of output:

      Linux% arp
      Address              HWtype   HWaddress             Flags Mask Iface
      gw.home              ether    00:0D:66:4F:60:00     C          eth1
      printer.home         ether    00:0A:95:87:38:6A     C          eth1

      Linux% arp -a
      printer.home (10.0.0.4) at     00:0A:95:87:38:6A [ether] on eth1
      gw.home (10.0.0.1) at 00:0D:66:4F:60:00 [ether] on eth1

      Running arp on Windows provides output similar to the following:

      c:\> arp -a

      Interface: 10.0.0.56 --- 0x2
        Internet Address      Physical Address          Type
        10.0.0.1            00-0d-66-4f-60-00         dynamic
        10.0.0.4            00-0a-95-87-38-6a         dynamic

          Here we see the IPv4-to-hardware addressing cache. In the first (Linux) case,
      each mapping is given by a five-element entry: the host name (corresponding to

            an IP address), hardware address type, hardware address, flags, and local net-
            work interface for which this mapping is active. The Flags column contains a
            symbol: C, M, or P. C-type entries have been learned dynamically by the ARP pro-
            tocol. M-type entries are entered by hand (by arp -s; see Section 4.9), and P-type
            entries mean “publish.” That is, for any P entry, the host responds to incoming
            ARP requests with an ARP response. This option is used for configuring proxy
            ARP (see Section 4.7). The second Linux example displays similar information
            using the “BSD style.” Here, both the host’s name and address are given, along
            with the address type (here, [ether] indicates an Ethernet type of address) and
            on which interface the mappings are active.
                 The Windows arp program displays the IPv4 address of the interface, and its
            interface number in hexadecimal (0x2 here). The Windows version also indicates
            whether the address was entered by hand or learned by ARP. In this example, both
            entries are dynamic, meaning they were learned by ARP (they would say static
            if entered by hand). Note that the 48-bit MAC addresses are displayed as six hexa-
            decimal numbers separated by colons in Linux and dashes in Windows. Tradi-
            tionally, UNIX systems have always used colons, whereas the IEEE standards and
            other operating systems tend to use dashes. We discuss additional features and
            other options of the arp command in Section 4.9.

4.4         ARP Frame Format
            Figure 4-2 shows the common format of an ARP request and reply packet, when
            used on an Ethernet network to resolve an IPv4 address. (As mentioned previ-
            ously, ARP is general enough to be used with addresses other than IPv4 addresses,
            although this is very rare.) The first 14 bytes constitute the standard Ethernet
            header, assuming no 802.1p/q or other tags, and the remaining portion is defined
            by the ARP protocol. The first 8 bytes of the ARP frame are generic, and the remain-
            ing portion in this example applies specifically when mapping IPv4 addresses to
            48-bit Ethernet-style addresses.

                                                                          )UDPH
                                                                      $53?5HTXHVW?RU?5HSO\?0HVVDJH
                                                                     6HQGHU¶V  6HQGHU¶V      7DUJHW                  7DUJHW
                                                    +DUG?6L]H
                                                    3URW?6L]H
                              RU?7\SH
                              /HQJWK

                                        +DUG 3URW                    +DUGZDUH  3URWRFRO    +DUGZDUH                 3URWRFRO         3DG
      '67         65&                                           2S                                                               QRW?WR?VFDOH
                                                                                                                                                )&6
                                        7\SH 7\SH                    $GGUHVV   $GGUHVV      $GGUHVV                 $GGUHVV
                                                                     H?J???(WKHUQHW   H?J???,3Y?   H?J???(WKHUQHW   H?J???,3Y?
                                                                                                                                                  

      0$&? (WKHUQHW ?+HDGHU                  )L[HG?6L]H                                  9DULDEOH?6L]H
               E\WHV                           ??E\WHV                          GHSHQGV?RQ?SURWRFROV?????E\WHV?IRU?
                                                                                        (WKHUQHW?,3Y?

Figure 4-2    ARP frame format as used when mapping IPv4 addresses to 48-bit MAC (Ethernet) addresses
                                                            Section 4.5 ARP Examples        171

             In the Ethernet header of the ARP frame shown in Figure 4-2, the first two
        fields contain the destination and source Ethernet addresses. For ARP requests, the
        special Ethernet destination address of ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff (all 1 bits) means the broad-
        cast address—all Ethernet interfaces in the same broadcast domain receive these
        frames. The 2-byte Ethernet frame Length or Type field is required to be 0x0806 for
        ARP (requests or replies).
             The first four fields following the Length/Type field specify the types and sizes
        of the final four fields. The values are maintained by the IANA [RFC5494]. The
        adjectives hardware and protocol are used to describe the fields in the ARP packets.
        For example, an ARP request asks for the hardware address (an Ethernet address
        in this case) corresponding to a protocol address (an IPv4 address in this case).
        These adjectives are rarely used outside the ARP context. Rather, the more com-
        mon terminology for the hardware address is MAC, physical, or link-layer address
        (or Ethernet address when the network in use is based on the IEEE 802.3/Ether-
        net series of specifications). The Hard Type field specifies the type of hardware
        address. Its value is 1 for Ethernet. The Prot Type field specifies the type of protocol
        address being mapped. Its value is 0x0800 for IPv4 addresses. This is purposely
        the same value as the Type field of an Ethernet frame containing an IPv4 datagram.
        The next two 1-byte fields, Hard Size and Prot Size, specify the sizes, in bytes, of the
        hardware addresses and the protocol addresses. For an ARP request or reply for
        an IPv4 address on an Ethernet they are 6 and 4, respectively. The Op field speci-
        fies whether the operation is an ARP request (a value of 1), ARP reply (2), RARP
        request (3), or RARP reply (4). This field is required because the Length/Type field
        is the same for an ARP request and an ARP reply.
             The next four fields that follow are the Sender’s Hardware Address (an Ethernet
        MAC address in this example), the Sender’s Protocol Address (an IPv4 address), the
        Target Hardware (MAC/Ethernet) Address, and the Target Protocol (IPv4) Address.
        Notice that there is some duplication of information: the sender’s hardware
        address is available both in the Ethernet header and in the ARP message. For an
        ARP request, all the fields are filled in except the Target Hardware Address (which is
        set to 0). When a system receives an ARP request directed to it, it fills in its hard-
        ware address, swaps the two sender addresses with the two target addresses, sets
        the Op field to 2, and sends the reply.

4.5     ARP Examples
        In this section we will use the tcpdump command to see what really happens
        with ARP when we execute normal TCP/IP utilities such as Telnet. Telnet is a
        simple application that can establish a TCP/IP connection between two systems.

4.5.1   Normal Example
        To see the operation of ARP, we will execute the telnet command, connecting to
        a Web server on host 10.0.0.3 using TCP port 80 (called www).

      C:\> arp -a                        Verify that the ARP cache is empty
      No ARP Entries Found
      C:\> telnet 10.0.0.3 www           Connect to the Web server [port 80]
      Connecting to 10.0.0.3...
      Escape character is ’^]’.

      Type Control + right bracket to get the Telnet client prompt.

      Welcome to Microsoft Telnet Client
      Escape Character is 'CTRL+]'
      Microsoft Telnet> quit

      The quit directive exits the program.
          While this is happening, we run the tcpdump command on another system
      that can observe the traffic exchanged. We use the -e option, which displays the
      MAC addresses (which in our examples are 48-bit Ethernet addresses).
          The following listing contains the output from tcpdump. We have deleted
      the final four lines of the output that correspond to the termination of the connec-
      tion (we cover such details in Chapter 13); they are not relevant to the discussion
      here. Note that different versions of tcpdump on different systems may provide
      slightly different output details.

       Linux#   tcpdump -e
       1        0.0 0:0:c0:6f:2d:40 ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff arp 60:
                arp who-has 10.0.0.3 tell 10.0.0.56
       2        0.002174 (0.0022)0:0:c0:c2:9b:26 0:0:c0:6f:2d:40 arp 60:
                arp reply 10.0.0.3 is-at 0:0:c0:c2:9b:26

       3        0.002831 (0.0007)0:0:c0:6f:2d:40 0:0:c0:c2:9b:26 ip 60:
                10.0.0.56.1030 > 10.0.0.3.www: S 596459521:596459521(0)
                win 4096 <mss 1024> [tos 0x10]
       4        0.007834 (0.0050)0:0:c0:c2:9b:26 0:0:c0:6f:2d:40 ip 60:
                10.0.0.3.www > 10.0.0.56.1030: S 3562228225:3562228225(0)
                ack 596459522 win 4096 <mss 1024>
       5        0.009615 (0.0018)0:0:c0:6f:2d:40 0:0:c0:c2:9b:26 ip 60:
                10.0.0.56.1030 > 10.0.0.3.discard: . ack 1 win 4096 [tos 0x10]

          In packet 1 the hardware address of the source is 0:0:c0:6f:2d:40. The des-
      tination hardware address is ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff, which is the Ethernet broadcast
      address. All Ethernet interfaces in the same broadcast domain (all those on the
      same LAN or VLAN, whether or not they are running TCP/IP) receive the frame
      and process it, as shown in Figure 4-1. The next output field in packet 1, arp,
      means that the Frame Type field is 0x0806, specifying either an ARP request or an
      ARP reply. The value 60 printed after the words arp and ip in each of the five
      packets is the length of the Ethernet frame. The size of an ARP request or ARP
      reply is always 42 bytes (28 bytes for the ARP message, 14 bytes for the Ethernet
      header). Each frame has been padded to the Ethernet minimum: 60 bytes of data
      plus a 4-byte CRC (see Chapter 3).
                                                           Section 4.5 ARP Examples      173

             The next part of packet 1, arp who-has, identifies the frame as an ARP request
        with the IPv4 address of 10.0.0.3 as the target address and the IPv4 address of
        10.0.0.56 as the sender’s address. tcpdump prints the host names corresponding
        to the IP addresses by default, but here they are not displayed (because no reverse
        DNS mappings for them are set up; Chapter 11 explains details of DNS). We will
        use the -n option later to see the IP addresses in the ARP request, whether or not
        DNS mappings are available.
             From packet 2 we see that while the ARP request is broadcast, the destination
        address of the ARP reply is the (unicast) MAC address 0:0:c0:6f:2d:40. The
        ARP reply is thus sent directly to the requesting host; it is not ordinarily broad-
        cast (see Section 4.8 for some cases where this rule is altered). tcpdump prints
        the ARP reply for this frame, along with the IPv4 address and hardware address
        of the responder. Line 3 is the first TCP segment requesting that a connection be
        established. Its destination hardware address is the destination host (10.0.0.3).
        We shall cover the details of this segment in Chapter 13.
             For each packet, the number printed after the packet number is the relative
        time (in seconds) when the packet was received by tcpdump. Each packet other
        than the first also contains the time difference (in seconds) from the previous time,
        in parentheses. We can see in the output that the time between sending the ARP
        request and receiving the ARP reply is about 2.2ms. The first TCP segment is sent
        0.7ms after this. The overhead involved in using ARP for dynamic address resolu-
        tion in this example is less than 3ms. Note that if the ARP entry for host 10.0.0.3
        was valid in the ARP cache at 10.0.0.56, the initial ARP exchange would not have
        occurred, and the initial TCP segment could have been sent immediately using the
        destination’s Ethernet address.
             A subtle point about the tcpdump output is that we do not see an ARP request
        from 10.0.0.3 before it sends its first TCP segment to 10.0.0.56 (line 4). While it
        is possible that 10.0.0.3 already has an entry for 10.0.0.56 in its ARP cache, nor-
        mally when a system receives an ARP request addressed to it, in addition to send-
        ing the ARP reply, it also saves the requestor’s hardware address and IPv4 address
        in its own ARP cache. This is an optimization based on the logical assumption that
        if the requestor is about to send it a datagram, the receiver of the datagram will
        probably send a reply.

4.5.2   ARP Request to a Nonexistent Host
        What happens if the host specified in an ARP request is down or nonexistent? To
        see this, we attempt to access a nonexistent local IPv4 address—the prefix corre-
        sponds to that of the local subnet, but there is no host with the specified address.
        We will use the IPv4 address 10.0.0.99 in this example.

        Linux% date ; telnet 10.0.0.99 ; date
        Fri Jan 29 14:46:33 PST 2010
        Trying 10.0.0.99...
        telnet: connect to address 10.0.0.99: No route to host

      Fri Jan 29 14:46:36 PST 2010                   3s after previous date

      Linux% arp -a
      ? (10.0.0.99) at <incomplete> on eth0

          Here is the output from tcpdump:

      Linux# tcpdump –n arp
      1 21:12:07.440845 arp who-has 10.0.0.99 tell 10.0.0.56
      2 21:12:08.436842 arp who-has 10.0.0.99 tell 10.0.0.56
      3 21:12:09.436836 arp who-has 10.0.0.99 tell 10.0.0.56

          This time we did not specify the -e option because we already know that
      the ARP requests are sent using broadcast addressing. The frequency of the ARP
      request is very close to one per second, the maximum suggested by [RFC1122].
      Testing on a Windows system (not illustrated) reveals a different behavior. Rather
      than three requests spaced 1s apart, the spacing varies based on the application
      and the other protocols being used. For ICMP and UDP (see Chapters 8 and 10,
      respectively), a spacing of approximately 5s is used, whereas for TCP 10s is used.
      For TCP, the 10s interval allows two ARP requests to be sent without responses
      before TCP gives up trying to establish a connection.

4.6   ARP Cache Timeout
      A timeout is normally associated with each entry in the ARP cache. (Later we
      shall see that the arp command enables the administrator to place an entry into
      the cache that will never time out.) Most implementations have a timeout of 20
      minutes for a completed entry and 3 minutes for an incomplete entry. (We saw an
      incomplete entry in our previous example where we forced an ARP to a nonexis-
      tent host.) These implementations normally restart the 20-minute timeout for an
      entry each time the entry is used. [RFC1122], the Host Requirements RFC, says
      that this timeout should occur even if the entry is in use, but many implementa-
      tions do not do this—they restart the timeout each time the entry is referenced.
           Note that this is one of our first examples of soft state. Soft state is information
      that is discarded if not refreshed before some timeout is reached. Many Internet
      protocols use soft state because it helps to initiate automatic reconfiguration if net-
      work conditions change. The cost of soft state is that some protocol must refresh the
      state to avoid expiration. “Soft state refreshes” are often incorporated in a protocol
      design to keep the soft state active.

4.7   Proxy ARP
      Proxy ARP [RFC1027] lets a system (generally a specially configured router)
      answer ARP requests for a different host. This fools the sender of the ARP request
                   Section 4.8 Gratuitous ARP and Address Conflict Detection (ACD)     175

      into thinking that the responding system is the destination host, when in fact the
      destination host may be elsewhere (or may not exist). Proxy ARP is not commonly
      used and is generally to be avoided if possible.
          Proxy ARP has also been called promiscuous ARP or the ARP hack. These
      names are from a historical use of proxy ARP: to hide two physical networks from
      each other. In this case both physical networks can use the same IP prefix as long
      as a router in the middle is configured as a proxy ARP agent to respond to ARP
      requests on one network for a host on the other network. This technique can be
      used to “hide” one group of hosts from another. In the past, there were two com-
      mon reasons for doing this: some systems were unable to handle subnetting, and
      some used an older broadcast address (a host ID of all 0 bits, instead of the current
      standard of a host ID with all 1 bits).
          Linux supports a feature called auto-proxy ARP. It can be enabled by writing
      the character 1 into the file /proc/sys/net/ipv4/conf/*/proxy_arp, or by
      using the sysctl command. This supports the ability of using proxy ARP with-
      out having to manually enter ARP entries for every possible IPv4 address that is
      being proxied. Doing so allows a range of addresses, instead of each individual
      address, to be automatically proxied.

4.8   Gratuitous ARP and Address Conflict Detection (ACD)
      Another feature of ARP is called gratuitous ARP. It occurs when a host sends an
      ARP request looking for its own address. This is usually done when the interface
      is configured “up” at bootstrap time. Here is an example trace taken on a Linux
      machine showing our Windows host booting up:

      Linux#         tcpdump -e -n arp
      1              0.0 0:0:c0:6f:2d:40 ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff arp 60:
                         arp who-has 10.0.0.56 tell 10.0.0.56

          (We specified the -n flag for tcpdump to always print numeric dotted-deci-
      mal addresses instead of host names.) In terms of the fields in the ARP request, the
      Sender’s Protocol Address and the Target Protocol Address are identical: 10.0.0.56.
      Also, the Source Address field in the Ethernet header, 0:0:c0:6f:2d:40 as shown
      by tcpdump, equals the sender’s hardware address. Gratuitous ARP achieves two
      goals:

          1. It lets a host determine if another host is already configured with the same
             IPv4 address. The host sending the gratuitous ARP is not expecting a reply
             to its request. If a reply is received, however, the error message “Duplicate
             IP address sent from Ethernet address . . .” is usually displayed. This is a
             warning to the system administrator and user that one of the systems in the
             same broadcast domain (e.g., LAN or VLAN) is misconfigured.

          2. If the host sending the gratuitous ARP has just changed its hardware
             address (perhaps the host was shut down, the interface card was replaced,
             and then the host was rebooted), this frame causes any other host receiving
             the broadcast that has an entry in its cache for the old hardware address
             to update its ARP cache entry accordingly. As mentioned before, if a host
             receives an ARP request from an IPv4 address that is already in the receiv-
             er’s cache, that cache entry is updated with the sender’s hardware address
             from the ARP request. This is done for any ARP request received by the
             host; gratuitous ARP happens to take advantage of this behavior.

           Although gratuitous ARP provides some indication that multiple stations may
      be attempting to use the same IPv4 address, it really provides no mechanism to
      react to the situation (other than by printing a message that is ideally acted upon by
      a system administrator). To deal with this issue, [RFC5227] describes IPv4 Address
      Conflict Detection (ACD). ACD defines ARP probe and ARP announcement pack-
      ets. An ARP probe is an ARP request packet in which the Sender’s Protocol (IPv4)
      Address field is set to 0. Probes are used to see if a candidate IPv4 address is being
      used by any other systems in the broadcast domain. Setting the Sender’s Protocol
      Address field to 0 avoids cache pollution should the candidate IPv4 address already
      be in use by another host, a difference from the way gratuitous ARP works. An
      ARP announcement is identical to an ARP probe, except both the Sender’s Protocol
      Address and the Target Protocol Address fields are filled in with the candidate IPv4
      address. It is used to announce the sender’s intention to use the candidate IPv4
      address as its own.
           To perform ACD, a host sends an ARP probe when an interface is brought up
      or out of sleep, or when a new link is established (e.g., when an association with
      a new wireless network is made). It first waits a random amount of time (in the
      range 0–1s, distributed uniformly) before sending up to three probe packets. The
      delay is used to avoid power-on congestion when multiple systems powered on
      simultaneously would otherwise attempt to perform ACD at once, leading to a
      network traffic spike. The probes are spaced randomly, with between 1 and 2s of
      delay (distributed uniformly) placed between.
           While sending its probes, a requesting station may receive ARP requests or
      replies. A reply to its probe indicates that a different station is already using the
      candidate IP address. A request containing the same candidate IPv4 address in the
      Target Protocol Address field sent from a different system indicates that the other
      system is simultaneously attempting to acquire the candidate IPv4 address. In
      either case, the system should indicate an address conflict message and pursue
      some alternative address. For example, this is the recommended behavior when
      being assigned an address using DHCP (see Chapter 6). [RFC5227] places a limit of
      ten conflicts when trying to acquire an address before the requesting host enters a
      rate-limiting phase when it is permitted to perform ACD only once every 60s until
      successful.
                                                       Section 4.9 The arp Command          177

           If a requesting host does not discover a conflict according to the procedure
      just described, it sends two ARP announcements spaced 2s apart to indicate to sys-
      tems in the broadcast domain the IPv4 address it is now using. In the announce-
      ments, both the Sender’s Protocol Address and the Target Protocol Address fields are
      set to the address being claimed. The purpose of sending these announcements is
      to ensure that any preexisting cached address mappings are updated to reflect the
      sender’s current use of the address.
           ACD is considered to be an ongoing process, and in this way it differs from
      gratuitous ARP. Once a host has announced an address it is using, it continues
      inspecting incoming ARP traffic (requests and replies) to see if its address appears
      in the Sender’s Protocol Address field. If so, some other system believes it is rightfully
      using the same address. In this case, [RFC5227] provides three possible resolution
      mechanisms: cease using the address, keep the address but send a “defensive”
      ARP announcement and cease using it if the conflict continues, or continue to
      use the address despite the conflict. The last option is recommended only for sys-
      tems that truly require a fixed, stable address (e.g., an embedded device such as a
      printer or router).
           [RFC5227] also suggests the potential benefit of having some ARP replies be
      sent using link-layer broadcast. Although this has not traditionally been the way
      ARP works, there can be some benefit in doing so, at the expense of requiring all
      stations on the same segment to process all ARP traffic. Broadcast replies allow
      ACD to occur more quickly because all stations will notice the reply and invali-
      date their caches during a conflict.

4.9   The arp Command
      We have used the arp command with the -a flag on Windows and Linux to dis-
      play all the entries in the ARP cache (on Linux we get similar information without
      using -a). The superuser or administrator can specify the -d option to delete an
      entry from the ARP cache. (This was used before running a few of the examples,
      to force an ARP exchange to be performed.)
           Entries can also be added using the -s option. It requires an IPv4 address (or
      host name that can be converted to an IPv4 address using DNS) and an Ethernet
      address. The IPv4 address and the Ethernet address are added to the cache as an
      entry. This entry is made semipermanent (i.e., it does not time out from the cache,
      but it disappears when the system is rebooted).
           The Linux version of arp provides a few more features than the Windows
      version. When the temp keyword is supplied at the end of the command line
      when adding an entry using -s, the entry is considered to be temporary and times
      out in the same way that other ARP entries do. The keyword pub at the end of a
      command line, also used with the -s option, causes the system to act as an ARP
      responder for that entry. The system answers ARP requests for the IPv4 address,
      replying with the specified Ethernet address. If the advertised address is one of

      the system’s own, the system is acting as a proxy ARP agent (see Section 4.7) for
      the specified IPv4 address. If arp -s is used to enable proxy ARP, Linux responds
      for the address specified even if the file /proc/sys/net/ipv4/conf/*/proxy_
      arp contains 0.

4.10 Using ARP to Set an Embedded Device’s IPv4 Address
      As more embedded devices are made compatible with Ethernet and the TCP/IP
      protocols, it is increasingly common to find network-attached devices that have
      no direct way to enter their network configuration information (e.g., they have no
      keyboard, so entering an IP address for them to use is not possible). These devices
      are typically configured in one of two ways. First, DHCP can be used to automati-
      cally assign an address and other information (see Chapter 6). Another way is to
      use ARP to set an IPv4 address, although this method is less common.
           Using ARP to configure an embedded device’s IPv4 address was not the origi-
      nal intent of the protocol, so it is not entirely automatic. The basic idea is to manu-
      ally establish an ARP mapping for the device (using the arp -s command), then
      send an IP packet to the address. Because the ARP entry is already present, no
      ARP request/reply is generated. Instead, the hardware address can be used imme-
      diately. Of course, the Ethernet (MAC) address of the device must be known. It is
      typically printed on the device itself and sometimes doubles as the manufacturer’s
      device serial number. When the device receives a packet destined for its hardware
      address, whatever destination address is contained in the datagram is used to
      assign its initial IPv4 address. After that, the device can be fully configured using
      other means (e.g., by an embedded Web server).

4.11 Attacks Involving ARP
      There have been a series of attacks involving ARP. The most straightforward is
      to use the proxy ARP facility to masquerade as some host, responding to ARP
      requests for it. If the victim host is not present, this is straightforward and may not
      be detected. It is considerably more difficult if the host is still running, as more
      than one response may be generated per ARP request, which is easily detected.
           A more subtle attack has been launched against ARP that involves cases where
      a machine is attached to more than one network, and ARP entries from one inter-
      face “leak” over into the ARP table of the other, because of a bug in the ARP soft-
      ware. This can be exploited to improperly direct traffic onto the wrong network
      segment. Linux provides a way to affect this behavior directly, by modifying the
      file /proc/sys/net/ipv4/conf/*/arp_filter. If the value 1 is written into
      this file, then when an incoming ARP request arrives over an interface, an IP for-
      warding check is made. The IP address of the requestor is looked up to determine
      which interface would be used to send IP datagrams back to it. If the interface
                                                           Section 4.13 References    179

     used by the arriving ARP request is different from the interface that would be
     used to return an IP datagram to the requestor, the ARP response is suppressed
     (and the triggering ARP request is dropped).
         A somewhat more damaging attack on ARP involves the handling of static
     entries. As discussed previously, static entries may be used to avoid the ARP
     request/reply when seeking the Ethernet (MAC) address corresponding to a par-
     ticular IP address. Such static entries have been used in an attempt to enhance
     security. The idea is that static entries placed in the ARP cache for important hosts
     would soon detect any hosts masquerading with that IP address. Unfortunately,
     most implementations of ARP have traditionally replaced even static cache entries
     with entries provided by ARP replies. The consequence of this is that a machine
     receiving an ARP reply (even if did not send an ARP request) would be coaxed
     into replacing its static entries with those provided by an attacker.

4.12 Summary
     ARP is a basic protocol in almost every TCP/IP implementation, but it normally
     does its work without the application or user being aware of it. ARP is used to
     determine the hardware addresses corresponding to the IPv4 addresses in use on
     the locally reachable IPv4 subnet. It is invoked when forwarding datagrams des-
     tined for the same subnet as the sending host’s and is also used to reach a router
     when the destination of a datagram is not on the subnet (the details of this are
     explained in Chapter 5). The ARP cache is fundamental to its operation, and we
     have used the arp command to examine and manipulate the cache. Each entry
     in the cache has a timer that is used to remove both incomplete and completed
     entries. The arp command displays and modifies entries in the ARP cache.
          We followed through the normal operation of ARP along with specialized
     versions: proxy ARP (when a router answers ARP requests for hosts accessible on
     another of the router’s interfaces) and gratuitous ARP (sending an ARP request for
     your own IP address, normally when bootstrapping). We also discussed address
     conflict detection for IPv4, which uses a continually operating gratuitous ARP-like
     exchange to avoid address duplication within the same broadcast domain. Finally,
     we discussed a number of attacks that involve ARP. Most of these involve imper-
     sonating hosts by fabricating ARP responses for them. This can lead to problems
     with higher-layer protocols if they do not implement strong security (see Chapter
     18).

4.13 References
     [RFC0826] D. Plummer, “Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or Converting
     Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet Address for Transmission on Eth-
     ernet Hardware,” Internet RFC 0826/STD 0037, Nov. 1982.

      [RFC0903] R. Finlayson, T. Mann, J. C. Mogul, and M. Theimer, “A Reverse
      Address Resolution Protocol,” Internet RFC 0903/STD 0038, June 1984.
      [RFC1027] S. Carl-Mitchell and J. S. Quarterman, “Using ARP to Implement
      Transparent Subnet Gateways,” Internet RFC 1027, Oct. 1987.
      [RFC1122] R. Braden, ed., “Requirements for Internet Hosts,” Internet RFC 1122/
      STD 0003, Oct. 1989.
      [RFC2332] J. Luciani, D. Katz, D. Piscitello, B. Cole, and N. Doraswamy, “NBMA
      Next Hop Resolution Protocol (NHRP),” Internet RFC 2332, Apr. 1998.
      [RFC5227] S. Cheshire, “IPv4 Address Conflict Detection,” Internet RFC 5227,
      July 2008.
      [RFC5494] J. Arkko and C. Pignataro, “IANA Allocation Guidelines for the
      Address Resolution Protocol (ARP),” Internet RFC 5494, Apr. 2009.
