      5

      The Internet Protocol (IP)

5.1   Introduction
      IP is the workhorse protocol of the TCP/IP protocol suite. All TCP, UDP, ICMP, and
      IGMP data gets transmitted as IP datagrams. IP provides a best-effort, connection-
      less datagram delivery service. By “best-effort” we mean there are no guarantees
      that an IP datagram gets to its destination successfully. Although IP does not sim-
      ply drop all traffic unnecessarily, it provides no guarantees as to the fate of the
      packets it attempts to deliver. When something goes wrong, such as a router tem-
      porarily running out of buffers, IP has a simple error-handling algorithm: throw
      away some data (usually the last datagram that arrived). Any required reliability
      must be provided by the upper layers (e.g., TCP). IPv4 and IPv6 both use this basic
      best-effort delivery model.
           The term connectionless means that IP does not maintain any connection state
      information about related datagrams within the network elements (i.e., within the
      routers); each datagram is handled independently from all other others. This also
      means that IP datagrams can be delivered out of order. If a source sends two con-
      secutive datagrams (first A, then B) to the same destination, each is routed inde-
      pendently and can take different paths, and B may arrive before A. Other things
      can happen to IP datagrams as well: they may be duplicated in transit, and they
      may have their data altered as the result of errors. Again, some protocol above IP
      (usually TCP) has to handle all of these potential problems in order to provide an
      error-free delivery abstraction for applications.
           In this chapter we take a look at the fields in the IPv4 (see Figure 5-1) and
      IPv6 (see Figure 5-2) headers and describe how IP forwarding works. The official
      specification for IPv4 is given in [RFC0791]. A series of RFCs describe IPv6, start-
      ing with [RFC2460].

                                                                                                                   
                                                              ELWV
                                                                      (
                              9HUVLRQ     ,+/          '6)LHOG                        7RWDO?/HQJWK
                                                                      &
                                 ELWV    ??ELWV         ??ELWV        1                 ???ELWV
                                          ,GHQWLILFDWLRQ                  )ODJV           )UDJPHQW?2IIVHW
                                                ELWV                      ??ELWV              ???ELWV
                    %DVLF
                     ,3?      7LPH?WR?/LYH? 77/          3URWRFRO                   +HDGHU?&KHFNVXP
                                      ELWV                ??ELWV                        ???ELWV                         ,3?
                   +HDGHU?
                      E\WHV                                                                                           +HDGHU
                                                             6RXUFH?,3?$GGUHVV
                                                                      ELWV
                                                           'HVWLQDWLRQ?,3?$GGUHVV
                                                                      ELWV
                                                              2SWLRQV? ,I?$Q\
                                                  YDULDEOH?OHQJWK??XS?WR?????ELWV????E\WHV

                                                               ,3?'DWD? ,I?$Q\
                                              YDULDEOH?OHQJWK??XS?WR?????????ELWV????????E\WHV

Figure 5-1   The IPv4 datagram. The header is of variable size, limited to fifteen 32-bit words (60
                   bytes) by the 4-bit IHL field. A typical IPv4 header contains 20 bytes (no options). The
                   source and destination addresses are 32 bits long. Most of the second 32-bit word is used
                   for the IPv4 fragmentation function. A header checksum helps ensure that the fields in
                   the header are delivered correctly to the proper destination but does not protect the data.

                                                                                                              
                                           ELWV

                         9HUVLRQ    '6)LHOG       (                          )ORZ?/DEHO
                                                  &
                            ELWV     ??ELWV       1                            ???ELWV
                                   3D\ORDG?/HQJWK                     1H[W?+HDGHU            +RS?/LPLW
                                          ELWV                           ??ELWV               ??ELWV

                                                       6RXUFH?,3?$GGUHVV
                                                                ELWV                                              ,3Y??
                                                                                                                 +HDGHU
                                                                                                                    E\WHV

                                                      'HVWLQDWLRQ?,3?$GGUHVV
                                                                  ELWV

Figure 5-2 The IPv6 header is of fixed size (40 bytes) and contains 128-bit source and destination
                 addresses. The Next Header field is used to indicate the presence and types of additional
                 extension headers that follow the IPv6 header, forming a daisy chain of headers that may
                 include special extensions or processing directives. Application data follows the header
                 chain, usually immediately following a transport-layer header.

5.2     IPv4 and IPv6 Headers
        Figure 5-1 shows the format of an IPv4 datagram. The normal size of the IPv4
        header is 20 bytes, unless options are present (which is rare). The IPv6 header is
        twice as large but never has any options. It may have extension headers, which pro-
        vide similar capabilities, as we shall see later. In our pictures of headers and data-
        grams, the most significant bit is numbered 0 at the left, and the least significant
        bit of a 32-bit value is numbered 31 on the right.
             The 4 bytes in a 32-bit value are transmitted in the following order: bits 0–7
        first, then bits 8–15, then 16–23, and bits 24–31 last. This is called big endian byte
        ordering, which is the byte ordering required for all binary integers in the TCP/IP
        headers as they traverse a network. It is also called network byte order. Computer
        CPUs that store binary integers in other formats, such as the little endian format
        used by most PCs, must convert the header values into network byte order for
        transmission and back again for reception.

5.2.1   IP Header Fields
        The first field (only 4 bits or one nibble wide) is the Version field. It contains the
        version number of the IP datagram: 4 for IPv4 and 6 for IPv6. The headers for both
        IPv4 and IPv6 share the location of the Version field but no others. Thus, the two
        protocols are not directly interoperable—a host or router must handle either IPv4
        or IPv6 (or both, called dual stack) separately. Although other versions of IP have
        been proposed and developed, only versions 4 and 6 have any significant amount
        of use. The IANA keeps an official registry of these version numbers [IV].
             The Internet Header Length (IHL) field is the number of 32-bit words in the IPv4
        header, including any options. Because this is also a 4-bit field, the IPv4 header is
        limited to a maximum of fifteen 32-bit words or 60 bytes. Later we shall see how
        this limitation makes some of the options, such as the Record Route option, nearly
        useless today. The normal value of this field (when no options are present) is 5.
        There is no such field in IPv6 because the header length is fixed at 40 bytes.
             Following the header length, the original specification of IPv4 [RFC0791]
        specified a Type of Service (ToS) byte, and IPv6 [RFC2460] specified the equivalent
        Traffic Class byte. Use of these never became widespread, so eventually this 8-bit
        field was split into two smaller parts and redefined by a set of RFCs ([RFC3260]
        [RFC3168][RFC2474] and others). The first 6 bits are now called the Differentiated
        Services Field (DS Field), and the last 2 bits are the Explicit Congestion Notification
        (ECN) field or indicator bits. These RFCs now apply to both IPv4 and IPv6. These
        fields are used for special processing of the datagram when it is forwarded. We
        discuss them in more detail in Section 5.2.3.
             The Total Length field is the total length of the IPv4 datagram in bytes. Using
        this field and the IHL field, we know where the data portion of the datagram
        starts, and its length. Because this is a 16-bit field, the maximum size of an IPv4
        datagram (including header) is 65,535 bytes. The Total Length field is required in

      the header because some lower-layer protocols that carry IPv4 datagrams do not
      (accurately) convey the size of encapsulated datagrams on their own. Ethernet,
      for example, pads small frames to be a minimum length (64 bytes). Even though
      the minimum Ethernet payload size is 46 bytes (see Chapter 3), an IPv4 datagram
      can be smaller (as few as 20 bytes). If the Total Length field were not provided, the
      IPv4 implementation would not know how much of a 46-byte Ethernet frame was
      really an IP datagram, as opposed to padding, leading to possible confusion.
           Although it is possible to send a 65,535-byte IP datagram, most link layers
      (such as Ethernet) are not able to carry one this large without fragmenting it
      (chopping it up) into smaller pieces. Furthermore, a host is not required to be able
      to receive an IPv4 datagram larger than 576 bytes. (In IPv6 a host must be able to
      process a datagram at least as large as the MTU of the link to which it is attached,
      and the minimum link MTU is 1280 bytes.) Many applications that use the UDP
      protocol (see Chapter 10) for data transport (e.g., DNS, DHCP, etc.) use a limited
      data size of 512 bytes to avoid the 576-byte IPv4 limit. TCP chooses its own data-
      gram size based on additional information (see Chapter 15).
           When an IPv4 datagram is fragmented into multiple smaller fragments, each of
      which itself is an independent IP datagram, the Total Length field reflects the length
      of the particular fragment. Fragmentation is described in detail along with UDP in
      Chapter 10. In IPv6, fragmentation is not supported by the header, and the length
      is instead given by the Payload Length field. This field measures the length of the
      IPv6 datagram not including the length of the header; extension headers, however,
      are included in the Payload Length field. As with IPv4, the 16-bit size of the field
      limits its maximum value to 65,535. With IPv6, however, it is the payload length that
      is limited to 64KB, not the entire datagram. In addition, IPv6 supports a jumbogram
      option (see Section 5.3.1.2) that provides for the possibility, at least theoretically, of
      single packets with payloads as large as 4GB (4,294,967,295 bytes)!
           The Identification field helps indentify each datagram sent by an IPv4 host. To
      ensure that the fragments of one datagram are not confused with those of another,
      the sending host normally increments an internal counter by 1 each time a datagram
      is sent (from one of its IP addresses) and copies the value of the counter into the IPv4
      Identification field. This field is most important for implementing fragmentation, so
      we explore it further in Chapter 10, where we also discuss the Flags and Fragment
      Offset fields. In IPv6, this field shows up in the Fragmentation extension header, as
      we discuss in Section 5.3.3.
           The Time-to-Live field, or TTL, sets an upper limit on the number of routers
      through which a datagram can pass. It is initialized by the sender to some value
      (64 is recommended [RFC1122], although 128 or 255 is not uncommon) and decre-
      mented by 1 by every router that forwards the datagram. When this field reaches
      0, the datagram is thrown away, and the sender is notified with an ICMP message
      (see Chapter 8). This prevents packets from getting caught in the network forever
      should an unwanted routing loop occur.

    Note
    The TTL field was originally specified to be the maximum lifetime of an IP data-
    gram in seconds, but routers were also always required to decrement the value by
    at least 1. Because virtually no routers today hold on to a datagram longer than 1s
    under normal operation, the earlier rule is now ignored or forgotten, and in IPv6
    the field has been renamed to its de facto use: Hop Limit.

     The Protocol field in the IPv4 header contains a number indicating the type of
data found in the payload portion of the datagram. The most common values are
17 (for UDP) and 6 (for TCP). This provides a demultiplexing feature so that the IP
protocol can be used to carry payloads of more than one protocol type. Although
this field originally specified the transport-layer protocol the datagram is encap-
sulating, it is now understood to identify the encapsulated protocol, which may or
not be a transport protocol. For example, other encapsulations are possible, such
as IPv4-in-IPv4 (value 4). The official list of the possible values of the Protocol field
is given in the assigned numbers page [AN]. The Next Header field in the IPv6
header generalizes the Protocol field from IPv4. It is used to indicate the type of
header following the IPv6 header. This field may contain any values defined for
the IPv4 Protocol field, or any of the values associated with the IPv6 extension
headers described in Section 5.3.
     The Header Checksum field is calculated over the IPv4 header only. This is impor-
tant to understand because it means that the payload of the IPv4 datagram (e.g.,
TCP or UDP data) is not checked for correctness by the IP protocol. To help ensure
that the payload portion of an IP datagram has been correctly delivered, other
protocols must cover any important data that follows the header with their own
data-integrity-checking mechanisms. We shall see that almost all protocols encap-
sulated in IP (ICMP, IGMP, UDP, and TCP) have a checksum in their own headers
to cover their header and data and also to cover certain parts of the IP header they
deem important (a form of “layering violation”). Perhaps surprisingly, the IPv6
header does not have any checksum field.

    Note
    Omitting the checksum field from the IPv6 header was a somewhat controversial
    decision. The reasoning behind this action is roughly as follows: Higher-layer pro-
    tocols requiring correctness in the IP header are required to compute their own
    checksums over the data they believe to be important. A consequence of errors
    in the IP header is that the data is delivered to the wrong destination, is indicated
    to have come from the wrong source, or is otherwise mangled during delivery.
    Because bit errors are relatively rare (thanks to fiber-optic delivery of Internet
    traffic) and stronger mechanisms are available to ensure correctness of the other
    fields (higher-layer checksums or other checks), it was decided to eliminate the
    field from the IPv6 header.

             The algorithm used in computing a checksum is also used by most of the
        other Internet-related protocols that use checksums and is sometimes known as
        the Internet checksum. Note that when an IPv4 datagram passes through a router,
        its header checksum must change as a result of decrementing the TTL field. We
        discuss the methods for computing the checksum in more detail in Section 5.2.2.
             Every IP datagram contains the Source IP Address of the sender of the datagram
        and the Destination IP Address of where the datagram is destined. These are 32-bit
        values for IPv4 and 128-bit values for IPv6, and they usually identify a single inter-
        face on a computer, although multicast and broadcast addresses (see Chapter 2)
        violate this rule. While a 32-bit address can accommodate a seemingly large num-
        ber of Internet entities (4.5 billion), there is widespread agreement that this num-
        ber is inadequate, a primary motivation for moving to IPv6. The 128-bit address
        of IPv6 can accommodate a huge number of Internet entities. As was restated in
        [H05], IPv6 has 3.4 × 1038 (340 undecillion) addresses. Quoting from [H05] and oth-
        ers: “The optimistic estimate would allow for 3,911,873,538,269,506,102 addresses
        per square meter of the surface of the planet Earth.” It certainly seems as if this
        should last a very, very long time indeed.

5.2.2   The Internet Checksum
        The Internet checksum is a 16-bit mathematical sum used to determine, with
        reasonably high probability, whether a received message or portion of a message
        matches the one sent. Note that the Internet checksum algorithm is not the same as
        the common cyclic redundancy check (CRC) [PB61], which offers stronger protection.
             To compute the IPv4 header checksum for an outgoing datagram, the value
        of the datagram’s Checksum field is first set to 0. Then, the 16-bit one’s comple-
        ment sum of the header is calculated (the entire header is considered a sequence
        of 16-bit words). The 16-bit one’s complement of this sum is then stored in the
        Checksum field to make the datagram ready for transmission. One’s complement
        addition can be implemented by “end-round-carry addition”: when a carry bit
        is produced using conventional (two’s complement) addition, the carry is added
        back in as a 1 value. Figure 5-3 presents an example, where the message contents
        are represented in hexadecimal.
             When an IPv4 datagram is received, a checksum is computed across the whole
        header, including the value of the Checksum field itself. Assuming there are no
        errors, the computed checksum value is always 0 (a one’s complement of the value
        FFFF). Note that for any nontrivial packet or header, the value of the Checksum
        field in the packet can never be FFFF. If it were, the sum (prior to the final one’s
        complement operation at the sender) would have to have been 0. No sum can ever
        be 0 using one’s complement addition unless all the bytes are 0—something that
        never happens with any legitimate IPv4 header. When the header is found to be
        bad (the computed checksum is nonzero), the IPv4 implementation discards the
        received datagram. No error message is generated. It is up to the higher layers to
        somehow detect the missing datagram and retransmit if necessary.

Sending
Message:                      E3 4F 23 96 44 27 99 F3 [00 00]     Checksum Field = 0000
Two’s Complement Sum:         1E4FF
One’s Complement Sum:         E4FF+1 = E500
One’s Complement:             ~(E500) = ~(1110 0101 0000 0000) = 0001 1010 1111 1111 =
                                1AFF (the checksum)

Receiving
Message + Checksum =          E34F + 2396 + 4427 + 99F3 + 1AFF = E500 + 1AFF = FFFF
                               ~(Message + Checksum) = 0000

Figure 5-3 The Internet checksum is the one’s complement of a one’s complement 16-bit sum of the
           data being checksummed (zero padding is used if the number of bytes being summed is
           odd). If the data being summed includes a Checksum field, the field is first set to 0 prior
           to the checksum operation and then filled in with the computed checksum. To check
           whether an incoming block of data that contains a Checksum field (header, payload, etc.)
           is valid, the same type of checksum is computed over the whole block (including the
           Checksum field). Because the Checksum field is essentially the inverse of the checksum of
           the rest of the data, computing the checksum on correctly received data should produce
           a value of 0.

5.2.2.1 Mathematics of the Internet Checksum
For the mathematically inclined, the set of 16-bit hexadecimal values V = {0001,
. . . , FFFF} and the one’s complement sum operation + together form an Abelian
group. For the combination of a set and an operator to be a group, several proper-
ties need to be obeyed: closure, associativity, existence of an identity element, and
existence of inverses. To be an Abelian (commutative) group, commutativity must
also be obeyed. If we look closely, we see that all of these properties are indeed
obeyed:

     • For any X,Y in V, (X + Y) is in V                                       [closure]
     • For any X,Y,Z in V, X + (Y + Z) = (X + Y) + Z                           [associativity]
     • For any X in V, e + X = X + e = X where e = FFFF                        [identity]
     • For any X in V, there is an X′ in V such that X + X′ = e                [inverse]
     • For any X,Y in V, (X + Y) = (Y + X)                                     [commutativity]

    What is interesting about the set V and the group <V,+> is that we have deleted
the number 0000 from consideration. If we put the number 0000 in the set V, then
<V,+> is not a group any longer. To see this, we first observe that 0000 and FFFF
appear to perform the role of zero (additive identity) using the + operation. For
example, AB12 + 0000 = AB12 = AB12 + FFFF. However, in a group there can be
only one identity element. If we have some element 12AB, and assume the identity

        element is 0000, then we need some inverse X′ so that (12AB + X′) = 0000, but we
        see that no such value of X′ exists in V that satisfies the criteria. Therefore, we need
        to exclude 0000 from consideration as the identity element in <V,+> by removing it
        from the set V to make this structure a true group. For an introduction to abstract
        algebra, the reader may wish to consult a detailed text on the subject, such as the
        popular book by Pinter [P90].

5.2.3   DS Field and ECN (Formerly Called the ToS Byte or IPv6 Traffic Class)
        The third and fourth fields of the IPv4 header (second and third fields of the IPv6
        header) are the Differentiated Services (called DS Field) and ECN fields. Differenti-
        ated Services (called DiffServ) is a framework and set of standards aimed at sup-
        porting differentiated classes of service (i.e., beyond just best-effort) on the Internet
        [RFC2474][RFC2475][RFC3260]. IP datagrams that are marked in certain ways (by
        having some of these bits set according to predefined patterns) may be forwarded
        differently (e.g., with higher priority) than other datagrams. Doing so can lead
        to increased or decreased queuing delay in the network and other special effects
        (possibly with associated special fees imposed by an ISP). A number is placed in
        the DS Field termed the Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP). A “code point”
        refers to a particular predefined arrangement of bits with agreed-upon meaning.
        Typically, datagrams have a DSCP assigned to them when they are given to the
        network infrastructure that remains unmodified during delivery. However, poli-
        cies (such as how many high-priority packets are allowed to be sent in a period of
        time) may cause a DSCP in a datagram to be changed during delivery.
             The pair of ECN bits in the header is used for marking a datagram with a
        congestion indicator when passing through a router that has a significant amount of
        internally queued traffic. Both bits are set by persistently congested ECN-aware
        routers when forwarding packets. The use case envisioned for this function is
        that when a marked packet is received at the destination, some protocol (such as
        TCP) will notice that the packet is marked and indicate this fact back to the sender,
        which would then slow down, thereby easing congestion before a router is forced
        to drop traffic because of overload. This mechanism is one of several aimed at
        avoiding or dealing with network congestion, which we explore in more detail in
        Chapter 16. Although the DS Field and ECN field are not obviously closely related,
        the space for them was carved out of the previously defined IPv4 Type of Service
        and IPv6 Traffic Class fields. For this reason, they are often discussed together, and
        the terms “ToS byte” and “Traffic Class byte” are still in widespread use.
             Although the original uses for the ToS and Traffic Class bytes are not widely
        supported, the structure of the DS Field has been arranged to provide some back-
        ward compatibility with them. To get a clear understanding of how this has been
        accomplished, we first review the original structure of the Type of Service field
        [RFC0791] as shown in Figure 5-4.

                                                                                      

                    3UHFHGHQFH? ??ELWV         '        7        5        5HVHUYHG? ?

Figure 5-4    The original IPv4 Type of Service and IPv6 Traffic Class field structures. The Precedence
              subfield was used to indicate which packets should receive higher priority (larger values
              mean higher priority). The D, T, and R subfields refer to delay, throughput, and reliabil-
              ity. A value of 1 in these fields corresponds to a desire for low delay, high throughput,
              and high reliability, respectively.

     The D, T, and R subfields are for indicating that the datagram should receive
good treatment with respect to delay, throughput, and reliability. A value of 1 indi-
cates better treatment (low delay, high throughput, high reliability, respectively).
The precedence values range from 000 (routine) to 111 (network control) with
increasing priority (see Table 5-1). They are based on a call preemption scheme
called Multilevel Precedence and Preemption (MLPP) dating back to the U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense’s AUTOVON telephone system [A92], in which lower-precedence
calls could be preempted by higher-precedence calls. These terms are still in use
and are being incorporated into VoIP systems.

Table 5-1    The original IPv4 Type of Service and IPv6 Traffic Class precedence subfield values

Value                         Precedence Name
000                           Routine
001                           Priority
010                           Immediate
011                           Flash
100                           Flash Override
101                           Critical
110                           Internetwork Control
111                           Network Control

     In defining the DS Field, the precedence values have been taken into account
[RFC2474] so as to provide a limited form of backward compatibility. Referring to
Figure 5-5, the 6-bit DS Field holds the DSCP, providing support for 64 distinct
code points. The particular value of the DSCP tells a router the forwarding treat-
ment or special handling the datagram should receive. The various forwarding
treatments are expressed as per-hop behavior (PHB), so the DSCP value effectively
tells a router which PHB to apply to the datagram. The default value for the DSCP
is generally 0, which corresponds to routine, best-effort Internet traffic. The 64
possible DSCP values are broadly divided into a set of pools for various uses, as
given in [DSCPREG] and shown in Table 5-2.

                                                                                                 

                                                                                       (&1
                        '6?      '6?       '6?      '6?       '6?    '6?? ?
                                                                                         ELWV

                                                        'URS?
                                &ODVV
                                                      3UREDELOLW\

Figure 5-5    The DS Field contains the DSCP in 6 bits (5 bits are currently standardized to indicate
                    the forwarding treatment the datagram should receive when forwarded by a compliant
                    router). The following 2 bits are used for ECN and may be turned on in the datagram
                    when it passes through a persistently congested router. When such datagrams arrive
                    at their destinations, the congestion indication is sent back to the source in a later data-
                    gram to inform the source that its datagrams are passing through one or more congested
                    routers.

Table 5-2    The DSCP values are divided into three pools: standardized, experimental/local use
                   (EXP/LU), and experimental/local use that is eventually intended for standardization (*).

      Pool                         Code Point Prefix                          Policy
      1                            xxxxx0                                     Standards
      2                            xxxx11                                     EXP/LU
      3                            xxxx01                                     EXP/LU(*)

           The arrangement provides for some experimentation and local use by
      researchers and operators. DSCPs ending in 0 are subject to standardized use,
      and those ending in 1 are for experimental/local use (EXP/LU). Those ending in
      01 are intended initially for experimentation or local use but with eventual intent
      toward standardization.
           Referring to Figure 5-5, the class portion of the DS Field contains the first 3 bits
      and is based on the earlier definition of the Precedence subfield of the Type of Service
      field. Generally, a router is to first segregate traffic into different classes. Traffic
      within a common class may have different drop probabilities, allowing the router
      to decide what traffic to drop first if it is forced to discard traffic. The 3-bit class
      selector provides for eight defined code points (called the class selector code points)
      that correspond to PHBs with a specified minimum set of features providing simi-
      lar functionality to the earlier IP precedence capability. These are called class selec-
      tor compliant PHBs. They are intended to support partial backward compatibility
      with the original definition given for the IP Precedence subfield given in [RFC0791].
      Code points of the form xxx000 always map to such PHBs, although other values
      may also map to the same PHBs.
           Table 5-3 indicates the class selector DSCP values with their corresponding
      terms for the IP Precedence field from [RFC0791]. The Assured Forwarding (AF)
      group provides forwarding of IP packets in a fixed number of independent AF

classes, effectively generalizing the precedence concept. Traffic from one class
is forwarded separately from other classes. Within a traffic class, a datagram is
assigned a drop precedence. Datagrams of higher drop precedence in a class are
handled preferentially (i.e., are forwarded with higher priority) over those with
lower drop precedence in the same class. Combining the traffic class and drop
precedence, the name AFij corresponds to assured forwarding class i with drop
precedence j. For example, a datagram marked with AF32 is in traffic class 3 with
drop precedence 2.

Table 5-3 The DS Field values are designed to be somewhat compatible with the IP Precedence
          subfield specified for the Type of Service and IPv6 Traffic Class field. AF and EF provide
          enhanced services beyond simple best-effort.

Name                    Value         Reference         Description
CS0                     000000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (best-effort/routine)
CS1                     001000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (priority)
CS2                     010000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (immediate)
CS3                     011000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (flash)
CS4                     100000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (flash override)
CS5                     101000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (CRITIC/ECP)
CS6                     110000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (internetwork control)
CS7                     111000        [RFC2474]         Class selector (control)
AF11                    001010        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (class 1,dp 1)
AF12                    001100        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (1,2)
AF13                    001110        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (1,3)
AF21                    010010        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (2,1)
AF22                    010100        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (2,2)
AF23                    010110        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (2,3)
AF31                    011010        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (3,1)
AF32                    011100        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (3,2)
AF33                    011110        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (3,3)
AF41                    100010        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (4,1)
AF42                    100100        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (4,2)
AF43                    100110        [RFC2597]         Assured Forwarding (4,3)
EF PHB                  101110        [RFC3246]         Expedited Forwarding
VOICE-ADMIT             101100        [RFC5865]         Capacity-Admitted Traffic

     The Expedited Forwarding (EF) service provides the appearance of an uncon-
gested network—that is, EF traffic should receive relatively low delay, jitter, and
loss. Intuitively, this requires the rate of EF traffic going out of a router to be at
least as large as the rate coming in. Consequently, EF traffic will only ever have to
wait in a router queue behind other EF traffic.

             Delivering differentiated services in the Internet has been an ongoing effort
        for over a decade. Although much of the standardization effort in terms of mecha-
        nisms took place in the late 1990s, only in the twenty-first century are some of its
        capabilities being realized and implemented. Some guidance on how to configure
        systems to take advantage of these capabilities is given in [RFC4594]. The com-
        plexity of differentiated services is due, in part, to the linkage between differenti-
        ated services and the presumed differentiated pricing structure and consequent
        issues of fairness that would go along with it. Such economic relationships can be
        complex and are outside the scope of the present discussion. For more information
        on this and related topics, please see [MB97] and [W03].

5.2.4   IP Options
        IP supports a number of options that may be selected on a per-datagram basis.
        Most of these options were introduced in [RFC0791] at the time IPv4 was being
        designed, when the Internet was considerably smaller and when threats from
        malicious users were less of a concern. As a consequence, many of the options are
        no longer practical or desirable because of the limited size of the IPv4 header or
        concerns regarding security. With IPv6, most of the options have been removed
        or altered and are not an integral part of the basic IPv6 header. Instead, they are
        placed after the IPv6 header in one or more extension headers. An IP router that
        receives a datagram containing options is usually supposed to perform special
        processing on the datagram. In some cases IPv6 routers process extension headers,
        but many headers are designed to be processed only by end hosts. In some routers,
        datagrams with options or extensions are not forwarded as fast as ordinary data-
        grams. We briefly discuss the IPv4 options as background and then look at how
        IPv6 implements extension headers and options. Table 5-4 shows most of the IPv4
        options that have been standardized over the years.
             Table 5-4 gives the reserved IPv4 options for which descriptive RFCs can be
        found. The complete list is periodically updated and is available online [IPPA-
        RAM]. The options area always ends on a 32-bit boundary. Pad bytes with a value
        of 0 are added if necessary. This ensures that the IPv4 header is always a multiple
        of 32 bits (as required by the IHL field). The “Number” column in Table 5-4 is the
        number of the option. The “Value” column indicates the number placed inside the
        option Type field to indicate the presence of the option. These values from the two
        columns are not necessarily the same because the Type field has additional struc-
        ture. In particular, the first (high-order) bit indicates whether the option should
        be copied into fragments if the associated datagram is fragmented. The next 2 bits
        indicate the option’s class. Currently, all options in Table 5-4 use option class 0
        (control) except Timestamp and Traceroute, which are both class 2 (debugging and
        measurement). Classes 1 and 3 are reserved.
             Most of the standardized options are rarely or never used in the Internet today.
        Options such as Source and Record Route, for example, require IPv4 addresses to
        be placed inside the IPv4 header. Because there is only limited space in the header

Table 5-4   Options, if present, are carried in IPv4 packets immediately after the basic IPv4 header. Options
            are identified by an 8-bit option Type field. This field is subdivided into three subfields: Copy (1 bit),
            Class (2 bits), and Number (5 bits). Options 0 and 1 are a single byte long, and most others are variable
            in length. Variable options consist of 1 byte of type identifier, 1 byte of length, and the option itself.

Name              Number Value           Length       Description                     Reference        Comments
End of List       0            0         1            Indicates no more          [RFC0791]             If required
                                                      options.
No Op             1            1         1            Indicates no operation     [RFC0791]             If required
                                                      to perform (used for
                                                      padding).
Source            3            131       Variable     Sender lists router “way- [RFC0791]              Rare, often
Routing           9            137                    points” for packet to tra-                       filtered
                                                      verse when forwarded.
                                                      Loose means other
                                                      routers can be included
                                                      between waypoints
                                                      (3,131). Strict means all
                                                      waypoints have to be tra-
                                                      versed exactly in order
                                                      (9,137).
Security and      2            130       11           Specifies how to include [RFC1108]               Historic
Handling          5            133                    security labels and
Labels                                                handling restrictions
                                                      with IP datagrams in U.S.
                                                      military environments.
Record            7            7         Variable     Records the route taken [RFC0791]                Rare
Route                                                 by a packet in its header.
Timestamp         4            68        Variable     Records the time of day [RFC0791]                Rare
                                                      at a packet’s source and
                                                      destination.
Stream ID         8            136       4            Carries the 16-bit         [RFC0791]             Historic
                                                      SATNET stream
                                                      identifier.
EIP               17           145       Variable     Extended Internet          [RFC1385]             Historic
                                                      Protocol (an experiment
                                                      in the early 1990s)
Traceroute        18           82        Variable     Adds a route-tracing       [RFC1393]             Historic
                                                      option and ICMP
                                                      message (an experiment
                                                      in the early 1990s).
Router Alert      20           148       4            Indicates that a router    [RFC2113]             Occasional
                                                      needs to interpret the     [RFC5350]
                                                      contents of the datagram.
Quick-Start       25           25        8            Indicates fast transport   [RFC4782]             Rare
                                                      protocol start
                                                      (experimental).

      (60 bytes total, of which 20 are devoted to the basic IPv4 header), these options are
      not very useful in today’s IPv4 Internet where the number of router hops in an
      average Internet path is about 15 [LFS07]. In addition, the options are primarily
      for diagnostic purposes and make the construction of firewalls more cumbersome
      and risky. Thus, IPv4 options are typically disallowed or stripped at the perimeter
      of enterprise networks by firewalls (see Chapter 7).
           Within enterprise networks, where the average path length is smaller and pro-
      tection from malicious users may be less of a concern, options can still be useful.
      In addition, the Router Alert option represents somewhat of an exception to the
      problems with the other options for use on the Internet. Because it is designed
      primarily as a performance optimization and does not change fundamental router
      behavior, it is permitted more often than the other options. As suggested previ-
      ously, some router implementations have a highly optimized internal pathway for
      forwarding IP traffic containing no options. The Router Alert option informs rout-
      ers that a packet requires processing beyond the conventional forwarding algo-
      rithms. The experimental Quick-Start option at the end of the table is applicable to
      both IPv4 and IPv6, and we describe it in the next section when discussing IPv6
      extension headers and options.

5.3   IPv6 Extension Headers
      In IPv6, special functions such as those provided by options in IPv4 can be enabled
      by adding extension headers that follow the IPv6 header. The routing and time-
      stamp functions from IPv4 are supported this way, as well as some other functions
      such as fragmentation and extra-large packets that were deemed to be rarely used
      for most IPv6 traffic (but still desired) and thereby did not justify allocating bits
      in the IPv6 header to support them. With this arrangement, the IPv6 header is
      fixed at 40 bytes, and extension headers are added only when needed. In choosing
      the IPv6 header to be of a fixed size, and requiring that extension headers be pro-
      cessed only by end hosts (with one exception), the designers of IPv6 have made the
      design and construction of high-performance routers easier because the demands
      on packet processing at routers can be simpler than with IPv4. In practice, packet-
      processing performance is governed by many factors, including the complexity
      of the protocol, the capabilities of the hardware and software in the router, and
      traffic load.
           Extension headers, along with headers of higher-layer protocols such as TCP
      or UDP, are chained together with the IPv6 header to form a cascade of headers
      (see Figure 5-6). The Next Header field in each header indicates the type of the
      subsequent header, which could be an IPv6 extension header or some other type.
      The value of 59 indicates the end of the header chain. The possible values for the
      Next Header field are available at [IP6PARAM], and most are provided in Table 5-5.
           As we can see from Table 5-5, the IPv6 extension header mechanism distin-
      guishes some functions (e.g., routing and fragmentation) from options. The order

                                                     ,3Y??'DWDJUDP
                                                              7&3?6HJPHQW

                   ,3Y??+HDGHU           7&3?
                                                                              7&3?'DWD
                1H[W?+HDGHU? ?7&3       +HDGHU

                          E\WHV          ???E\WHV

                                                                            7&3?6HJPHQW

                                        5RXWLQJ?
                   ,3Y??+HDGHU          +HDGHU          7&3?
                                      1H[W?+HDGHU?
                                                                                   7&3?'DWD
              1H[W?+HDGHU? ?5RXWLQJ                    +HDGHU
                                           7&3

                          E\WHV                         ???E\WHV

                                                                                   7&3?6HJPHQW

                                        5RXWLQJ?       )UDJPHQW?
                   ,3Y??+HDGHU          +HDGHU          +HDGHU          7&3?
                                      1H[W?+HDGHU?    1H[W?+HDGHU?
                                                                                          7&3?'DWD
              1H[W?+HDGHU? ?5RXWLQJ                                    +HDGHU
                                        )UDJPHQW          ?7&3

                          E\WHV                                         ???E\WHV

Figure 5-6   IPv6 headers form a chain using the Next Header field. Headers in the chain
                       may be IPv6 extension headers or transport headers. The IPv6 header appears
                       at the beginning of the datagram and is always 40 bytes long.

Table 5-5 The values for the IPv6 Next Header field may indicate extensions or headers for other protocols. The
          same values are used with the IPv4 Protocol field, where appropriate.

Header Type                                    Order         Value        References
IPv6 header                                    1             41           [RFC2460][RFC2473]
Hop-by-Hop                                     2             0            [RFC2460]; must immediately follow
Options (HOPOPT)                                                          IPv6 header
Destination Options                            3,8           60           [RFC2460]
Routing                                        4             43           [RFC2460][RFC5095]
Fragment                                       5             44           [RFC2460]
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)           7             50           (See Chapter 18)
Authentication (AH)                            6             51           (See Chapter 18)
Mobility (MIPv6)                               9             135          [RFC6275]
(None—no next header)                          Last          59           [RFC2460]
ICMPv6                                         Last          58           (See Chapter 8)
UDP                                            Last          17           (See Chapter 10)
TCP                                            Last          6            (See Chapters 13–17)
Various other upper-layer protocols            Last          —            See [AN] for complete list

        of the extension headers is given as a recommendation, except for the location of
        the Hop-by-Hop Options, which is mandatory, so an IPv6 implementation must
        be prepared to process extension headers in the order in which they are received.
        Only the Destination Options header can be used twice—the first time for options
        pertaining to the destination IPv6 address contained in the IPv6 header and the
        second time (position 8) for options pertaining to the final destination of the data-
        gram. In some cases (e.g., when the Routing header is used), the Destination IP
        Address field in the IPv6 header changes as the datagram is forwarded to its ulti-
        mate destination.

5.3.1   IPv6 Options
        As we have seen, IPv6 provides a more flexible and extensible way of incorporat-
        ing extensions and options as compared to IPv4. Those options from IPv4 that
        ceased to be useful because of space limitations in the IPv4 header appear in IPv6
        as variable-length extension headers or options encoded in special extension
        headers that can accommodate today’s much larger Internet. Options, if present,
        are grouped into either Hop-by-Hop Options (those relevant to every router along a
        datagram’s path) or Destination Options (those relevant only to the recipient). Hop-
        by-Hop Options (called HOPOPTs) are the only ones that need to be processed
        by every router a packet encounters. The format for encoding options within the
        Hop-by-Hop and Destination Options extension headers is common.
             The Hop-by-Hop and Destination Options headers are capable of holding
        more than one option. Each of these options is encoded as type-length-value (TLV)
        sets, according to the format shown in Figure 5-7.

                                                                         
                                      &    7\SH?
                             $FWLRQ                  2SW?'DWD?/HQ
                               ELWV
                                      K   6XEILHOG                          2SWLRQ?'DWD
                                      J    ??ELWV        ??ELWV

                                2SWLRQ?7\SH

Figure 5-7   Hop-by-hop and Destination Options are encoded as TLV sets. The first byte gives
                     the option type, including subfields indicating how an IPv6 node should behave if the
                     option is not recognized, and whether the option data might change as the datagram is
                     forwarded. The Opt Data Len field gives the size of the option data in bytes.

            The TLV structure shown in Figure 5-7 includes 2 bytes followed by a variable-
        length number of data bytes. The first byte indicates the type of the option and
        includes three subfields. The first subfield gives the action to be taken by an IPv6
        node attempting to process the option that does not recognize the 5-bit option Type
        subfield. Its possible values are presented in Table 5-6.

Table 5-6   The 2 high-order bits in an IPv6 TLV option type indicate whether an IPv6 node should
            forward or drop the datagram if the option is not recognized, and whether a message
            indicating the datagram’s fate should be sent back to the sender.

Value        Action
00           Skip option, continue processing
01           Discard the datagram (silently)
10           Discard the datagram and send an ICMPv6 Parameter Problem message to
             the source address
11           Same as 10, but send the ICMPv6 message only if the offending packet’s
             destination was not multicast

    If an unknown option were included in a datagram destined for a multicast
destination, a large number of nodes could conceivably generate traffic back to the
source. This can be avoided by use of the 11-bit pattern for the Action subfield. The
flexibility of the Action subfield is useful in the development of new options. A
newly specified option can be carried in datagrams and simply ignored by those
routers that do not understand it, helping to promote incremental deployment of
new options. The Change bit field (Chg in Figure 5-7) is set to 1 when the option data
may be modified as the datagram is forwarded. The options shown in Table 5-7
have been defined for IPv6.

Table 5-7   Options in IPv6 are carried in either Hop-by-Hop (H) or Destination (D) Options exten-
            sion headers. The option Type field contains the value from the “Type” column with the
            Action and Change subfields denoted in binary. The “Length” column contains the value
            of the Opt Data Len byte from Figure 5-7. The Pad1 option is the only one lacking this byte.

Option Name                  Header      Action     Change      Type        Length      References
Pad1                         HD          00         0           0           N/A         [RFC2460]
PadN                         HD          00         0           1           var         [RFC2460]
Jumbo Payload                H           11         0           194         4           [RFC2675]
Tunnel Encapsulation         D           00         0           4           4           [RFC2473]
Limit
Router Alert                 H           00         0           5           4           [RFC2711]
Quick-Start                  H           00         1           6           8           [RFC4782]
CALIPSO                      H           00         0           7           8+          [RFC5570]
Home Address                 D           11         0           201         16          [RFC6275]

5.3.1.1 Pad1 and PadN
IPv6 options are aligned to 8-byte offsets, so options that are naturally smaller are
padded with 0 bytes to round out their lengths to the nearest 8 bytes. Two padding
options are available to support this, called Pad1 and PadN. The Pad1 option (type 0)
is the only option that lacks Length and Value fields. It is simply 1 byte long and

      contains the value 0. The PadN option (type 1) inserts 2 or more bytes of padding
      into the options area of the header using the format of Figure 5-7. For n bytes of
      padding, the Opt Data Len field contains the value (n - 2).

      5.3.1.2 IPv6 Jumbo Payload
      In some TCP/IP networks, such as those used to interconnect supercomputers,
      the normal 64KB limit on the IP datagram size can lead to unwanted overhead
      when moving large amounts of data. The IPv6 Jumbo Payload option specifies an
      IPv6 datagram with payload size larger than 65,535 bytes, called a jumbogram. This
      option need not be implemented by nodes attached to links with MTU sizes below
      64KB. The Jumbo Payload option provides a 32-bit field for holding the payload
      size for datagrams with payloads of sizes between 65,535 and 4,294,967,295 bytes.
           When a jumbogram is formed for transmission, its normal Payload Length field
      is set to 0. As we shall see later, the TCP protocol makes use of the Payload Length
      field in order to compute its checksum using the Internet checksum algorithm
      described previously. When the Jumbo Payload option is used, TCP must be care-
      ful to use the length value from the option instead of the regular Length field in
      the base header. Although this procedure is not difficult, larger payloads can lead
      to an increased chance of undetected error [RFC2675].

      5.3.1.3 Tunnel Encapsulation Limit
      Tunneling refers to the encapsulation of one protocol in another that does not con-
      form to traditional layering (see Chapters 1 and 3). For example, IP datagrams may
      be encapsulated inside the payload portion of another IP datagram. Tunneling can
      be used to form virtual overlay networks, in which one network (e.g., the Internet)
      acts as a well-connected link layer for another layer of IP [TWEF03]. Tunnels can
      be nested in the sense that datagrams that are in a tunnel may themselves be
      placed in a tunnel, in a recursive fashion.
           When sending an IP datagram, a sender does not ordinarily have much con-
      trol over how many tunnel levels are ultimately used for encapsulation. Using this
      option, however, a sender can specify this limit. A router intending to encapsulate
      an IPv6 datagram into a tunnel first checks for the presence and value of the Tun-
      nel Encapsulation Limit option. If the limit value is 0, the datagram is discarded
      and an ICMPv6 Parameter Problem message (see Chapter 8) is sent to the source
      of the datagram (i.e., the previous tunnel entry point). If the limit is nonzero, the
      tunnel encapsulation is permitted, but the newly formed (encapsulating) IPv6
      datagram must include a Tunnel Encapsulation Limit option whose value is 1 less
      than the option value in the arriving datagram. In effect, the encapsulation limit
      acts like the IPv4 TTL or IPv6 Hop Limit field, but for levels of tunnel encapsulation
      instead of forwarding hops.

      5.3.1.4 Router Alert
      The Router Alert option indicates that the datagram contains information that
      needs to be processed by a router. It is used for the same purpose as the IPv4
      Router Alert option. [RTAOPTS] gives the current set of values for the option.

5.3.1.5 Quick-Start
The Quick-Start (QS) option is used in conjunction with the experimental Quick-
Start procedure for TCP/IP specified in [RFC4782]. It is applicable to both IPv4 and
IPv6 but at present is suggested only for private networks and not the global Inter-
net. The option includes a value encoding the sender’s desired transmission rate in
bits per second, a QS TTL value, and some additional information. Routers along
the path may agree that supporting the desired rate is acceptable, in which case
they decrement the QS TTL and leave the rate request unchanged when forward-
ing the containing datagram. When they disagree (i.e., wish to support a lower
rate), they can reduce the number to an acceptable rate. Routers that do not recog-
nize the QS option do not decrement the QS TTL. A receiver provides feedback to
the sender, including the difference between the received datagram’s IPv4 TTL or
IPv6 Hop Limit field and its QS TTL, along with the resulting rate that may have
been adjusted by the routers along the forward path. This information is used by
the sender to determine its sending rate (which, for example, may exceed the rate
TCP it would otherwise use). Comparison of the TTL values is used to ensure that
every router along the path participates in the QS negotiation; if any routers are
found to be decrementing the IPv4 TTL (or IPv6 Hop Limit) field and not modify-
ing the QS TTL value, QS is not enabled.

5.3.1.6 CALIPSO
This option is used for supporting the Common Architecture Label IPv6 Security
Option (CALIPSO) [RFC5570] in certain private networks. It provides a method to
label datagrams with a security-level indicator, along with some additional infor-
mation. In particular, it is intended for use in multilevel secure networking envi-
ronments (e.g., government, military, and banking) where the security level of all
data must be indicated by some form of label.

5.3.1.7 Home Address
This option holds the “home” address of the IPv6 node sending the datagram
when IPv6 mobility options are in use. Mobile IP (see Section 5.5) specifies a set of
procedures for handling IP nodes that may change their point of network attach-
ment without losing their higher-layer network connections. It has a concept of
a node’s “home,” which is derived from the address prefix of its typical location.
When roaming away from home, the node is generally assigned a different IP
address. This option allows the node to provide its normal home address in addi-
tion to its (presumably temporarily assigned) new address while traveling. The
home address can be used by other IPv6 nodes when communicating with the
mobile node. If the Home Address option is present, the Destination Options
header containing it must appear after a Routing header and before the Fragment,
Authentication, and ESP headers (see Chapter 18), if any of them is also present.
We discuss this option in more detail in the context of Mobile IP.

5.3.2   Routing Header
        The IPv6 Routing header provides a mechanism for the sender of an IPv6 data-
        gram to control, at least in part, the path the datagram takes through the network.
        At present, two different versions of the routing extension header have been speci-
        fied, called type 0 (RH0) and type 2 (RH2), respectively. RH0 has been deprecated
        because of security concerns [RFC5095], and RH2 is defined in conjunction with
        Mobile IP. To best understand the Routing header, we begin by discussing RH0
        and then investigate why it has been deprecated and how it differs from RH2. RH0
        specifies one or more IPv6 nodes to be “visited” as the datagram is forwarded. The
        header is shown in Figure 5-8.

                                                                                               

                      1H[W?+HDGHU     +HDGHU?([WHQVLRQ?    5RXWLQJ?7\SH? ?   6HJPHQWV?/HIW
                           ELWV        /HQJWK? ??ELWV           ??ELWV          ??ELWV
                                                  5HVHUYHG? ?
                                                       ELWV

                                                 ,3?$GGUHVV?>?@
                                                                                                   5RXWLQJ?
                                                         ELWV
                                                                                                  ([WHQVLRQ?
                                                                                                   +HDGHU
                                                                                                   YDULDEOH

                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                

                                                 ,3?$GGUHVV?>Q@
                                                        ELWV

Figure 5-8 The now-deprecated Routing header type 0 (RH0) generalizes the IPv4 loose and strict
                   Source Route and Record Route options. It is constructed by the sender to include IPv6
                   node addresses that act as waypoints when the datagram is forwarded. Each address can
                   be specified as a loose or strict address. A strict address must be reached by a single IPv6
                   hop, whereas a loose address may contain one or more other hops in between. The IPv6
                   Destination IP Address field in the base header is modified to contain the next waypoint
                   address as the datagram is forwarded.

            The IPv6 Routing header shown in Figure 5-8 generalizes the loose Source
        and Record Route options from IPv4. It also supports the possibility of routing on
        identifiers other than IPv6 addresses, although this feature is not standardized

and is not discussed further here. For standardized routing on IPv6 addresses,
RH0 allows the sender to specify a vector of IPv6 addresses for nodes to be visited.
     The header contains an 8-bit Routing Type identifier and an 8-bit Segments
Left field. The type identifier for IPv6 addresses is 0 for RH0 and 2 for RH2. The
Segments Left field indicates how many route segments remain to be processed—
that is, the number of explicitly listed intermediate nodes still to be visited before
reaching the final destination. The block of addresses starts with a 32-bit reserved
field set by the sender to 0 and ignored by receivers. The addresses are nonmulti-
cast IPv6 addresses to be visited as the datagram is forwarded.
     A Routing header is not processed until it reaches the node whose address is
contained in the Destination IP Address field of the IPv6 header. At this time, the
Segments Left field is used to determine the next hop address from the address vec-
tor, and this address is swapped with the Destination IP Address field in the IPv6
header. Thus, as the datagram is forwarded, the Segments Left field grows smaller,
and the list of addresses in the header reflects the node addresses that forwarded
the datagram. The forwarding procedure is better understood with an example
(see Figure 5-9).

                        65&??6
                        '67??5?                               65&??6
                        /HIW???                               '67??5?
                        $???5?                                /HIW???
                        $???5?                                $???5?
                        $???'                                 $???5?
                                                              $???'

             6            5?             5?              5?             5?             '

                                              65&??6                         65&??6
                                              '67??5?                        '67??'
                                              /HIW???                        /HIW???
                                              $???5?                         $???5?
                                              $???5?                         $???5?
                                              $???'                          $???5?

Figure 5-9   Using an IPv6 Routing header (RH0), the sender (S) is able to direct the datagram
             through the intermediate nodes R 2 and R3. The other nodes traversed are determined by
             the normal IPv6 routing. Note that the destination address in the IPv6 header is updated
             at each hop specified in the Routing header.

     In Figure 5-9 we can see how the Routing header is processed by intermedi-
ate nodes. The sender (S) constructs the datagram with destination address R1
and a Routing header (type 0) containing the addresses R2, R3, and D. The final
destination of the datagram is the last address in the list (D). The Segments Left
field (labeled “Left” in Figure 5-9) starts at 3. The datagram is forwarded toward
R1 automatically by S and R0. Because R0’s address is not present in the datagram,

      no modifications of the Routing header or addresses are performed by R0. Upon
      reaching R1, the destination address from the base header is swapped with the first
      address listed in the Routing header and the Segments Left field is decremented.
          As the datagram is forwarded, the process of swapping the destination
      address with the next address from the address list in the Routing header repeats
      until the last destination listed in the Routing header is reached.
          We can arrange to include a Routing header with a simple command-line
      option to the ping6 command in Windows XP (Windows Vista and later include
      only the ping command, which incorporates IPv6 support):

      C:\> ping6 -r -s 2001:db8::100 2001:db8::1

      This command arranges to use the source address 2001:db8::100 when sending a
      ping request to 2001:db8::1. The -r option arranges for a Routing header (RH0)
      to be included. We can see the outgoing request using Wireshark (see Figure 5-10).

Figure 5-10   The ping request appears as an ICMPv6 Echo Request in Wireshark. The IPv6 header
                    includes a Next Header field indicating that the packet contains a type 0 Routing header,
                    followed by an ICMPv6 header. The number of segments in the RH0 left to be processed
                    is one (2001:db8::100).

           The ping message appears as an ICMPv6 Echo Request packet (see Chapter
      8). By following the Next Header field values, we can see that the base header is
      followed by a Routing header. In the Routing header, we can see that the type is
      0 (indicating an RH0), and there is one segment (hop) left to process. The hop is
      specified by the first slot in the address list (number 0): 2001:db8::100.

             As mentioned previously, RH0 has been deprecated by [RFC5095] because of
        a security concern that allows RH0 to be used to increase the effectiveness of DoS
        attacks. The problem is that RH0 allows the same address to be specified in mul-
        tiple locations within the Routing header. This can lead to traffic being forwarded
        many times between two or more hosts or routers along a particular path. The
        potentially high traffic loads that can be created along particular paths in the net-
        work can cause disruption to other traffic flows competing for bandwidth across
        the same path. Consequently, RH0 has been deprecated and only RH2 remains as
        the sole Routing header supported by IPv6. RH2 is equivalent to RH0 except it has
        room for only a single address and uses a different value in the Routing Type field.

5.3.3   Fragment Header
        The Fragment header is used by an IPv6 source when sending a datagram larger
        than the path MTU of the datagram’s intended destination. Path MTU and how
        it is determined are discussed in more detail in Chapter 13, but 1280 bytes is a
        network-wide link-layer minimum MTU for IPv6 (see section 5 of [RFC2460]). In
        IPv4, any host or router can fragment a datagram if it is too large for the MTU on
        the next hop, and fields within the second 32-bit word of the IPv4 header indicate
        the fragmentation information. In IPv6, only the sender of the datagram is permit-
        ted to perform fragmentation, and in such cases a Fragment header is added.
             The Fragment header includes the same information as is found in the IPv4
        header, but the Identification field is 32 bits instead of the 16 that are used for IPv4.
        The larger field provides the ability for more fragmented packets to be outstand-
        ing in the network simultaneously. The Fragment header uses the format shown
        in Figure 5-11.

                                                                                                    

                      1H[W?+HDGHU       5HVHUYHG? ?               )UDJPHQW?2IIVHW    5HV      0
                                                                                                       )UDJPHQW?
                           ELWV            ??ELWV                     ???ELWV        ??ELWV            ([WHQVLRQ?
                                                 ,GHQWLILFDWLRQ                                         +HDGHU??
                                                       ELWV                                             ??E\WHV

Figure 5-11    The IPv6 Fragment header contains a 32-bit Identification field (twice as large as the Iden-
                       tification field in IPv4). The M bit field indicates whether the fragment is the last of an
                       original datagram. As with IPv4, the Fragment Offset field gives the offset of the payload
                       into the original datagram in 8-byte units.

             Referring to Figure 5-11, the Reserved field and 2-bit Res field are both zero
        and ignored by receivers. The Fragment Offset field indicates where the data that
        follows the Fragment header is located, as a positive offset in 8-byte units, relative
        to the “fragmentable part” (see the next paragraph) of the original IPv6 datagram.
        The M bit field, if set to 1, indicates that more fragments are contained in the
        datagram. A value of 0 indicates that the fragment contains the last bytes of the
        original datagram.

           The datagram serving as input to the fragmentation process is called the
      “original packet” and consists of two parts: the “unfragmentable part” and the
      “fragmentable part.” The unfragmentable part includes the IPv6 header and any
      included extension headers required to be processed by intermediate nodes to the
      destination (i.e., all headers up to and including the Routing header, otherwise
      the Hop-by-Hop Options extension header if only it is present). The fragmentable
      part constitutes the remainder of the datagram (i.e., Destination Options header,
      upper-layer headers, and payload data).
           When the original packet is fragmented, multiple fragment packets are pro-
      duced, each of which contains a copy of the unfragmentable part of the origi-
      nal packet, but for which each IPv6 header has the Payload Length field altered to
      reflect the size of the fragment packet it describes. Following the unfragmentable
      part, each new fragment packet contains a Fragment header with an appropriately
      assigned Fragment Offset field (e.g., the first fragment contains offset 0) and a copy
      of the original packet’s Identification field. The last fragment has its M (More Frag-
      ments) bit field set to 0.
           The following example illustrates the way an IPv6 source might fragment a
      datagram. In the example shown in Figure 5-12, a payload of 3960 bytes is frag-
      mented such that no fragment’s total packet size exceeds 1500 bytes (a typical MTU
      for Ethernet), yet the fragment data sizes still are arranged to be multiples of 8 bytes.

                                                                             2ULJLQDO?3DFNHW
                    ,3Y??+HDGHU?????????????                 ,3?'DWD          /HQJWK? ?????
                         E\WHV                              ?????E\WHV
                                                                          3D\ORDG?/HQJWK? ?????

                                                    E\WHV

                                                                 E\WHV
                                                                              )LUVW?)UDJPHQW
                                          )UDJ                                /HQJWK? ?????
                    ,3Y??+HDGHU?????????????
                         E\WHV
                                       +HDGHU??????         ,3?'DWD
                                          E\WHV                           3D\ORDG?/HQJWK? ?????
                                     2IIVHW? ??                            'DWD?/HQJWK? ?????
                                       0)? ??
                             ,GHQWLILFDWLRQ? ????????

                                                                            6HFRQG?)UDJPHQW
                                          )UDJ
                    ,3Y??+HDGHU?????????????                                  /HQJWK? ?????
                         E\WHV
                                       +HDGHU??????         ,3?'DWD
                                          E\WHV                           3D\ORDG?/HQJWK? ?????
                                    2IIVHW? ????                           'DWD?/HQJWK? ?????
                                       0)? ??
                             ,GHQWLILFDWLRQ? ????????

                                                                           7KLUG? ILQDO ?)UDJPHQW
                                          )UDJ
                    ,3Y??+HDGHU?????????????
                                       +HDGHU??????
                                                      ,3?'DWD                  /HQJWK? ?????
                         E\WHV                        ?????E\WHV
                                          E\WHV                           3D\ORDG?/HQJWK? ?????
                                    2IIVHW? ????                            'DWD?/HQJWK? ?????
                                       0)? ??
                             ,GHQWLILFDWLRQ? ????????

Figure 5-12   An example of IPv6 fragmentation where a 3960-byte payload is split into three frag-
                    ment packets of size 1448 bytes or less. Each fragment contains a Fragment header with
                    the identical Identification field. All but the last fragment have the More Fragments field
                    (M) set to 1. The offset is given in 8-byte units—the last fragment, for example, con-
                    tains data beginning at offset (362 * 8) = 2896 bytes from the beginning of the original
                    packet’s data. The scheme is similar to fragmentation in IPv4.

      In Figure 5-12 we see how the larger original packet has been fragmented
into three smaller packets, each containing a Fragment header. The IPv6 header’s
Payload Length field is modified to reflect the size of the data and newly formed
Fragment header. The Fragment header in each fragment contains a common Iden-
tification field , and the sender ensures that no distinct original packets are assigned
the same field value within the expected lifetime of a datagram on the network.
      The Offset field in the Fragment header is given in 8-byte units, so fragmenta-
tion is performed at 8-byte boundaries, which is why the first and second fragments
contain 1448 data bytes instead of 1452. Thus, all but the last fragment (possibly) is a
multiple of 8 bytes. The receiver must ensure that all fragments of an original data-
gram have been received before performing reassembly. The reassembly procedure
aggregates the fragments, forming the original datagram. As with fragmentation in
IPv4 (see Chapter 10), fragments may arrive out of order at the receiver but are reas-
sembled in order to form a datagram that is given to other protocols for processing.
      We can see the construction of an IPv6 fragment using this command on Win-
dows 7:

C:\> ping -l 3952 ff01::2

    Figure 5-13 shows the Wireshark output of the activity on the network as it runs.

Figure 5-13   The ping program generates ICMPv6 packets (see Chapter 8) containing 3960 IPv6
              payload bytes in this example. These packets are fragmented to produce three packet
              fragments, each of which is small enough to fit in the Ethernet MTU size of 1500 bytes.

          In Figure 5-13 we see the fragments constituting four ICMPv6 Echo Request
      messages sent to the IPv6 multicast address ff01::2. Each request requires frag-
      mentation because the -l 3952 option indicates that 3952 data bytes are to be car-
      ried in the data area of each ICMPv6 message (leading to an IPv6 payload length
      of 3960 bytes due to the 8-byte ICMPv6 header). The IPv6 source address is link-
      local. To determine the target’s link-layer multicast address, a mapping procedure
      specific to IPv6 is performed, described in Chapter 9. The ICMPv6 Echo Request
      (generated by the ping program) spans several fragments, which Wireshark reas-
      sembles to display once it has processed all the constituent fragments. Figure 5-14
      shows the second fragment in more detail.

Figure 5-14   The second fragment of an ICMPv6 Echo Request contains 1448 IPv6 payload bytes
                    including the 8-byte Fragment header. The presence of the Fragment header indicates
                    that the overall datagram was fragmented at the source, and the Offset field of 181 indi-
                    cates that this fragment contains data starting at byte offset 1448. The More Fragments
                    bit field being set indicates that other fragments are needed to reassemble the datagram.
                    All fragments from the same original datagram contain the same Identification field (2
                    in this case).

          In Figure 5-14 we see the IPv6 header, with payload length 1448 bytes, as
      expected. The Next Header field contains the value 44 (0x2c) we saw in Table 5-5,
      indicating that a Fragment header follows the IPv6 header. The Fragment header
      indicates that the following header is for ICMPv6, meaning there are no more

extension headers. Also, the Offset field is 181, meaning this fragment contains
data at byte offset 1448 in the original datagram. We know it is not the last frag-
ment because the More Fragments field is set (displayed as Yes by Wireshark). Fig-
ure 5-15 shows the final fragment of the initial ICMPv6 Echo Request datagram.

Figure 5-15 The last fragment of the first ICMPv6 Echo Request datagram has an offset of 362 * 8
            = 2896 and payload length of 1072 bytes (1064 bytes of the original datagram’s payload
            plus 8 bytes of Fragment header). The More Fragments bit field being set to 0 indicates
            that this is the last fragment, and the original datagram’s total payload length is 2896
            + 1064 = 3960 bytes (3956 bytes of ICMP data plus 8 bytes for the ICMPv6 header; see
            Chapter 8).

    In Figure 5-15 we see that the Offset field has the value 362, but this is in 8-byte
units, meaning that the byte offset relative to the original datagram is 362 * 8 =
2896. The Total Length field has the value 1072, which includes 8 bytes for the Frag-
ment header. Wireshark computes the fragmentation pattern for us, indicating
that the first and second fragments contained the first and second sets of 1448
bytes, and the final fragment contained 1064. All in all, the fragmentation process
added 40*2 + 8*3 = 104 bytes to be carried by the network layer (two additional

        IPv6 headers plus an 8-byte Fragment header for each fragment). If we add link-
        layer overhead, the total comes to 104 + (2*18) = 140 bytes. (Each new Ethernet
        frame includes a 14-byte header and a 4-byte CRC.)

5.4     IP Forwarding
        Conceptually, IP forwarding is simple, especially for a host. If the destination is
        directly connected to the host (e.g., a point-to-point link) or on a shared network
        (e.g., Ethernet), the IP datagram is sent directly to the destination—a router is not
        required or used. Otherwise, the host sends the datagram to a single router (called
        the default router) and lets the router deliver the datagram to its destination. This
        simple scheme handles most host configurations.
             In this section we investigate the details of this simple situation and also how
        IP forwarding works when the situation is not as simple. We begin by noting that
        most hosts today can be configured to be routers as well as hosts, and many home
        networks use an Internet-connected PC to act as a router (and also a firewall, as
        we discuss in Chapter 7). What differentiates a host from a router to IP is how IP
        datagrams are handled: a host never forwards datagrams it does not originate,
        whereas routers do.
             In our general scheme, the IP protocol can receive a datagram either from
        another protocol on the same machine (TCP, UDP, etc.) or from a network inter-
        face. The IP layer has some information in memory, usually called a routing table or
        forwarding table, which it searches each time it receives a datagram to send. When a
        datagram is received from a network interface, IP first checks if the destination IP
        address is one of its own IP addresses (i.e., one of the IP addresses associated with
        one of its network interfaces) or some other address for which it should receive
        traffic such as an IP broadcast or multicast address. If so, the datagram is delivered
        to the protocol module specified by the Protocol field in the IPv4 header or Next
        Header field in the IPv6 header. If the datagram is not destined for one of the IP
        addresses being used locally by the IP module, then (1) if the IP layer was config-
        ured to act as a router, the datagram is forwarded (that is, handled as an outgoing
        datagram as described in Section 5.4.2); or (2) the datagram is silently discarded.
        Under some circumstances (e.g., no route is known in case 1), an ICMP message
        may be sent back to the source indicating an error condition.

5.4.1   Forwarding Table
        The IP protocol standards do not dictate the precise data required to be in a for-
        warding table, as this choice is left up to the implementer of the IP protocol. Nev-
        ertheless, several key pieces of information are generally required to implement
        the forwarding table for IP, and we shall discuss these now. Each entry in the
        routing or forwarding table contains the following information fields, at least
        conceptually:
                                                            Section 5.4 IP Forwarding     209

            • Destination: This contains a 32-bit field (or 128-bit field for IPv6) used for
              matching the result of a masking operation (see the next bulleted item).
              The destination can be as simple as zero, for a “default route” covering all
              destinations, or as long as the full length of an IP address, in the case of a
              “host route” that describes only a single destination.
            • Mask: This contains a 32-bit field (128-bit field for IPv6) applied as a bitwise
              AND mask to the destination IP address of a datagram being looked up in
              the forwarding table. The masked result is compared with the set of desti-
              nations in the forwarding table entries.
            • Next-hop: This contains the 32-bit IPv4 address or 128-bit IPv6 address of
              the next IP entity (router or host) to which the datagram should be sent. The
              next-hop entity is typically on a network shared with the system perform-
              ing the forwarding lookup, meaning the two share the same network prefix
              (see Chapter 2).

            • Interface: This contains an identifier used by the IP layer to reference the
              network interface that should be used to send the datagram to its next hop.
              For example, it could refer to a host’s 802.11 wireless interface, a wired Eth-
              ernet interface, or a PPP interface associated with a serial port. If the for-
              warding system is also the sender of the IP datagram, this field is used in
              selecting which source IP address to use on the outgoing datagram (see
              Section 5.6.2.1).

            IP forwarding is performed on a hop-by-hop basis. As we can see from this
        forwarding table information, the routers and hosts do not contain the complete
        forwarding path to any destination (except, of course, those destinations that are
        directly connected to the host or router). IP forwarding provides the IP address of
        only the next-hop entity to which the datagram is sent. It is assumed that the next
        hop is really “closer” to the destination than the forwarding system is, and that
        the next-hop router is directly connected to (i.e., shares a common network pre-
        fix with) the forwarding system. It is also generally assumed that no “loops” are
        constructed between the next hops so that a datagram does not circulate around
        the network until its TTL or hop limit expires. The job of ensuring correctness of
        the routing table is given to one or more routing protocols. Many different routing
        protocols are available to do this job, including RIP, OSPF, BGP, and IS-IS, to name a
        few (see, for example, [DC05] for more detail on routing protocols).

5.4.2   IP Forwarding Actions
        When the IP layer in a host or router needs to send an IP datagram to a next-hop
        router or host, it first examines the destination IP address (D) in the datagram.
        Using the value D, the following longest prefix match algorithm is executed on the
        forwarding table:

            1. Search the table for all entries for which the following property holds:
               (D ^ mj) = dj, where mj is the value of the mask field associated with the for-
               warding entry ej having index j, and dj is the value of the destination field
               associated with ej. This means that the destination IP address D is bitwise
               ANDed with the mask in each forwarding table entry (mj), and the result is
               compared against the destination in the same forwarding table entry (dj).
               If the property holds, the entry (ej here) is a “match” for the destination IP
               address. When a match happens, the algorithm notes the entry index (j
               here) and how many bits in the mask mj were set to 1. The more bits set to
               1, the “better” the match.
            2. The best matching entry ek (i.e., the one with the largest number of 1 bits in
               its mask mk) is selected, and its next-hop field nk is used as the next-hop IP
               address in forwarding the datagram.

             If no matches in the forwarding table are found, the datagram is undeliverable.
        If the undeliverable datagram was generated locally (on this host), a “host unreach-
        able” error is normally returned to the application that generated the datagram. On
        a router, an ICMP message is normally sent back to the host that sent the datagram.
             In some circumstances, more than one entry may match an equal number of 1
        bits. This can happen, for example, when more than one default route is available
        (e.g., when attached to more than one ISP, called multihoming). The end-system
        behavior in such cases is not set by standards and is instead specific to the operat-
        ing system’s protocol implementation. A common behavior is for the system to sim-
        ply choose the first match. More sophisticated systems may attempt to load-balance
        or split traffic across the multiple routes. Studies suggest that multihoming can be
        beneficial not only for large enterprises, but also for residential users [THL06].

5.4.3   Examples
        To get a solid understanding of how IP forwarding works both in the simple local
        environment (e.g., same LAN) and in the somewhat more complicated multihop
        (global Internet) environment, we look at two cases. The first case, where all sys-
        tems are using the same network prefix, is called direct delivery, and the other case
        is called indirect delivery (see Figure 5-16).

        5.4.3.1 Direct Delivery
        First consider a simple example. Our Windows XP host (with IPv4 address S and
        MAC address S), which we will just call S, has an IP datagram to send to our Linux
        host (IPv4 address D, MAC address D), which we will call D. These systems are
        interconnected using a switch. Both hosts are on the same Ethernet (see inside
        front cover). Figure 5-16 (top) shows the delivery of the datagram. When the IP
        layer in S receives a datagram to send from one of the upper layers such as TCP or
        UDP, it searches its forwarding table. We would expect the forwarding table on S
        to contain the information shown in Table 5-8.
                                                                            Section 5.4 IP Forwarding              211

                                                                                        5

                                                                                                         'LUHFW
                                                      6                6ZLWFK
                                                                                                        'HOLYHU\
     '67??'
                /D\HU??? H?J???(WKHUQHW ?+HDGHU                                         '
     65&??6
                                                             '67??'
     65&??6     /D\HU??? ,3 ?+HDGHU                          65&??6
     '67??'
                                                             65&??6
                                                             '67??'

                                    '67??5?D
                                    65&??6                                                       ,QGLUHFW
                                    65&??6
                                    '67??'                                                       'HOLYHU\

                                D            E    D          E     D            E   D        E
                     6                5?              5?               5?               5?              '

                             '67??5?D                     '67??5?D          '67??5?D         '67??'
                             65&??5?E                     65&??5?E          65&??5?E         65&??5?E
                             65&??6                       65&??6            65&??6           65&??6
                             '67??'                       '67??'            '67??'           '67??'

Figure 5-16 Direct delivery does not require the presence of a router—IP datagrams are encapsu-
            lated in a link-layer frame that directly identifies the source and destination. Indirect
            delivery involves a router—data is forwarded to the router using the router’s link-layer
            address as the destination link-layer address. The router’s IP address does not appear
            in the IP datagram (unless the router itself is the source or destination, or when source
            routing is used).

     In Table 5-8, the destination IPv4 address D (10.0.0.9) matches both the first
and second forwarding table entries. Because it matches the second entry bet-
ter (25 bits instead of none), the “gateway” or next-hop address is 10.0.0.100, the
address S. Thus, the gateway portion of the entry contains the address of the send-
ing host’s own network interface (no router is referenced), indicating that direct
delivery is to be used to send the datagram.

Table 5-8     The (unicast) IPv4 forwarding table at host S contains only two entries. Host S is config-
              ured with IPv4 address and subnet mask 10.0.0.100/25. Datagrams destined for addresses
              in the range 10.0.0.1 through 10.0.0.126 use the second forwarding table entry and are sent
              using direct delivery. All other datagrams use the first entry and are given to router R
              with IPv4 address 10.0.0.1.

Destination                    Mask                              Gateway (Next Hop)                   Interface
0.0.0.0                        0.0.0.0                           10.0.0.1                             10.0.0.100
10.0.0.0                       255.255.255.128                   10.0.0.100                           10.0.0.100

           The datagram is encapsulated in a lower-layer frame destined for the target
      host D. If the lower-layer address of the target host is unknown, the ARP protocol
      (for IPv4; see Chapter 4) or Neighbor Solicitation (for IPv6; see Chapter 8) opera-
      tion may be invoked at this point to determine the correct lower-layer address, D.
      Once known, the destination address in the datagram is D’s IPv4 address (10.0.0.9),
      and D is placed in the Destination IP Address field in the lower-layer header. The
      switch delivers the frame to D based solely on the link-layer address D; it pays no
      attention to the IP addresses.

      5.4.3.2 Indirect Delivery
      Now consider another example. Our Windows host has an IP datagram to send
      to the host ftp.uu.net, whose IPv4 address is 192.48.96.9. Figure 5-16 (bottom)
      shows the conceptual path of the datagram through four routers. First, the Win-
      dows machine searches its forwarding table but does not find a matching prefix
      on the local network. It uses its default route entry (which matches every destina-
      tion, but with no 1 bits at all). The default entry indicates that the appropriate next-
      hop gateway is 10.0.0.1 (the “a side” of the router R1). This is a typical scenario for
      a home network.
           Recall that in the direct delivery case, the source and destination IP addresses
      correspond to those associated with the source and destination hosts. The same
      is true for the lower-layer (e.g., Ethernet) addresses. In indirect delivery, the
      IP addresses correspond to the source and destination hosts as before, but the
      lower-layer addresses do not. Instead, the lower-layer addresses determine which
      machines receive the frame containing the datagram on a per-hop basis. In this
      example, the lower-layer address needed is the Ethernet address of the next-hop
      router R1’s a-side interface, the lower-layer address corresponding to IPv4 address
      10.0.0.1. This is accomplished by ARP (or a Neighbor Solicitation request if this
      example were using IPv6) on the network interconnecting S and R1. Once R1
      responds with its a-side lower-layer address, S sends the datagram to R1. Delivery
      from S to R1 takes place based on processing only the lower-layer headers (more
      specifically, the lower-layer destination address). Upon receipt of the datagram, R1
      checks its forwarding table. The information in Table 5-9 would be typical.

Table 5-9   The forwarding table at R1 indicates that address translation should be performed for
                  traffic. The router has a private address on one side (10.0.0.1) and a public address on the
                  other (70.231.132.85). Address translation is used to make datagrams originating on the
                  10.0.0.0/25 network appear to the Internet as though they had been sent from 70.231.132.85.

      Destination           Mask                   Gateway (Next Hop)           Interface           Note
      0.0.0.0               0.0.0.0                70.231.159.254               70.231.132.85       NAT
      10.0.0.0              255.255.255.128        10.0.0.100                   10.0.0.1            NAT
                                                   Section 5.4 IP Forwarding     213

    When R1 receives the datagram, it realizes that the datagram’s destination IP
address is not one of its own, so it forwards the datagram. Its forwarding table is
searched and the default entry is used. The default entry in this case has a next
hop within the ISP servicing the network, 70.231.159.254 (this is R2’s a-side inter-
face). This address happens to be within SBC’s DSL network called by the some-
what cumbersome name adsl-70-231-159-254.dsl.snfc21.sbcglobal.net.
Because this router is in the global Internet and the Windows machine’s source
address is the private address 10.0.0.100, R1 performs Network Address Translation
(NAT) on the datagram to make it routable on the Internet. The NAT operation
results in the datagram having the new source address 70.231.132.85, which cor-
responds to R1’s b-side interface. Networks that do not use private addressing (e.g.,
ISPs and larger enterprises) avoid the last step and the original source address
remains unchanged. NAT is described in more detail in Chapter 7.
    When router R2 (inside the ISP) receives the datagram, it goes through the
same steps that the local router R1 did (except for the NAT operation). If the data-
gram is not destined for one of its own IP addresses, the datagram is forwarded.
In this case, the router usually has not only a default route but several others,
depending on its connectivity to the rest of the Internet and its own local policies.
    Note that IPv6 forwarding varies only slightly from conventional IPv4 for-
warding. Aside from the larger addresses, IPv6 uses a slightly different mecha-
nism (Neighbor Solicitation messages) to ascertain the lower-layer address of its
next hop. It is described in more detail in Chapter 8, as it is part of ICMPv6. In
addition, IPv6 has both link-local addresses and global addresses (see Chapter 2).
While global addresses behave like regular IP addresses, link-local addresses can
be used only on the same link. In addition, because all the link-local addresses
share the same IPv6 prefix (fe80::/10), a multihomed host may require user input
to determine which interface to use when sending a datagram destined for a link-
local destination.
    To illustrate the use of link-local addresses, we start with our Windows XP
machine, assuming IPv6 is enabled and operational:

C:\> ping6 fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80

Pinging fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80 with 32 bytes of data:

No route to destination.
  Specify correct scope-id or use -s to specify source address.
  ...

C:\> ping6 fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%6

Pinging fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%6
from fe80::205:4eff:fe4a:24bb%6 with 32 bytes of data:

Reply from fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%6: bytes=32 time=1ms
Reply from fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%6: bytes=32 time=1ms

      Reply from fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%6: bytes=32 time=1ms
      Reply from fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%6: bytes=32 time=1ms

      Ping statistics for fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%6:
          Packets: Sent = 4, Received = 4, Lost = 0 (0% loss),
      Approximate round trip times in milli-seconds:
          Minimum = 1ms, Maximum = 1ms, Average = 1ms

          Here we see that failing to specify which interface to use for outbound link-
      local traffic results in an error. In Windows XP, we can specify either a scope ID or
      a source address. In this example we specify the scope ID as an interface number
      using the %6 extension to the destination address. This informs the system to use
      interface number 6 as the correct interface when sending the ping traffic.
          To see the path taken to an IP destination, we can use the traceroute pro-
      gram (called tracert on Windows, which has a slightly different set of options)
      with the -n option to not convert IP addresses to names:

      Linux% traceroute -n ftp.uu.net
      traceroute to ftp.uu.net (192.48.96.9), 30 hops max, 38 byte packets
       1 70.231.159.254 9.285 ms 8.404 ms 8.887 ms
       2 206.171.134.131 8.412 ms 8.764 ms 8.661 ms
       3 216.102.176.226 8.502 ms 8.995 ms 8.644 ms
       4 151.164.190.185 8.705 ms 8.673 ms 9.014 ms
       5 151.164.92.181 9.149 ms 9.057 ms 9.537 ms
       6 151.164.240.134 9.680 ms 10.389 ms 11.003 ms
       7 151.164.41.10 11.605 ms 37.699 ms 11.374 ms
       8 12.122.79.97 13.449 ms 12.804 ms 13.126 ms
       9 12.122.85.134 15.114 ms 15.020 ms 13.654 ms
           MPLS Label=32307 CoS=5 TTL=1 S=0
      10 12.123.12.18 16.011 ms 13.555 ms 13.167 ms
      11 192.205.33.198 15.594 ms 15.497 ms 16.093 ms
      12 152.63.57.102 15.103 ms 14.769 ms 15.128 ms
      13 152.63.34.133 77.501 ms 77.593 ms 76.974 ms
      14 152.63.38.1 77.906 ms 78.101 ms 78.398 ms
      15 207.18.173.162 81.146 ms 81.281 ms 80.918 ms
      16 198.5.240.36 77.988 ms 78.007 ms 77.947 ms
      17 198.5.241.101 81.912 ms 82.231 ms 83.115 ms

           This program lists each of the IP hops traversed while sending a series of data-
      grams to the destination ftp.uu.net (192.48.96.9). The traceroute program
      uses a combination of UDP datagrams (with increasing TTL over time) and ICMP
      messages (used to detect each hop when the UDP datagrams expire) to accomplish
      its task. Three UDP packets are sent at each TTL value, providing three round-
      trip-time measurements to each hop. Traditionally, traceroute has carried only
      IP information, but here we also see the following line:

      MPLS Label=32307 CoS=5 TTL=1 S=0
                                                                  Section 5.5 Mobile IP     215

        This indicates that Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) [RFC3031] is being used
        on the path, and the label ID is 32307, class of service is 5, TTL is 1, and the message
        is not the bottom of the MPLS label stack (S = 0; see [RFC4950]). MPLS is a form
        of link-layer network capable of carrying multiple network-layer protocols. Its
        interaction with ICMP is described in [RFC4950], and its handling of IPv4 packets
        containing options is described in [RFC6178]. Many network operators use it for
        traffic engineering purposes (i.e., controlling where network traffic flows through
        their networks).

5.4.4   Discussion
        In the examples we have just seen there are a few key points that should be kept in
        mind regarding the operation of IP unicast forwarding:

            1. Most of the hosts and routers in this example used a default route consist-
               ing of a single forwarding table entry of this form: mask 0, destination 0,
               next hop <some IP address>. Indeed, most hosts and most routers at the
               edge of the Internet can use a default route for everything other than desti-
               nations on local networks because there is only one interface available that
               provides connectivity to the rest of the Internet.
            2. The source and destination IP addresses in the datagram never change
               once in the regular Internet. This is always the case unless either source
               routing is used, or when other functions (such as NAT, as in the example)
               are encountered along the data path. Forwarding decisions at the IP layer
               are based on the destination address.
            3. A different lower-layer header is used on each link that uses addressing,
               and the lower-layer destination address (if present) always contains the
               lower-layer address of the next hop. Therefore, lower-layer headers rou-
               tinely change as the datagram is moved along each hop toward its des-
               tination. In our example, both Ethernet LANs encapsulated a link-layer
               header containing the next hop’s Ethernet address, but the DSL link did
               not. Lower-layer addresses are normally obtained using ARP (see Chapter
               4) for IPv4 and ICMPv6 Neighbor Discovery for IPv6 (see Chapter 8).

5.5     Mobile IP
        So far we have discussed the conventional ways that IP datagrams are forwarded
        through the Internet, as well as private networks that use IP. One assumption of the
        model is that a host’s IP address shares a prefix with its nearby hosts and routers. If
        such a host should move its point of network attachment, yet remain connected to
        the network at the link layer, all of its upper-layer (e.g., TCP) connections would fail

        because either its IP address would have to be changed or routing would not deliver
        packets to the (moved) host properly. A multiyear (actually, multidecade!) effort
        known as Mobile IP addresses this issue. (Other protocols have also been suggested;
        see [RFC6301].) Although there are versions of Mobile IP for both IPv4 [RFC5944]
        (MIPv4) and IPv6 [RFC6275], we focus on Mobile IPv6 (called MIPv6) because it is
        more flexible and somewhat easier to explain. Also, it currently appears more likely
        to be deployed in the quickly growing smartphone market. Note that we do not
        discuss MIPv6 comprehensively; it is sufficiently complex to merit a book on its own
        (e.g., [RC05]). Nonetheless, we will cover its basic concepts and principles.
             Mobile IP is based on the idea that a host has a “home” network but may visit
        other networks from time to time. While at home, ordinary forwarding is per-
        formed, according to the algorithms discussed in this chapter. When away from
        home, the host keeps the IP address it would ordinarily use at home, but some
        special routing and forwarding tricks are used to make the host appear to the
        network, and to the other systems with which it communicates, as though it is
        attached to its home network. The scheme depends on a special type of router
        called a “home agent” that helps provide routing for mobile nodes.
             Most of the complexity in MIPv6 involves signaling messages and how they
        are secured. These messages use various forms of the Mobility extension header
        (Next Header field value 135 in Table 5-5, often just called the mobility header), so
        Mobile IP is, in effect, a special protocol of its own. The IANA maintains a registry
        of the various header types (17 are reserved currently), along with many other
        parameters associated with MIPv6 [MP]. We shall focus on the basic messages
        specified in [RFC6275]. Other messages are used to implement “fast handovers”
        [RFC5568], changing of the home agent [RFC5142], and experiments [RFC5096].
        To understand MIPv6, we begin by introducing the basic model for IP mobility
        and the associated terminology.

5.5.1   The Basic Model: Bidirectional Tunneling
        Figure 5-17 shows the entities involved in making MIPv6 work. Much of the termi-
        nology also applies to MIPv4 [RFC5944]. A host that might move is called a mobile
        node (MN), and the hosts with which it is communicating are called correspon-
        dent nodes (CNs). The MN is given an IP address chosen from the network prefix
        used in its home network. This address is known as its home address (HoA). When
        it travels to a visited network, it is given an additional address, called its care-of
        address (CoA). In the basic model, whenever a CN communicates with an MN,
        the traffic is routed through the MN’s home agent (HA). HAs are a special type of
        router deployed in the network infrastructure like other important systems (e.g.,
        routers and Web servers). The association between an MN’s HoA and its CoA is
        called a binding for the MN.
             The basic model (see Figure 5-17) works in cases where an MN’s CNs do not
        engage in the MIPv6 protocol. This model is also used for network mobility (called
        “NEMO” [RFC3963]), when an entire network is mobile. When the MN (or mobile
                                                                              Section 5.5 Mobile IP          217

                                     &RUUHVSRQGHQW?1RGHV?
                                             &1V

                                                ,QWHUQHW
        +RPH?$JHQW? +$

   +RPH?1HWZRUN
                                                                                         9LVLWHG?1HWZRUN

                                                   0RYHV                   &DUH?RI?$GGUHVV? &R$
                 +RPH?$GGUHVV? +R$                                          DQG?+RPH?$GGUHVV?
                                                                                    +R$

                                          0RELOH?1RGH? 01

Figure 5-17   Mobile IP supports the ability of nodes to change their point of network attachment and keep
              network connections operating. The mobile node’s home agent helps to forward traffic for mobiles
              it serves and also plays a role in route optimization, which can substantially improve routing per-
              formance by allowing mobile and correspondent nodes to communicate directly.

          network router) attaches to a new point in the network, it receives its CoA and
          sends a binding update message to its HA. The HA responds with a binding acknowl-
          edgment. Assuming that all goes well, traffic between the MN and CNs is thereaf-
          ter routed through the MN’s HA using a two-way form of IPv6 packet tunneling
          [RFC2473] called bidirectional tunneling. These messages are ordinarily protected
          using IPsec with the Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) (see Chapter 18). Doing so
          ensures that an HA is not fooled into accepting a binding update from a fake MN.

5.5.2     Route Optimization (RO)
          Bidirectional tunneling makes MIPv6 work in a relatively simple way, and with
          CNs that are not Mobile-IP-aware, but the routing can be extremely inefficient,
          especially if the MN and CNs are near each other but far away from the MN’s HA.
          To improve upon the inefficient routing that may occur in basic MIPv6, a process
          called route optimization (RO) can be used, provided it is supported by the various
          nodes involved. As we shall see, the methods used to ensure that RO is secure and
          useful are somewhat complicated. We shall sketch only its basic operations. For a
          more detailed discussion, see [RFC6275] and [RFC4866]. For a discussion of the
          design rationale behind RO security, see [RFC4225].

           When used, RO involves a correspondent registration whereby an MN notifies
      its CNs of its current CoA to allow routing to take place without help from the HA.
      RO operates in two parts: one part involves establishing and maintaining the reg-
      istration bindings; another involves the method used to exchange datagrams once
      all bindings are in place. To establish a binding with its CNs, an MN must prove
      to each CN that it is the proper MN. This is accomplished by a Return Routability
      Procedure (RRP). The messages that support RRP are not protected using IPsec as
      are the messages between an MN and its HA. Expecting IPsec to work between
      an MN and any CN was believed to be too unreliable (IPv6 requires IPsec sup-
      port but does not require its use). Although the RRP is not as strong as IPsec, it
      is simpler and covers most of the security threats of concern to the designers of
      Mobile IP.
           The RRP uses the following mobility messages, all of which are subtypes of the
      IPv6 Mobility extension header: Home Test Init (HoTI), Home Test (HoT), Care-of
      Test Init (CoTI), Care-of Test (CoT). These messages verify to a CN that a particu-
      lar MN is reachable both at its home address (HoTI and HoT messages) and at its
      care-of addresses (CoTI and CoT messages). The protocol is shown in Figure 5-18.

                                                                        +RPH?$JHQW? +$
                    0RELOH?1RGH? 01
                                                              ,3VHF?7XQQHO
                                                      +R7,? ?
                                                     +R7? ?

                                                    0RELOH?QRGH?XVHV?WRNHQV?LQ?+R7?DQG?
                                                     &R7?PHVVDJHV?WR?GHULYH?D?NH\?IRU?
                                                            ELQGLQJ?XSGDWHV?ZLWK?&1
                                                      &R
                                                                                                    +R7? ?
                                                                                          +R7,? ?

                                                         7?
                                                              
                                                     &R
                                                        7,?
                                                             

                                       &RUUHVSRQGHQW?1RGH? &1

Figure 5-18   The return routability check procedure used in sending binding updates from an MN
                    to a CN in order to enable route optimization. The check aims to demonstrate to a CN
                    that an MN is reachable at both its home address and its care-of address. In this figure,
                    messages routed indirectly are indicated with dashed arrows. The numbers indicate
                    the ordering of messages, although the HoTI and CoTI messages can be sent by an MN
                    in parallel.
                                                               Section 5.5 Mobile IP       219

    To understand the RRP, we take the simplest case of a single MN, its HA, and
a CN as shown in Figure 5-18. The MN begins by sending both a HoTI and CoTI
message to the CN. The HoTI message is forwarded through the HA on its way
to the CN. The CN receives both messages in some order and responds with a
HoT and CoT message to each, respectively. The HoT message is sent to the MN
via the HA. Inside these messages are random bit strings called tokens, which the
MN uses to form a cryptographic key (see Chapter 18 for a discussion of the basics
of cryptography and keys). The key is then used to form authenticated binding
updates that are sent to the CN. If successful, the route can be optimized and data
can flow directly between an MN and a CN, as shown in Figure 5-19.

                      65&??01?&R$
                      '67??&1
                      +RPH?$GGU?2SWLRQ?
                                                      &RUUHVSRQGHQW?1RGH? &1
                          01?+R$
                                           7R?&1

                                          )URP?&1
                                                    65&??&1
                                                    '67??01?&R$
       0RELOH?1RGH? 01
                                                    5WJ?+GU???
                                                     01?+R$

Figure 5-19   Once a binding is established between an MN and a CN, data flows directly between
              them. The direction from MN to CN uses an IPv6 Home Address Destination option.
              The reverse direction uses a type 2 Routing header (RH2).

    Once a binding has been established successfully, data may flow directly
between an MN and its CNs without the inefficiency of bidirectional tunneling.
This is accomplished using an IPv6 Destination option for traffic moving from
the MN to a CN and a type 2 Routing header (RH2) for traffic headed in the
reverse direction, as detailed in Figure 5-19. The packets from MN to CN include
a Source IP Address field of the MN’s CoA, which avoids problems associated with
ingress filtering [RFC2827] that might cause packets containing the MN’s HoA in
the Source IP Address field to be dropped. The MN’s HoA, contained in the Home
Address option, is not processed by routers, so it passes through to the CN with-
out modification. On the return path, packets are destined for the MN’s CoA. After
successfully receiving a returning packet, the MN processes the extension headers
and replaces the destination IP address with the HoA contained in the RH2. The
resulting packet is delivered to the rest of the MN’s protocol stack, so applications
“believe” they are using the MN’s HoA instead of its CoA for establishing connec-
tions and other actions.

5.5.3   Discussion
        There are a number of issues with Mobile IP. It is designed to address a certain
        type of mobility in which a node’s IP address may change while the underlying
        link layer remains more or less connected. This type of usage is not common for
        portable computers, which tend to shut down or be put to sleep when being moved
        from place to place. The usage model requiring Mobile IP (and MIPv6 in particu-
        lar) is more likely to be a large number of smartphones that use IP. Such devices
        may be running real-time applications (e.g., VoIP) that have latency requirements.
        Consequently, several approaches are being explored to reduce the amount of time
        required to execute binding updates. These include fast handovers [RFC5568], a
        modification to MIPv6 called Hierarchical MIPv6 (HMIPv6) [RFC5380], and a
        modification in which the mobile signaling ordinarily required of an MN is per-
        formed by a proxy (called proxy MIPv6 or PMIPv6 [RFC5213]).

5.6     Host Processing of IP Datagrams
        Although routers do not ordinarily have to consider which IP addresses to place
        in the Source IP Address and Destination IP Address fields of the packets they for-
        ward, hosts must consider both. Applications such as Web browsers may attempt
        to make connections to a named host or server that can have multiple addresses.
        The client system making such connections may also have multiple addresses.
        Thus, there is some question as to which address (and version of IP) should be
        used when sending a datagram. A more subtle point we shall explore is whether
        to accept traffic destined for a local IP address if it arrives on the wrong interface
        (i.e., one that is not configured with the destination address present in a received
        datagram).

5.6.1   Host Models
        Although it may appear to be a straightforward decision to determine whether a
        received unicast datagram matches one of a host’s IP addresses and should be pro-
        cessed, this decision depends on the host model of the receiving system [RFC1122]
        and is most relevant for multihomed hosts. There are two host models, the strong
        host model and the weak host model. In the strong host model, a datagram is accepted
        for delivery to the local protocol stack only if the IP address contained in the Desti-
        nation IP Address field matches one of those configured on the interface upon which
        the datagram arrived. In systems implementing the weak host model, the oppo-
        site is true—a datagram carrying a destination address matching any of the local
        addresses may arrive on any interface and is processed by the receiving protocol
        stack, irrespective of the network interface upon which it arrived. Host models also
        apply to sending behavior. That is, a host using the strong host model sends data-
        grams from a particular interface only if one of the interface’s configured addresses
        matches the Source IP Address field in the datagram being sent.
                                         Section 5.6 Host Processing of IP Datagrams              221

     Figure 5-20 illustrates a case where the host model becomes important. In
this example, two hosts (A and B) are connected through the global Internet but
also through a local network. If host A is set up to conform to the strong host
model, packets it receives destined for 203.0.113.1 from the Internet or destined for
192.0.2.1 from the local network are dropped. This situation can arise, for example,
if host B is configured to obey the weak host model. It may choose to send pack-
ets to 192.0.2.1 using the local network (e.g., because doing so may be cheaper or
faster). This situation seems unfortunate, as A receives what appear to be perfectly
legitimate packets, yet drops them merely because it is operating according to the
strong host model. So a reasonable question would be: Why is it ever a good idea
to use the strong host model?

                                          ,QWHUQHW

                                                                              

                              +RVW?$                      +RVW?%

                                                                          

Figure 5-20   Hosts may be connected by more than one interface. In such cases, they must decide
              which addresses to use for the Source IP Address and Destination IP Address fields of the
              packets they exchange. The addresses used result from a combination of each host’s for-
              warding table, application of an address selection algorithm [RFC 3484], and whether
              hosts are operating using a weak or strong host model.

     The attraction of using the strong host model relates to a security concern.
Referring to Figure 5-20, consider a malicious user on the Internet who injects a
packet destined for the address 203.0.113.2. This packet could also include a forged
(“spoofed”) source IP address (e.g., 203.0.113.1). If the Internet cooperates in rout-
ing such a packet to B, applications running on B may be tricked into believing
they have received local traffic originating from A. This can have significant nega-
tive consequences if such applications make access control decisions based on the
source IP address.
     The host model, for both sending and receiving behavior, can be configured
in some operating systems. In Windows (Vista and later), strong host behavior is

        the default for sending and receiving for IPv4 and IPv6. In Linux, the IP behavior
        defaults to the weak host model. BSD (including Mac OS X) uses the strong host
        model. In Windows, the following commands can be used to configure weak host
        receive and send behavior, respectively:

        C:\> netsh interface ipvX set interface <ifname> weakhostreceive=Yabled

        C:\> netsh interface ipvX set interface <ifname> weakhostsend=Yabled

        For these commands, <ifname> is replaced with the appropriate interface name;
        X is replaced with either 4 or 6, depending on which version of IP is being con-
        figured; and Y is replaced with either en or dis, depending on whether weak
        behavior is to be enabled or disabled, respectively.

5.6.2   Address Selection
        When a host sends an IP datagram, it must decide which of its IP addresses to
        place in the Source IP Address field of the outgoing datagram, and which destina-
        tion address to use for a particular destination host if multiple addresses for it are
        known. In some cases the source address is already known because it is provided
        by an application or because the packet is being sent in response to a previously
        received packet on the same connection (see, for example, Chapter 13 for how
        addresses are managed with TCP).
            In modern IP implementations, the IP addresses used in the Source IP Address
        and Destination IP Address fields of the datagram are selected using a set of pro-
        cedures called source address selection and destination address selection. Historically,
        most Internet hosts had only one IP address for external communication, so select-
        ing the addresses was not terribly difficult. With the advent of multiple addresses
        per interface and the use of IPv6 in which simultaneous use of addresses with
        multiple scopes is normal, some procedure must be used. The situation is further
        complicated when communication is to take place between two hosts that imple-
        ment both IPv4 and IPv6 (“dual-stack” hosts; see [RFC4213]). Failure to select the
        correct addresses can lead to asymmetric routing, unwanted filtering, or discard-
        ing of packets. Fixing such problems can be a challenge.
            [RFC3484] gives the rules for selecting IPv6 default addresses; IPv4-only hosts
        do not ordinarily have such complex issues. In general, applications can invoke
        special API operations to override the default behavior, as suggested previously.
        Even then, tricky deployment situations may still arise [RFC5220]. The default
        rules in [RFC3484] are to prefer source/destination address pairs where the
        addresses are of the same scope, to prefer smaller over larger scopes, to avoid the
        use of temporary addresses when other addresses are available, and to otherwise
        prefer pairs with the longest common prefix. Global addresses are preferred over
        temporary addresses when available. The specification also includes a method of
                                        Section 5.6 Host Processing of IP Datagrams              223

providing “administrative override” to the default rules, but this is deployment-
specific and we do not discuss it further.
     The selection of default addresses is controlled by a policy table, present (at
least conceptually) in each host. It is a longest-matching-prefix lookup table, simi-
lar to a forwarding table used with IP routing. For an address A, a lookup in this
table produces a precedence value for A, P(A), and a label for A, L(A). A higher pre-
cedence value indicates greater preference. The labels are used for grouping of
similar address types. For example if L(S) = L(D), the algorithm prefers to use the
pair (S,D) as a source/destination pair. If no other policy is specified, [RFC3484]
suggests that the policy values from Table 5-10 be used.

Table 5-10   The default host policy table, according to [RFC3484]. Higher precedence values indicate
             a greater preference.

Prefix                            Precedence P()                    Label L()
::1/128                           50                                0
::/0                              40                                1

2002::/16                         30                                2
::/96                             20                                3

::ffff:0:0/96                     10                                4

     This table, or one configured at a site based upon administrative configura-
tion parameters, is used to drive the address selection algorithm. The function
CPL(A,B) or “common prefix length” is the length, in bits, of the longest com-
mon prefix between IPv6 addresses A and B, starting from the left-most signifi-
cant bit. The function S(A) is the scope of IPv6 address A mapped to a numeric
value with larger scopes mapping to larger values. If A is link-scoped and B is
global scope, then S(A) < S(B). The function M(A) maps an IPv4 address A to an
IPv4-mapped IPv6 address. Because the scope properties of IPv4 addresses are
based on the value of the address itself, the following relations need to be defined:
S(M(169.254.x.x)) = S(M(127.x.x.x)) < S(M(private address space)) < S(M(any other
address)). The notation Λ(A) is the lifecycle of the address (see Chapter 6). Λ (A) <
Λ (B) if A is a deprecated address (i.e., one whose use is discouraged) and B is a pre-
ferred address (i.e., an address preferred for active use). Finally, H(A) is true if A is
a home address and C(A) is true if A is a care-of address. These last two terms are
used only in the context of Mobile IP.

5.6.2.1 The Source Address Selection Algorithm
The source address selection algorithm defines a candidate set CS(D) of potential
source addresses based on a particular destination address D. There is a restriction

      that anycast, multicast, and the unspecified address are never in CS(D) for any D.
      We shall use the notation R(A) to indicate the rank of address A in the set CS(D).
      A higher rank (i.e., greater value of R(A)) for A versus B in CS(D), denoted R(A) >
      R(B), means that A is preferred to B for use as a source address for reaching the
      machine with address D. The notation R(A) *> R(B) means to assign A a higher
      rank than B in CS(D). The notation I(D) indicates the interface selected (i.e., by
      the forwarding longest matching prefix algorithm described previously) to reach
      destination D. The notation @(i) is the set of addresses assigned to interface i. The
      notation T(A) is the Boolean true if A is a temporary address (see Chapter 6) and
      false otherwise.
          The following rules are applied to establish a partial ordering between
      addresses A and B in CS(D) for destination D:

          1. Prefer same address: if A = D, R(A) *> R(B); if B = D, R(B) *> R(A).
          2. Prefer appropriate scope: if S(A) < S(B) and S(A) < S(D), R(B) *> R(A) else
             R(A) *> R(B); if S(B) < S(A) and S(B) < S(D), R(A) *> R(B) else R(B) *> R(A).
          3. Avoid deprecated addresses: if S(A) = S(B), { if Λ(A) < Λ(B), R(B) *> R(A) else
             R(A) *> R(B) }.
          4. Prefer home address: if H(A) and C(A) and ¬(C(B) and H(B)), R(A) *> R(B);
             if H(B) and C(B) and ¬(C(A) and H(A)), R(B) *> R(A); if (H(A) and ¬C(A))
             and (¬H(B) and C(B)), R(A) *> R(B); if (H(B) and ¬C(B)) and (¬H(A) and
             C(A)), R(B) *> R(A).
          5. Prefer outgoing interface: if A ∈ @(I(D)) and B ∈ @(I(D)), R(A) *> R(B); if B
             ∈@(I(D)) and A ∈ @(I(D)), R(B) *> R(A).
          6. Prefer matching label: if L(A) = L(D) and L(B) ≠ L(D), R(A) *> R(B); if L(B) =
             L(D) and L(A) ≠ L(D), R(B) *> R(A).
          7. Prefer nontemporary addresses: if T(B) and ¬T(A), R(A) *> R(B); if T(A) and
             ¬T(B), R(B) *> R(A).
          8. Use longest matching prefix: if CPL(A,D) > CPL(B,D), R(A) *> R(B); if
             CPL(B,D) > CPL(A,D), R(B) *> R(A).

          The partial ordering rules can be used to form a total ordering of all the can-
      didate addresses in CS(D). The one with the largest rank is the selected source
      address for destination D, denoted Q(D), and is used by the destination address
      selection algorithm. If Q(D) = Ø (null), no source could be determined for destina-
      tion D.

      5.6.2.2 The Destination Address Selection Algorithm
      We now turn to the problem of default destination address selection. It is specified
      in a way similar to source address selection. Recall that Q(D) is the source address
                                  Section 5.6 Host Processing of IP Datagrams     225

selected in the preceding example to reach the destination D. Let U(B) be the Bool-
ean true if destination B is not reachable and E(A) indicate that destination A is
reached using some “encapsulating transport” (e.g., tunneled routing). Using the
same structure as before on pairwise elements A and B of the set SD(S), we have
the following rules:

    1. Avoid unusable destinations: if U(B) or Q(B) = Ø, R(A) *> R(B); if U(A) or
       Q(A) = Ø, R(B) *> R(A).
    2. Prefer matching scope: if S(A) = S(Q(A)) and S(B) ≠ S(Q(B)), R(A) *> R(B); if
       S(B) = S(Q(B)) and S(A) ≠ S(Q(A)), R(B)*>R(A).
    3. Avoid deprecated addresses: if Λ (Q(A)) < Λ (Q(B)), R(B) *> R(A); if Λ (Q(B))
       < Λ (Q(A)), R(A) *> R(B).
    4. Prefer home address: if H(Q(A)) and C(Q(A)) and ¬(C(Q(B)) and H(Q(B))),
       R(A) *> R(B); if (Q(B)) and C(Q(B)) and ¬(C(Q(A)) and H(Q(A))), R(B) *>
       R(A); if (H(Q(A)) and ¬C(Q(A))) and (¬H(Q(B)) and C(Q(B))), R(A) *> R(B);
       if (H(Q(B)) and ¬C(Q(B))) and (¬H(Q(A)) and C(Q(A))), R(B) *> R(A).
    5. Prefer matching label: if L(Q(A)) = L(A) and L(Q(B)) ≠ L(B), R(A) *> R(B); if
       L(Q(A)) ≠ L(A) and L(Q(B)) = L(B), R(B) *> R(A).
    6. Prefer higher precedence: if P(A) > P(B), R(A) *> R(B); if P(A) < P(B), R(B) *>
       R(A).
    7. Prefer native transport: if E(A) and ¬E(B), R(B) *> R(A); if E(B) and ¬E(A),
       R(A) *> R(B).
    8. Prefer smaller scope: if S(A) < S(B), R(A) *> R(B) else R(B) *> R(A).
    9. Use longest matching prefix: if CPL(A, Q(A)) > CPL(B, Q(B)), R(A) *> R(B);
       if CPL(A, Q(A)) < CPL (B, Q(B)), R(B) *> R(A).
   10. Otherwise, leave rank order unchanged.

    As with source address selection, these rules form a partial ordering between
two elements of the set of possible destinations in the set of destinations SD(S) for
source S. The highest-rank address gives the output for the destination address
selection algorithm. As mentioned previously, some issues have been raised
regarding operation of this algorithm (e.g., step 9 of the destination address selec-
tion can lead to problems with DNS round-robin; see Chapter 11). As a result,
an update to [RFC3484] is being considered [RFC3484-revise]. Importantly, this
revision addresses how so-called Unique Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses (ULAs)
[RFC4193] are treated by the address selection algorithms. ULAs are globally
scoped IPv6 addresses that are constrained to be used only within a common
(private) network.

5.7   Attacks Involving IP
      There have been a number of attacks on the IP protocol over the years, based pri-
      marily on the operation of options, or by exploiting bugs in specialized code (such
      as fragment reassembly). Simple attacks involve trying to get a router to crash or
      perform poorly because one or more of the IP header fields is not valid (e.g., bad
      header length or version number). Typically, routers in the Internet today ignore
      or strip IP options, and the bugs in basic packet processing have been fixed. Thus,
      these types of simple attacks are not a big concern. Attacks involving fragmenta-
      tion can be addressed using other means [RFC1858][RFC3128].
           Without authentication or encryption (or when it is disabled for IPv6), IP
      spoofing attacks are possible. Some of the earliest attacks involved fabricating
      the source IP address. Because early access control mechanisms depended on the
      source IP address, many such systems were circumvented. Spoofing would some-
      times be combined with various combinations of source routing options. Under
      some circumstances, a remote attacker’s computer would appear to be a host on
      the local network (or even the same computer) requesting some sort of service.
      Although the spoofing of IP addresses is still a concern today, there are several
      approaches to limit its damage, including ingress filtering [RFC2827][RFC3704],
      whereby an ISP checks the source addresses of its customers’ traffic to ensure that
      datagrams contain source addresses from an assigned IP prefix.
           As IPv6 and Mobile IP are relatively new, at least compared to IPv4, all of
      their vulnerabilities have undoubtedly not yet been discovered. With the newer
      and more flexible types of options headers, an attacker could have considerable
      influence on the processing of an IPv6 packet. For example, the Routing header
      (type 0) was discovered to have such severe security problems that its use has
      been deprecated entirely. Other possibilities include spoofing the source address
      and/or Routing header entries to make packets appear as if they have come from
      other places. These attacks are avoided by configuring packet-filtering firewalls to
      take into account the contents of Routing headers. It is worth noting that simply
      filtering out all packets containing extension headers and options in IPv6 would
      severely restrict its use. In particular, disabling extension headers would prevent
      Mobile IPv6 from functioning.

5.8   Summary
      In this chapter we started with a description of the IPv4 and IPv6 headers, discuss-
      ing some of the related functions such as the Internet checksum and fragmenta-
      tion. We saw how IPv6 increases the size of addresses, improves upon IP’s method
      of including options in packets by use of the extension headers, and removes sev-
      eral of the noncritical fields from the IPv4 header. With the addition of this func-
      tionality, the IP header increases in size by only a factor of 2 even though the
      size of the addresses has increased fourfold. The IPv4 and IPv6 headers are not
                                                        Section 5.8 Summary       227

directly compatible and share only the 4-bit Version field in common. Because of
this, some level of translation is required to interconnect IPv4 and IPv6 nodes.
Dual-stack hosts implement both IPv4 and IPv6 but must choose which protocol
to use and when.
     Since its inception, IP has included a header field to indicate a type of traffic
or service class associated with each datagram. This mechanism has been rede-
fined over the years in hopes of providing mechanisms to support differentiated
services on the Internet. If it is widely implemented, the Internet could potentially
offer improved performance for some traffic or users versus others in a standard
way. To what extent this happens will be based in part on working out the busi-
ness models surrounding the differentiated services capability.
     IP forwarding describes the way IP datagrams are transported through single
and multihop networks. IP forwarding is performed on a hop-by-hop basis unless
special processing takes place. The destination IP address never changes as the
datagram proceeds through all the hops, but the link-layer encapsulation and des-
tination link-layer address change on each hop. Forwarding tables and the longest
prefix match algorithm are used by hosts and routers to determine the best match-
ing forwarding entry and determine the next hops along a forwarding path. In
many circumstances, very simple tables consisting of only a default route, which
matches all possible destinations equally, are adequate.
     Using a special set of protocols for security and signaling, Mobile IP estab-
lishes secure bindings between a mobile node’s home address and care-of address.
These bindings may be used to communicate with a mobile node even when it is
not at home. The basic function involves tunneling traffic through a cooperating
home agent, but this may lead to very inefficient routing. A number of additional
features support a route optimization feature that allows a mobile node to talk
directly with other remote nodes and vice versa. This requires a mobile node’s
correspondent hosts to support MIPv6 as well as route optimization, which is an
optional feature. Ongoing work aims at reducing the latency involved in the route
optimization binding update procedure.
     We also looked at how the host model, strong or weak, affects how IP data-
grams are processed. In the strong model, each interface is permitted to receive
or send only datagrams that use addresses associated with the interface, whereas
the weak model is less restrictive. The weak host model permits communication
in some cases where it would not otherwise be possible but may be more vulner-
able to certain kinds of attacks. The host model also relates to how a host chooses
which addresses to use when communicating. Early on, most hosts had only one
IP address so the decision was fairly straightforward. With IPv6, in which a host
may have several addresses, and for multihomed hosts using several network
interfaces, the decision is less straightforward yet nonetheless may have an impor-
tant impact on routing. A set of address selection algorithms, for both source and
destination addresses, was presented. These algorithms tend to prefer limited-
scope, permanent addresses.

          We discussed some of the attacks targeted against the IP protocol. Such
      attacks have often involved spoofing addresses, including options to alter rout-
      ing behavior, and attempts to exploit bugs in the implementation of IP, especially
      with respect to fragmentation. The protocol implementation bugs have been fixed
      in modern operating systems, and in most cases options are disabled at the edge
      routers of enterprises. Although spoofing remains somewhat of a concern, proce-
      dures such as ingress filtering help to eliminate this problem as well.

5.9   References
      [A92] P. Mersky, “Autovon: The DoD Phone Company,” http://www.chips.navy.
      mil/archives/92_oct/file3.htm
      [AN] http://www.iana.org/assignments/protocol-numbers
      [DC05] J. Doyle and J. Carroll, Routing TCP/IP, Volume 1, Second Edition (Cisco
      Press, 2005).
      [DSCPREG] http://www.iana.org/assignments/dscp-registry/dscp-registry.xml
      [H05] G. Huston, “Just How Big Is IPv6?—or Where Did All Those Addresses
      Go?” The ISP Column, July 2005, http://cidr-report.org/papers/isoc/2005-07/
      ipv6size.html
      [IP6PARAM] http://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv6-parameters
      [IPPARAM] http://www.iana.org/assignments/ip-parameters
      [IV] http://www.iana.org/assignments/version-numbers
      [LFS07] J. Leguay, T. Friedman, and K. Salamatian, “Describing and Simulating
      Internet Routes,” Computer Networks, 51(8), June 2007.
      [MB97] L. McKnight and J. Bailey, eds., Internet Economics (MIT Press, 1997).
      [MP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/mobility-parameters
      [P90] C. Pinter, A Book of Abstract Algebra, Second Edition (Dover, 2010; reprint of
      1990 edition).
      [PB61] W. Peterson and D. Brown, “Cyclic Codes for Error Detection,” Proc. IRE,
      49(228), Jan. 1961.
      [RC05] S. Raab and M. Chandra, Mobile IP Technology and Applications (Cisco
      Press, 2005).
      [RFC0791] J. Postel, “Internet Protocol,” Internet RFC 0791/STD 0005, Sept. 1981.
      [RFC1108] S. Kent, “U.S. Department of Defense Security Options for the Internet
      Protocol,” Internet RFC 1108 (historical), Nov. 1991.
                                                      Section 5.9 References     229

[RFC1122] R. Braden, ed., “Requirements for Internet Hosts—Communication
Layers,” Internet RFC 1122/STD 0003, Oct. 1989.
[RFC1385] Z. Wang, “EIP: The Extended Internet Protocol,” Internet RFC 1385
(informational), Nov. 1992.
[RFC1393] G. Malkin, “Traceroute Using an IP Option,” Internet RFC 1393
(experimental), Jan. 1993.
[RFC1858] G. Ziemba, D. Reed, and P. Traina, “Security Consideration for IP Frag-
ment Filtering,” Internet RFC 1858 (informational), Oct. 1995.
[RFC2113] D. Katz, “IP Router Alert Option,” Internet RFC 2113, Feb. 1997.
[RFC2460] S. Deering and R. Hinden, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6),” Inter-
net RFC 2460, Dec. 1998.
[RFC2473] A. Conta and S. Deering, “Generic Packet Tunneling in IPv6 Specifica-
tion,” Internet RFC 2473, Dec. 1998.
[RFC2474] K. Nichols, S. Blake, F. Baker, and D. Black, “Definition of the Differen-
tiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers,” Internet RFC 2474,
Dec. 1998.
[RFC2475] S. Blake, D. Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, and W. Weiss, “An
Architecture for Differentiated Services,” Internet RFC 2475 (informational), Dec.
1998.
[RFC2597] J. Heinanen, F. Baker, W. Weiss, and J. Wroclawski, “Assured Forward-
ing PHB Group,” Internet RFC 2597, June 1999.
[RFC2675] D. Borman, S. Deering, and R. Hinden, “IPv6 Jumbograms,” Internet
RFC 2675, Aug. 1999.
[RFC2711] C. Partridge and A. Jackson, “IPv6 Router Alert Option,” Internet RFC
2711, Oct. 1999.
[RFC2827] P. Ferguson and D. Senie, “Network Ingress Filtering: Defeating
Denial of Service Attacks Which Employ IP Source Address Spoofing,” Internet
RFC 2827/BCP 0038, May 2000.
[RFC3031] E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan, and R. Callon, “Multiprotocol Label
Switching Architecture,” Internet RFC 3031, Jan. 2001.
[RFC3128] I. Miller, “Protection Against a Variant of the Tiny Fragment Attack,”
Internet RFC 3128 (informational), June 2001.
[RFC3168] K. Ramakrishnan, S. Floyd, and D. Black, “The Addition of Explicit
Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP,” Internet RFC 3168, Sept. 2001.
[RFC3246] B. Davie, A. Charny, J. C. R. Bennett, K. Benson, J. Y. Le Boudec, W.
Courtney, S. Davari, V. Firoiu, and D. Stiliadis, “An Expedited Forwarding PHB
(Per-Hop Behavior),” Internet RFC 3246, Mar. 2002.

      [RFC3260] D. Grossman, “New Terminology and Clarifications for Diffserv,”
      Internet RFC 3260 (informational), Apr. 2002.
      [RFC3484] R. Draves, “Default Address Selection for Internet Protocol Version 6
      (IPv6),” Internet RFC 3484, Feb. 2003.
      [RFC3484-revise] A. Matsumoto, J. Kato, T. Fujisaki, and T. Chown, “Update to
      RFC 3484 Default Address Selection for IPv6,” Internet draft-ietf-6man-rfc3484-
      revise, work in progress, July 2011.
      [RFC3704] F. Baker and P. Savola, “Ingress Filtering for Multihomed Hosts,”
      Internet RFC 3704/BCP 0084, May 2004.
      [RFC3963] V. Devarapalli, R. Wakikawa, A. Petrescu, and P. Thubert, “Network
      Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol,” Internet RFC 3963, Jan. 2005.
      [RFC4193] R. Hinden and B. Haberman, “Unique Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses,”
      Internet RFC 4193, Oct. 2005.
      [RFC4213] E. Nordmark and R. Gilligan, “Basic Transition Mechanisms for IPv6
      Hosts and Routers,” Internet RFC 4213, Oct. 2005.
      [RFC4225] P. Nikander, J. Arkko, T. Aura, G. Montenegro, and E. Nordmark,
      “Mobile IP Version 6 Route Optimization Security Design Background,” Internet
      RFC 4225 (informational), Dec. 2005.
      [RFC4594] J. Babiarz, K. Chan, and F. Baker, “Configuration Guidelines for
      Diffserv Service Classes,” Internet RFC 4594 (informational), Aug. 2006.
      [RFC4782] S. Floyd, M. Allman, A. Jain, and P. Sarolahti, “Quick-Start for TCP
      and IP,” Internet RFC 4782 (experimental), Jan. 2007.
      [RFC4866] J. Arkko, C. Vogt, and W. Haddad, “Enhanced Route Optimization for
      Mobile IPv6,” Internet RFC 4866, May 2007.
      [RFC4950] R. Bonica, D. Gan, D. Tappan, and C. Pignataro, “ICMP Extensions for
      Multiprotocol Label Switching,” Internet RFC 4950, Aug. 2007.
      [RFC5095] J. Abley, P. Savola, and G. Neville-Neil, “Deprecation of Type 0 Rout-
      ing Headers in IPv6,” Internet RFC 5095, Dec. 2007.
      [RFC5096] V. Devarapalli, “Mobile IPv6 Experimental Messages,” Internet RFC
      5094, Dec. 2007.
      [RFC5142] B. Haley, V. Devarapalli, H. Deng, and J. Kempf, “Mobility Header
      Home Agent Switch Message,” Internet RFC 5142, Jan. 2008.
      [RFC5213] S. Gundavelli, ed., K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and B.
      Patil, “Proxy Mobile IPv6,” Internet RFC 5213, Aug. 2008.
      [RFC5220] A. Matsumoto, T. Fujisaki, R. Hiromi, and K. Kanayama, “Prob-
      lem Statement for Default Address Selection in Multi-Prefix Environments:
                                                     Section 5.9 References     231

Operational Issues of RFC 3484 Default Rules,” Internet RFC 5220 (informa-
tional), July 2008.
[RFC5350] J. Manner and A. McDonald, “IANA Considerations for the IPv4 and
IPv6 Router Alert Options,” Internet RFC 5350, Sept. 2008.
[RFC5380] H. Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. ElMalki, and L. Bellier, “Hierarchical
Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) Mobility Management,” Internet RFC 5380, Oct. 2008.
[RFC5568] R. Koodli, ed., “Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers,” Internet RFC 5568, July
2009.
[RFC5570] M. StJohns, R. Atkinson, and G. Thomas, “Common Architecture
Label IPv6 Security Option (CALIPSO),” Internet RFC 5570 (informational), July
2009.
[RFC5865] F. Baker, J. Polk, and M. Dolly, “A Differentiated Services Code Point
(DSCP) for Capacity-Admitted Traffic,” Internet RFC 5865, May 2010.
[RFC5944] C. Perkins, ed., “IP Mobility Support for IPv4, Revised,” Internet RFC
5944, Nov. 2010.
[RFC6178] D. Smith, J. Mullooly, W. Jaeger, and T. Scholl, “Label Edge Router For-
warding of IPv4 Option Packets,” Internet RFC 6178, Mar. 2011.
[RFC6275] C. Perkins, ed., D. Johnson, and J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in IPv6,”
Internet RFC 6275, June 2011.
[RFC6301] Z. Zhu, R. Rakikawa, and L. Zhang, “A Survey of Mobility Support in
the Internet,” Internet RFC 6301 (informational), July 2011.
[RTAOPTS] http://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv6-routeralert-values
[THL06] N. Thompson, G. He, and H. Luo, “Flow Scheduling for End-Host Multi-
homing,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr. 2006.
[TWEF03] J. Touch, Y. Wang, L. Eggert, and G. Flinn, “A Virtual Internet Archi-
tecture,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Future Directions in Network Architecture Workshop,
Mar. 2003.
[W03] T. Wu, “Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination,” Journal of Tele-
communications and High Technology Law, 2, 2003 (revised 2005).
This page intentionally left blank
