      6

      System Configuration: DHCP
      and Autoconfiguration

6.1   Introduction
      To make use of the TCP/IP protocol suite, each host and router requires a certain
      amount of configuration information. Configuration information is used to assign
      local names to systems, and identifiers (such as IP addresses) to interfaces. It is
      also used to either provide or make use of various network services, such as the
      Domain Name System (DNS) and Mobile IP home agents. Over the years there have
      been many ways of providing and obtaining this information, but fundamen-
      tally there are three approaches: type in the information by hand, have a system
      obtain it using a network service, or use some sort of algorithm to automatically
      determine it. We shall explore each of these options and see how they are used
      with both IPv4 and IPv6. Understanding how configuration works is important,
      because it is one of the issues that every system administrator and nearly every
      end user must deal with to some extent.
           Recall from Chapter 2 that every interface to be used with TCP/IP networking
      requires an IP address, subnet mask, and broadcast address (for IPv4). The broad-
      cast address can ordinarily be determined using the address and mask. With this
      minimal information, it is generally possible to carry out communication with
      other systems on the same subnetwork. To engage in communication beyond the
      local subnet, called indirect delivery in Chapter 5, a system requires a routing or
      forwarding table that indicates what router(s) are to be used for reaching vari-
      ous destinations. To be able to use services such as the Web and e-mail, the DNS
      (see Chapter 11) is used to map user-friendly domain names to the IP addresses
      required by the lower-protocol layers. Because the DNS is a distributed service,
      any system making use of it must know how to reach at least one DNS server.
      All in all, having an IP address, subnet mask, and the IP address of a DNS server

      and router are the “bare essentials” to get a system running on the Internet that
      is capable of using or providing popular services such as Web and e-mail. To use
      Mobile IP, a system also needs to know how to find a home agent.
           In this chapter we will focus primarily on the protocols and procedures used
      to establish the bare essentials in Internet client hosts: the Dynamic Host Configu-
      ration Protocol (DHCP) and stateless address autoconfiguration in IPv4 and IPv6. We
      will also discuss how some ISPs use PPP with Ethernet for configuration of client
      systems. Servers and routers are more often configured by hand, usually by typ-
      ing the relevant configuration information into a file or graphical user interface.
      There are several reasons for this distinction. First, client hosts are moved around
      more often than servers and routers, meaning they should have mechanisms for
      flexibly reassigning their configuration information. Second, server hosts and
      routers are expected to be “always available” and relatively autonomous. As such,
      having their configuration information not depend on other network services can
      lead to greater confidence in their reliability. Third, there are often far more clients
      in an organization than servers or routers, so it is simpler and less error-prone to
      use a centralized service to dynamically assign configuration information to cli-
      ent hosts. Fourth, the operators of clients often have less system administration
      experience than server and router administrators, so it is once again less error-
      prone to have most clients configured by a centralized service administered by an
      experienced staff.
           Beyond the bare essentials, there are numerous other bits of configuration
      information a host or router may require, depending on the types of services it
      uses or provides. These may include the locations of home agents, multicast rout-
      ers, VPN gateways, and Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)/VoIP gateways. Some of
      these services have standardized mechanisms and supporting protocols to obtain
      the relevant configuration information; others do not and instead require the user
      to type in the necessary information.

6.2   Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)
      DHCP [RFC2131] is a popular client/server protocol used to assign configuration
      information to hosts (and, less frequently, to routers). DHCP is very widely used,
      in both enterprises and home networks. Even the most basic home router devices
      support embedded DHCP servers. DHCP clients are incorporated into all common
      client operating systems and a large number of embedded devices such as net-
      work printers and VoIP phones. Such devices usually use DHCP to acquire their IP
      address, subnet mask, router IP address, and DNS server IP address. Information
      pertaining to other services (e.g., SIP servers used with VoIP) may also be conveyed
      using DHCP. DHCP was originally conceived for use with IPv4, so references to
      it or its relationship with IP in this chapter will refer to IPv4 unless otherwise
      specified. IPv6 can also use a version of DHCP called DHCPv6 [RFC3315], which
      we discuss in Section 6.2.5, but IPv6 also supports its own automatic processes to

        determine configuration information. In a hybrid configuration, IPv6 automatic
        configuration can be combined with the use of DHCPv6.
             The design of DHCP is based on an earlier protocol called the Internet Boot-
        strap Protocol (BOOTP) [RFC0951][RFC1542], which is now effectively obsolete.
        BOOTP provides limited configuration information to clients and does not have
        a mechanism to support changing that information after it has been provided.
        DHCP extends the BOOTP model with the concept of leases [GC89] and can pro-
        vide all information required for a host to operate. Leases allow clients to use
        the configuration information for an agreed-upon amount of time. A client may
        request to renew the lease and continue operations, subject to agreement from
        the DHCP server. BOOTP and DHCP are backward-compatible in the sense that
        BOOTP-only clients can make use of DHCP servers and DHCP clients can make
        use of BOOTP-only servers. BOOTP, and therefore DHCP as well, is carried using
        UDP/IP (see Chapter 10). Clients use port 68 and servers use port 67.
             DHCP comprises two major parts: address management and delivery of
        configuration data. Address management handles the dynamic allocation of IP
        addresses and provides address leases to clients. Configuration data delivery
        includes the DHCP protocol’s message formats and state machines. A DHCP
        server can be configured to provide three levels of address allocation: automatic
        allocation, dynamic allocation, and manual allocation. The differences among the
        three have to do with whether the addresses assigned are based on the identity of
        the client and whether such addresses are subject to being revoked or changed.
        The most commonly used method is dynamic allocation, whereby a client is given
        a revocable IP address from a pool (usually a predefined range) of addresses con-
        figured at the server. In automatic allocation, the same method is used but the
        address is never revoked. In manual allocation, the DHCP protocol is used to con-
        vey the address, but the address is fixed for the requesting client (i.e., it is not part
        of an allocatable pool maintained by the server). In this last mode, DHCP acts like
        BOOTP. We shall focus on dynamic allocation, as it is the most interesting and
        common case.

6.2.1   Address Pools and Leases
        In dynamic allocation, a DHCP client requests the allocation of an IP address.
        The server responds with one address selected from a pool of available addresses.
        Typically, the pool is a contiguous range of IP addresses allocated specifically for
        DHCP’s use. The address given to the client is allocated for only a specific amount
        of time, called the lease duration. The client is permitted to use the IP address until
        the lease expires, although it may request extension of the lease as required. In
        most situations, clients are able to renew leases they wish to extend.
             The lease duration is an important configuration parameter of a DHCP server.
        Lease durations can range from a few minutes to days or more (“infinite” is pos-
        sible but not recommended for anything but simple networks). Determining the
        best value to use for leases is a trade-off between the number of expected clients,

        the size of the address pool, and the desire for the stability of addresses. Longer
        lease durations tend to deplete the available address pool faster but provide greater
        stability in addresses and somewhat reduced network overhead (because there
        are fewer requests to renew leases). Shorter leases tend to keep the pool available
        for other clients, with a consequent potential decrease in stability and increase in
        network traffic load. Common defaults include 12 to 24 hours, depending on the
        particular DHCP server being used. Microsoft, for example, recommends 8 days
        for small networks and 16 to 24 days for larger networks. Clients begin trying to
        renew leases after half of the lease duration has passed.
             When making a DHCP request, a client is able to provide information to the
        server. This information can include the name of the client, its requested lease
        duration, a copy of the address it is already using or last used, and other parame-
        ters. When the server receives such a request, it can make use of whatever informa-
        tion the client has provided (including the requesting MAC address) in addition
        to other exogenous information (e.g., the time of day, the interface on which the
        request was received) to determine what address and configuration information
        to provide in response. In providing a lease to a client, a server stores the lease
        information in persistent memory, typically in nonvolatile memory or on disk. If
        the DHCP server restarts and all goes well, leases are maintained intact.

6.2.2   DHCP and BOOTP Message Format
        DHCP extends BOOTP, DHCP’s predecessor. Compatibility is maintained between
        the protocols by defining the DHCP message format as an extension to BOOTP’s
        in such a way that BOOTP clients can be served by DHCP servers, and BOOTP
        relay agents (see Section 6.2.6) can be used to support DHCP use, even on networks
        where DHCP servers do not reside. The message format includes a fixed-length
        initial portion and a variable-length tail portion (see Figure 6-1).
             The message format of Figure 6-1 is defined by BOOTP and DHCP in several
        RFCs ([RFC0951][RFC1542][RFC2131]). The Op (Operation) field identifies the mes-
        sage as either a request (1) or a reply (2). The HW Type (htype) field is assigned
        based on values used with ARP (see Chapter 4) and defined in the corresponding
        IANA ARP parameters page [IARP], with the value 1 (Ethernet) being very com-
        mon. The HW Len (hlen) field gives the number of bytes used to hold the hardware
        (MAC) address and is commonly 6 for Ethernet-like networks. The Hops field is
        used to store the number of relays through which the message has traveled. The
        sender of the message sets this value to 0, and it is incremented at each relay.
        The Transaction ID is a (random) number chosen by the client and copied into
        responses by the server. It is used to match replies with requests.
             The Secs field is set by the client with the number of seconds that have elapsed
        since the first attempt to establish or renew an address. The Flags field currently
        contains only a single defined bit called the broadcast flag. Clients may set this bit
        in requests if they are unable or unwilling to process incoming unicast IP data-
        grams but can process incoming broadcast datagrams (e.g., because they do not

                                                                                   
              2S? 5HT?5HSO\      +:?7\SH             +:?/HQ             +RSV
                    ELWV        KW\SH????ELWV       KOHQ????ELWV        ??ELWV                               )ODJV? ???ELWV
                                                                                                                                
                                 7UDQVDFWLRQ?,'? [LG?????ELWV

                      6HFV? ???ELWV                        )ODJV? ???ELWV              %                            =HUR

                        &OLHQW?,3?$GGUHVV? FLDGGU?????ELWV??LI?NQRZQ

                              ³<RXU´?,3?DGGUHVV? \LDGGU?????ELWV                      %URDGFDVW?)ODJ

                          1H[W ?6HUYHU?,3?$GGUHVV? VLDGGU?????ELWV

                       *DWHZD\? 5HOD\ ?,3?$GGUHVV? JLDGGU?????ELWV
 )L[HG?6L]H

                        &OLHQW?+DUGZDUH?$GGUHVV? FKDGGU??????ELWV

                               6HUYHU?1DPH? VQDPH?????E\WHV

                                                                                            2SWLRQ?2YHUORDG?$UHD
                                                                                       $OWHUQDWLYH?$UHD?WR?+ROG?2SWLRQV
                                %RRW?)LOH?1DPH? ILOH??????E\WHV

                                                                                               %2273?2SWLRQ???
                                   2SWLRQV? YHQG??YDULDEOH                                 ,QGLFDWHV?'+&3?0HVVDJH

Figure 6-1          The BOOTP message format, including field names from [RFC0951], [RFC1542], and [RFC2131].
                    The BOOTP message format is used to hold DHCP messages by appropriate assignment of options.
                    In this way, BOOTP relay agents can process DHCP messages, and BOOTP clients can use DHCP
                    servers. The Server Name and Boot File Name fields can be used to carry DHCP options if necessary.

                  yet have an IP address). Setting the bit informs the server and relays that broad-
                  cast addressing should be used for replies.

                      Note
                      There has been some difficulty in Windows environments regarding the use of
                      the broadcast flag. Windows XP and Windows 7 DHCP clients do not set the
                      flag, but Windows Vista clients do. Some DHCP servers in use do not process
                      the flag properly, leading to apparent difficulties in supporting Vista clients, even
                      though the Vista implementation is RFC-compliant. See [MKB928233] for more
                      information.

                       The next four fields are various IP addresses. The Client IP Address (ciaddr)
                  field includes a current IP address of the requestor, if known, and is 0 otherwise.
                  The “Your” IP Address (yiaddr) field is filled in by a server when providing an

        address to a requesting client. The Next Server IP Address (siaddr) field gives the IP
        address of the next server to use for the client’s bootstrap process (e.g., if the client
        needs to download an operating system image that may be accomplished from a
        server other than the DHCP server). The Gateway (or Relay) IP Address (giaddr) field
        is filled in by a DHCP or BOOTP relay with its address when forwarding DHCP
        (BOOTP) messages. The Client Hardware Address (chaddr) field holds a unique
        identifier of the client and can be used in various ways by the server, including
        arranging for the same IP address to be given each time a particular client makes
        an address request. This field has traditionally held the client’s MAC address,
        which has been used as an identifier. Nowadays, the Client Identifier, an option
        described in Sections 6.2.3 and 6.2.4, is preferred for this use.
             The remaining fields include the Server Name (sname) and Boot File Name (file)
        fields. These fields are not always filled in, but if they are, they contain 64 or 128
        bytes, respectively, of ASCII characters indicating the name of the server or path to
        the boot file. Such strings are null-terminated, as in the C programming language.
        They can also be used instead to hold DHCP options if space is tight (see Section
        6.2.3). The final field, originally known as the Vendor Extensions field in BOOTP
        and fixed in length, is now known as the Options field and is variable in length. As
        we shall see, options are used extensively with DHCP and are required to distin-
        guish DHCP messages from legacy BOOTP messages.

6.2.3   DHCP and BOOTP Options
        Given that DHCP extends BOOTP, any fields needed by DHCP that were not pres-
        ent when BOOTP was designed are carried as options. Options take a standard
        format beginning with an 8-bit tag indicating the option type. For some options,
        a fixed number of bytes following the tag contain the option value. All others
        consist of the tag followed by 1 byte containing the length of the option value (not
        including the tag or length), followed by a variable number of bytes containing the
        option value itself.
             A large number of options are available with DHCP, some of which are also
        supported by BOOTP. The current list is given by the BOOTP/DHCP parameters
        page [IBDP]. The first 77 options, including the most common ones, are speci-
        fied in [RFC2132]. Common options include Pad (0), Subnet Mask (1), Router
        Address (3), Domain Name Server (6), Domain Name (15), Requested IP Address
        (50), Address Lease Time (51), DHCP Message Type (53), Server Identifier (54),
        Parameter Request List (55), DHCP Error Message (56), Lease Renewal Time (58),
        Lease Rebinding Time (59), Client Identifier (61), Domain Search List (119), and
        End (255).
             The DHCP Message Type option (53) is a 1-byte-long option that is always used
        with DHCP messages and has the following possible values: DHCPDISCOVER
        (1), DHCPOFFER (2), DHCPREQUEST (3), DHCPDECLINE (4), DHCPACK (5),
        DHCPNAK (6), DHCPRELEASE (7), DHCPINFORM (8), DHCPFORCERENEW
        (9) [RFC3203], DHCPLEASEQUERY (10), DHCPLEASEUNASSIGNED (11),

        DHCPLEASEUNKNOWN (12), and DHCPLEASEACTIVE (13). The last four val-
        ues are defined by [RFC4388].
             Options may be carried in the Options field of a DHCP message, as well as in
        the Server Name and Boot File Name fields mentioned previously. When options are
        carried in either of these latter two places, called option overloading, a special Over-
        load option (52) is included to indicate which fields have been appropriated for
        holding options. For options whose lengths exceed 255 bytes, a special long options
        mechanism has been defined [RFC3396]. In essence, if the same option is repeated
        multiple times in the same message, the contents are concatenated in the order in
        which they appear in the message, and the result is processed as a single option. If
        a long option also uses option overloading, the order of processing is last to first:
        Options field, Boot File Name field, and then Server Name field.
             Options tend to either provide relatively simple configuration information or
        be used in supporting some other agreement protocol. For example, [RFC2132]
        specifies options for most of the traditional configuration information a TCP/IP
        node requires (addressing information, server addresses, Boolean assignments of
        configuration information such as enabling IP forwarding, initial TTL values).
        Subsequent specifications describe simple configuration information for NetWare
        [RFC2241][RFC2242], user classes [RFC3004], FQDN [RFC4702], Internet Storage
        Name Service server (iSNS, used in storage networks) [RFC4174], Broadcast and
        Multicast Service controller (BCMCS, used with 3G cellular networks) [RFC4280],
        time zone [RFC4833], autoconfiguration [RFC2563], subnet selection [RFC3011],
        name service selection (see Chapter 11) [RFC2937], and servers for the Protocol
        for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA) (see Chapter 18) [RFC5192].
        Those options defined for use in support of other protocols and functions are
        described later, starting with Section 6.2.7.

6.2.4   DHCP Protocol Operation
        DHCP messages are essentially BOOTP messages with a special set of options.
        When a new client attaches to a network, it first discovers what DHCP servers are
        available and what addresses they are offering. It then decides which server to
        use and which address it desires and requests it from the offering server (while
        informing all the servers of its choice). Unless the server has given away the
        address in the meantime, it responds by acknowledging the address allocation
        to the requesting client. The time sequence of events between a typical client and
        server is depicted in Figure 6-2.
             Requesting clients set the BOOTP Op field to BOOTREQUEST and the first
        4 bytes of the Options field to the decimal values 99, 130, 83, and 99, respectively
        (the magic cookie value from [RFC2132]). Messages from client to server are sent as
        UDP/IP datagrams containing a BOOTP BOOTREQUEST operation and an appro-
        priate DHCP message type (usually DHCPDISCOVER or DHCPREQUEST). Such
        messages are sent from address 0.0.0.0 (port 68) to the limited broadcast address
        255.255.255.255 (port 67). Messages traveling in the other direction (from server to

                                                                                   6 HOHFWHG?
                                 &OLHQW
                                                                                    6 HUYHU
                       &OLHQW?6 WDUWV
                   0D\?8VH?=HUR?,3 ?                   ',6 &2    9( 5
                                        QXOO?FLDGGU???EU                                  'HWHUPLQHV
                                                        RDGFDVW??[LG??SD
                   6 RXUFH?$GGUHVV                                         UDPV?UHTXHVW
                                                                                          &RQILJXUDWLRQ
                                                                                          2WKHU?6 HUYHUV?0D\?2))( 5
                                                          2) ) (   5
                                                                              WLRQV
                  &ROOHFWV?5HSOLHV                                ??\LDGGU??RS
                                             RD GFDVW??VLDGGU??[LG
                           6 HOHFWV?       EU
             6 HUYHU?&RQILJXUDWLRQ                      5 ( 48 ( 6 7
                                           EURDGFDVW??
                                                      VLD   GGU??FLDGGU??
                                                                         [LG??RSWLRQV
                                                                                          6 HOHFWHG?6 HUYHU?&RPPLWV
                                                                                          &RQILJXUDWLRQ
                                                           $&.              RQV
                                                                                           2WKHU?6 HUYHUV?'R?1RW
                                                                    GU??RSWL
                                                    FD VW??[LG??\LDG
                                               EURDG
                        &RQILJXUHG

                        9HULI\LQJ
                   5HFRPPHQGHG                     &KHFN?IR
                                                            U?&R
                                                    H?J???$5 3 QIOLFW
                                                               $&'
                                                       '( &/,1(
                                                       ,I?&RQIOLFW

Figure 6-2     A typical DHCP exchange. A client discovers a set of servers and addresses they are
                     offering using broadcast messages, requests the address it desires, and receives an
                     acknowledgment from the selected server. The transaction ID (xid) allows requests and
                     responses to be matched up, and the server ID (an option) indicates which server is pro-
                     viding and committing the provided address binding with the client. If the client already
                     knows the address it desires, the protocol can be simplified to include use of only the
                     REQUEST and ACK messages.

      client) are sent from the IP address of the server and port 67 to the IP local broad-
      cast address and port 68 (see Chapter 10 for details on UDP).
           In a typical exchange, a client first broadcasts a DHCPDISCOVER message. Each
      server receiving the request, either directly or through a relay, may respond with a
      DHCPOFFER message, including an offered IP address in the “Your” IP Address
      field. Other configuration options (e.g., IP address of DNS server, subnet mask) are
      often included. The offer message includes the lease time (T), which provides the
      upper bound on the amount of time the address can be used if it is not renewed. The
      message also contains the renewal time (T1), which is the amount of time before the
      client should attempt to renew its lease with the server from which it acquired its
      lease, and the rebinding time (T2), which bounds the time in which it should attempt
      to renew its address with any DHCP server. By default, T1 = (T/2) and T2 = (7T/8).
           After receiving one or more DHCPOFFER messages from one or more servers,
      the client determines which offer it will accept and broadcasts a DHCPREQUEST
      message including the Server Identifier option. The Requested IP Address option is
      set to the address received in the selected DHCPOFFER message. Multiple servers
      may receive the broadcast DHCPREQUEST message, but only the server identified
      within the DHCPREQUEST message acts by committing the address binding to

persistent storage; the others clear any state regarding the request. After handling
the binding, the selected server responds with a DHCPACK message, indicating to
the client that the address binding can now be used. In the case where the server
cannot allocate the address contained in the DHCPREQUEST message (e.g., it has
been allocated in some other way or is not available), the server responds with a
DHCPNAK message.
     Once the client receives the DHCPACK message and other associated configu-
ration information, it may probe the network to ensure that the address provided
is not in use (e.g., by sending an ARP request for the address to perform ACD,
described in Chapter 4). Should the client determine that the address is already in
use, the client ceases using the address and sends a DHCPDECLINE message to
the server to indicate that the address cannot be used. After a recommended 10s
delay, the client is able to retry. If a client elects to relinquish its address before its
lease expires, it sends a DHCPRELEASE message.
     In circumstances where a client already has an IP address and wishes only
to renew its lease, the initial DHCPDISCOVER/DHCPOFFER messages can be
skipped. Instead, the protocol begins with the client requesting the address it
is currently using with a DHCPREQUEST message. At this point, the protocol
works as already described: the server will likely grant the request (with a DHC-
PACK) or deny the request by issuing a DHCPNAK. Another circumstance arises
when a client already has an address, does not need to renew it, but requires other
(non-address) configuration information. In this case, it can use a DHCPINFORM
message in place of a DHCPREQUEST message to indicate its use of an existing
address and desire to obtain additional information. Such messages elicit a DHC-
PACK message from the server, which includes the requested additional configu-
ration information.

6.2.4.1 Example
To see DHCP in action, we now inspect the packets exchanged when a Microsoft
Vista laptop attaches to a wireless LAN supported by a Linux-based DHCP server
(Windows 7 systems are nearly identical). The client was recently associated with a
different wireless network, using a different IP prefix, and is now being connected
to the new network. Because it remembers the address it had from the previous net-
work, the client first tries to continue using that address using a DHCPREQUEST
message (see Figure 6-3).

    Note
    There is now an agreed-upon procedure for detecting network attachment (DNA),
    specified in [RFC4436] for IPv4 and [RFC6059] for IPv6. These specifications do
    not contain new protocols but instead suggest how unicast ARP (for IPv4) and
    a combination of unicast and multicast Neighbor Solicitation/Router Discovery
    messages (for IPv6; see Chapter 8) can be used to reduce the latency of acquir-
    ing configuration information when a host switches network links. As these speci-
    fications are relatively new (especially for IPv6), not all systems implement them.

Figure 6-3   A client has switched networks and attempts to request its old address, 172.16.1.34, from
                   a DHCP server on the new network using a DHCPREQUEST message.

            In Figure 6-3 we can see a DHCP request sent in a link-layer broadcast frame
      (destination ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff) using the unspecified source IP address 0.0.0.0 and the
      limited broadcast destination address 255.255.255.255. Because the client does not
      yet know if the address it is requesting will be successfully allocated and does
      not know the network prefix used on the network to which it is attaching, it has
      little alternative to using these addresses. The message is a UDP/IP datagram sent
      from the BOOTP client port 68 (bootpc) to the server port 67 (bootps). As DHCP
      is really part of BOOTP, the protocol is the Bootstrap Protocol and the message
      type is a BOOTREQUEST (1), with hardware type set to 1 (Ethernet) and address
      length of 6 bytes. The transaction ID is 0xdb23147d, a random number chosen by
      the client. The BOOTP broadcast flag is set in this message, meaning responses
      should be sent using broadcast addressing. The requested address of 172.16.1.34
      is contained in one of several options. We shall have a closer look at the types of
      options that appear in DHCP messages beginning in Section 6.2.9.

    The nearby DHCP server receives the client’s DHCPREQUEST message
including the requested IP address of 172.16.1.34. However, the server is unable to
allocate the address because 172.16.1.34 is not in use on the current network. Con-
sequently, the server refuses the client’s request by sending a DHCPNAK message
(see Figure 6-4).

Figure 6-4 A DHCPNAK message is sent by the DHCP server, indicating that the client should not
           attempt to use IP address 172.16.1.34. The transaction ID allows the client to know that
           the message corresponds to its address request.

     The DHCPNAK message shown in Figure 6-4 is sent as a broadcast BOOTP
reply from the server. It includes the message type of DHCPNAK, a transaction ID
matching the client’s request, a Server Identifier option containing 10.0.0.1, a copy
of the client’s identifier (MAC address in this case), and a textual string indicating
the form of error, "wrong address". At this point the client ceases trying to use
its old address of 172.16.1.34 and instead starts over, looking for whatever servers
and addresses it can find, using a DHCPDISCOVER message (see Figure 6-5).

Figure 6-5   The DHCPDISCOVER message indicates that the client is retrying its attempt to obtain
                   an address after the previous failure of its DHCPREQUEST message.

           The DHCPDISCOVER message sent by the client and shown in Figure 6-5
      is similar to the DHCPREQUEST message, including the requested IP address it
      used before (it does not have any other address to request), but it contains a richer
      list of options and a new transaction ID (0x3a681b0b). Most of the rest of the pri-
      mary BOOTP fields are left empty and set to 0, except the client MAC address,
      which appears in the Client Hardware Address (chaddr) field. Note that this address
      matches the Ethernet frame source MAC address, as expected, because the packet
      was not forwarded through a BOOTP relay agent. The rest of the DISCOVER mes-
      sage contains eight options, most of which are expanded in the screen shot in
      Figure 6-6 so that the various option subtypes can be seen.
           Figure 6-6 details the options included in the BOOTP request message. The first
      option indicates that the message is a DHCPDISCOVER message. The second option
      indicates a client’s desire to know whether to use address autoconfiguration [RFC2563]
      (described in Section 6.3). If it is unable to obtain an address using DHCP, it is per-
      mitted to determine one itself if allowed to do so by the DHCP server.

Figure 6-6   The DHCPDISCOVER message may contain a rich list of parameter requests, indicating
             what configuration information the client seeks.

      The next option indicates that the Client Identifier (ID) option is set to
0100130220B918 (not shown). The DHCP server can use the client ID to determine
if there is any special configuration information to be given to the particular
requesting client. Most operating systems now allow the user to specify the client
ID for the DHCP client to use when obtaining an address. Generally, however, it is
better to allow the client ID to be chosen automatically, as the use of the same cli-
ent ID by multiple clients can lead to DHCP problems. The automatically selected
client ID is generally based on the MAC address of the client. In the case of Win-
dows, it is the MAC address with a 1-byte hardware type identifier prepended to
it (in this case, the value of the byte is 1, indicating Ethernet).

    Note
    There has been a move to use client identifiers that are not based on MAC
    addresses. This is motivated by the desire to have a persistent identifier for a cli-
    ent for use with IPv4 or IPv6 that remains consistent even if the system’s network
    interface hardware changes (which usually causes its MAC address to change).
    [RFC4361] specifies node-specific identifiers for IPv4, using a scheme originally

          defined for IPv6. It involves using a DHCP Unique Identifier (DUID) in combination
          with an Identity Association Identifier (IAID) as specified for DHCPv6 [RFC3315]
          (also see Sections 6.2.5.3 and 6.2.5.4), but with conventional DHCPv4. It also
          deprecates the use of the Client Hardware Address (chaddr) field in DHCP mes-
          sages. However, it is not yet widely deployed.

           The next (Requested IP Address) option indicates that the client is requesting
      IP address 172.16.1.34. This is the IP address it was using when associated with the
      previous wireless network. As mentioned before, this address is not available on
      the new network because a different network prefix is being used.
           Other options indicate a configured host name of “vista,” a vendor class ID
      of “MSFT 5.0” (for Microsoft Windows 2000 and later systems), and a parameter
      request list. The Parameter Request List option provides an indication to the DHCP
      server of what sort of configuration information the client is requesting. It con-
      sists of a string of bytes in which each byte indicates a particular option number.
      Here we can see that it includes conventional Internet information (subnet mask,
      domain name, DNS server, default router) but also a number of other options com-
      mon to Microsoft systems (i.e., NetBIOS options). It also includes an indication
      that the client is interested in knowing whether to perform ICMP Router Discov-
      ery (see Chapter 8) and whether any static forwarding table entries should be
      placed in the client’s forwarding table when starting up (see Chapter 5).

          Note
          The reason there are three different types of static route parameters listed is
          a consequence of the history of addressing. Before the full adoption of subnet
          masks and network prefixes, the network portion of an address was known by
          inspection of the address alone (“classful addressing”), and this is the form of
          route used with the Static Route (33) parameter. With the adoption of classless
          routes, DHCP was updated to hold a mask that could be applied, resulting in the
          so-called Classless Static Route (CSR) parameter (121) defined in [RFC3442].
          Microsoft’s variant (using code 249) is similar.

          The last parameter request (43) is for vendor-specific information. It is ordi-
      narily used in conjunction with the Vendor-Class Identifier option (60), to allow
      clients to receive nonstandard information, although another proposal combines
      the vendor’s identity with the vendor-specific information [RFC3925], providing
      a method to determine the vendor given any vendor-specific information, even
      for a single client. In the case of Microsoft systems, vendor-specific information
      is used for selecting the use of NetBIOS, indicating whether a DHCP lease should
      be released on shutdown, and how the metric (preference) of a default route in the
      forwarding table should be processed. It is also used by Microsoft’s Network Access
      Protection (NAP) system [MS-DHCPN]. Mac OS systems use vendor-specific infor-
      mation in supporting Apple’s NetBoot service and Boot Server Discovery Protocol
      (BSDP) [F07].

    Upon receipt of the DHCPDISCOVER message, a DHCP server responds with
an offer of an IP address, lease, and additional configuration information con-
tained in a DHCPOFFER message. In the example shown in Figure 6-7, there is
only one DHCP server (which is also a router and DNS server).

Figure 6-7   The DHCPOFFER sent from the DHCP server at 10.0.0.1 is offering IP address 10.0.0.57
             for up to 12 hours. Additional information includes the address of a DNS server, domain
             name, default router IP address, subnet mask, and broadcast address. In this example,
             the system with IP address 10.0.0.1 is the default router, DHCP server, and DNS server.

    In the DHCPOFFER message shown in Figure 6-7 we again see that the message
format includes a BOOTP portion as well as a set of options that relate to its DHCP
address handling. The BOOTP message type is BOOTREPLY. The client IP address
provided by the server is 10.0.0.57, located in the “Your” [client] IP Address field. Note

      that this address does not match the requested value of 172.16.1.34 contained in the
      DHCPDISCOVER message, as the 172.16/12 prefix is not in use on the local network.
           Additional information contained in the set of options includes the server’s
      IP address (10.0.0.1), the lease time of the offered IP address (12 hours), and the T1
      (renewal) and T2 (rebinding) timeouts of 6 and 10.5 hours, respectively. In addition,
      the server provides the subnet mask for the client to use (255.255.255.128), the proper
      broadcast address (10.0.0.127), the default router and DNS server (all 10.0.0.1, the same
      as the DHCP server in this case), and a default domain name of "home". The domain
      name home is not standardized in any way and would not be used outside of a private
      network. This example is a home network, so by the author’s convention the names
      of machines used on it have the form <name>.home. Once the client has collected a
      DHCPOFFER message and decided to attempt leasing the IP address 10.0.0.57 it has
      been offered, it continues with a second DHCPREQUEST message (see Figure 6-8).

Figure 6-8   The second DHCPREQUEST indicates that the client wishes to be assigned the IP address
                   10.0.0.57. The message is sent to the broadcast address and includes the address 10.0.0.1
                   in the Server ID option. This allows any other servers that may receive the broadcast to
                   know which DHCP server and address the client has selected.

    The second DHCPREQUEST message, shown in Figure 6-8, is similar to the
DHCPDISCOVER message, except the requested IP address is now set to 10.0.0.57,
the DHCP message type is set to DHCPREQUEST, the DHCP autoconfiguration
option is not present, and the Server Identifier option is now filled in with the
address of the server (10.0.0.1). Note that this message, like the DHCPDISCOVER
message, is sent using broadcast, so any server or client present on the local net-
work receives it. The Server Identifier option field is used to keep unselected
servers from committing the address binding. When the selected server receives
the DHCPREQUEST and commits the binding, it ordinarily responds with a
DHCPACK message, as we see in Figure 6-9.

Figure 6-9   The DHCPACK message verifies to the client (and other servers) the allocation of address
             10.0.0.57 for up to 12 hours.

           The DHCPACK message shown in Figure 6-9 is very similar to the DHCPOFFER
      message we have seen before. However, now the client’s FQDN option is included
      as well. In this case (not shown), it is set to vista.home. At this point, the client
      is free to use the address 10.0.0.57, as far as the DHCP server is concerned. It is still
      advised to use techniques such as ACD, described in Chapter 4, to ensure that its
      address is not used by some other host.
           The DHCP messages exchanged in this example are typical of a system when
      it boots or is attached to a new network. It is also possible to induce a system to
      perform the release or acquisition of DHCP configuration information by hand.
      For example, in Windows the following command will release the data acquired
      using DHCP:

      C:\> ipconfig /release

      and the following command will acquire it:

      C:\> ipconfig /renew

      In Linux, the following commands can be used to achieve the same results:

      Linux# dhclient -r

      to release a DHCP lease, and

      Linux# dhclient

      to renew one.
           The type of information acquired by DHCP and assigned to the local system
      can be ascertained with a variant of the ipconfig command on Windows. Here
      is an excerpt from its output:

      C:\> ipconfig /all
      ...
      Wireless LAN adapter Wireless Network Connection:

         Connection-specific DNS Suffix . : home
         Description . . . . . . . . . . . : Intel(R) PRO/Wireless 3945ABG
                                             Network Connection
         Physical Address. . . . . . . . . : 00-13-02-20-B9-18
         DHCP Enabled. . . . . . . . . . . : Yes
         Autoconfiguration Enabled . . . . : Yes
         IPv4 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 10.0.0.57(Preferred)
         Subnet Mask . . . . . . . . . . . : 255.255.255.128
         Lease Obtained. . . . . . . . . . : Sunday, December 21, 2008
                                             11:31:48 PM
         Lease Expires . . . . . . . . . . : Monday, December 22, 2008
                                             11:31:40 AM
         Default Gateway . . . . . . . . . : 10.0.0.1

   DHCP Server . . . . . . . . . . . : 10.0.0.1
   DNS Servers . . . . . . . . . . . : 10.0.0.1
   NetBIOS over Tcpip. . . . . . . . : Enabled
   Connection-specific DNS Suffix Search List :home

This command is very useful to see what configuration information has been
assigned to a host using DHCP or other means.

6.2.4.2 The DHCP State Machine
The DHCP protocol operates a state machine at the clients and servers. The states
dictate which types of messages the protocol is expecting to process next. The cli-
ent state machine is illustrated in Figure 6-10. Transitions between states (arrows)
occur because of messages that are received and sent or when timers expire.

                                                  6 HQG
                                               ',6 &29( 5

                                                                            &ROOHFW
                                        ,1,7                 6 HOHFWLQJ     2IIHUV

                    5HFY?1$&.                                        6 HOHFW?6 HUYHU
                 RU?/HDVH?( [SLUHV                                 6 HQG?5( 48( 6 7
                                     5HFY?$&.? 'HFOLQH
                                      6 HQG?'( &/,1(
                                             RU
                                                            5HTXHVWLQJ
                                        5HFY?1$&.

                      5HELQGLQJ                                     5HFY?$&.? $FFHSW

                                       5HFY?$&.? $FFHSW         %RXQG
                      7?
                   ( [SLUHV                                 2EWDLQ?7???7?

                              5HQHZLQJ

                                                        7?
                                                     ( [SLUHV

Figure 6-10   The DHCP client state machine. The boldface states and transitions are typical for a
              client first acquiring a leased address. The dashed line and INIT state are where the
              protocol begins.

     As shown in Figure 6-10, a client begins in the INIT state when it has no infor-
mation and broadcasts the DHCPDISCOVER message. In the Selecting state, it col-
lects DHCPOFFER messages until it decides which address and server it wishes
to use. Once its selection has been made, it responds with a DHCPREQUEST mes-
sage and enters the Requesting state. At this point it may receive ACKs for other

        addresses it does not want. If it finds no address it wants, it sends a DHCPDECLINE
        and reverts to the INIT state. More likely, however, it receives a DHCPACK mes-
        sage for an address it wants, accepts it, obtains the timeout values T1 and T2,
        and enters the Bound state, where it is able to use the address until expiration.
        Upon the first timer expiration (timer T1), the client enters the Renewing state and
        attempts to reestablish its lease. This succeeds if a fresh DHCPACK is received
        (returning the client to the Bound state). If not, T2 ultimately expires, causing the
        client to attempt to reacquire an address from any server. If the lease time finally
        expires, the client must give up the leased address and becomes disconnected if it
        has no alternative address or network connection to use.

6.2.5   DHCPv6
        Although the IPv4 and IPv6 DHCP protocols achieve conceptually similar
        goals, their respective protocol designs and deployment options differ. DHCPv6
        [RFC3315] can be used in either a “stateful” mode, in which it works much like
        DHCPv4, or in a “stateless” mode in conjunction with stateless address autocon-
        figuration (see Section 6.3). In the stateless mode, IPv6 clients are assumed to self-
        configure their IPv6 addresses but require additional information (e.g., DNS server
        address) obtained using DHCPv6. Another option exists for deriving the location
        of a DNS server using ICMPv6 Router Advertisement messages (see Chapters 8
        and 11 and [RFC6106]).

        6.2.5.1 IPv6 Address Lifecycle
        IPv6 hosts usually operate with multiple addresses per interface, and each address
        has a set of timers indicating how long and for what purposes the corresponding
        address can be used. In IPv6, addresses are assigned with a preferred lifetime and
        valid lifetime. These lifetimes are used to form timeouts that move an address
        from one state to another in an address’s state machine (see Figure 6-11).

                                   '$'                  3UHIHUUHG                   9DOLG
                                  6XFFHVV               7LPHRXW                    7LPHRXW

                      7HQWDWLYH             3UHIHUUHG                'HSUHFDWHG              ,QYDOLG

                                                          '$'
                                                         6XFFHVV

                      $GGUHVV                           2SWLPLVWLF
                      6HOHFWLRQ
                                                                           9DOLG

Figure 6-11   The lifecycle of an IPv6 address. Tentative addresses are used only for DAD until veri-
                      fied as unique. After that, they become preferred and can be used without restriction
                      until an associated timeout changes their state to deprecated. Deprecated addresses are
                      not to be used for initiating new connections and may not be used at all after the associ-
                      ated valid timeout expires.

              Figure 6-11 shows the lifecycle of an IPv6 address. An address is in the pre-
         ferred state when it is available for general use and is available as either a source
         or destination IPv6 address. A preferred address becomes deprecated when its
         preferred timeout occurs. When it becomes deprecated, it may still be used for
         existing transport (e.g., TCP) connections but is not to be used for initiating new
         connections.
              When an address is first selected for use, it enters a tentative or optimistic state.
         When in the tentative state, it may be used only for the IPv6 Neighbor Discovery
         protocol (see Chapter 8). It is not used as a source or destination address for any
         other purposes. While in this state the address is being checked for duplication,
         to see if any other nodes on the same network are already using the address. The
         procedure for doing this is called duplicate address detection (DAD) and is described
         in more detail in Section 6.3.2.1. An alternative to conventional DAD is called opti-
         mistic DAD [RFC4429], whereby a selected address is used for a limited set of
         purposes until DAD completes. Because an optimistic use of an address is really
         just a special set of rules for DAD, it is not a truly complete state itself. Optimistic
         addresses are treated as deprecated for most purposes. In particular, an address
         may be both optimistic and deprecated simultaneously, depending on the pre-
         ferred and valid lifetimes.

         6.2.5.2 DHCPv6 Message Format
         DHCPv6 messages are encapsulated as UDP/IPv6 datagrams, with client port 546
         and server port 547 (see Chapter 10). Messages are sent using a host’s link-scoped
         source address to either relay agents or servers. There are two message formats,
         one used directly between a client and a server, and another when a relay is used
         (see Figure 6-12).

                                                                                                        

  0HVVDJH?7\SH          7UDQVDFWLRQ?,'? ???ELWV            0HVVDJH?7\SH   +RS?&RXQW

                    2SWLRQV? YDULDEOH                                         /LQN?$GGUHVV

                      &OLHQW?6HUYHU
                     0HVVDJH?)RUPDW
                                                                              3HHU?$GGUHVV

                                                                              2SWLRQV? YDULDEOH

                                                                                5HOD\?$JHQW
                                                                               0HVVDJH?)RUPDW

Figure 6-12 The basic DHCPv6 message format (left) and relay agent message format (right). Most interesting
            information in DHCPv6 is carried in options.

              The primary DHCPv6 message format is given in Figure 6-12 on the left and
         an extended version, which includes the Link Address and Peer Address fields, is
         given on the right. The format on the right is used between a DHCPv6 relay agent
         and a DHCPv6 server. The Link Address field gives the global IPv6 address used
         by the server to identify the link on which the client is located. The Peer Address
         field contains the address of the relay agent or client from which the message to be
         relayed was received. Note that relaying may be chained, so a relay may be relay-
         ing a message received from another relay. Relaying, for DHCPv4 and DHCPv6, is
         described in Section 6.2.6.
              The message type for messages in the format on the left include typical DHCP-
         style messages (REQUEST, REPLY, etc.), whereas the message types for messages
         in the format on the right include RELAY-FORW and RELAY-REPL, to indicate a
         message forwarded from a relay or destined to a relay, respectively. The Options
         field for the format on the right always includes a Relay Message option, which
         includes the complete message being forwarded by the relay. Other options may
         also be included.
              One of the differences between DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 is how DHCPv6 uses
         IPv6 multicast addressing. Clients send requests to the All DHCP Relay Agents and
         Servers multicast address (ff02::1:2). Source addresses are of link-local scope. In
         IPv6, there is no legacy BOOTP message format. The message semantics, however,
         are similar. Table 6-1 gives the types of DHCPv6 messages, their values, defining
         RFCs, and the roughly equivalent message and defining RFC for DHCPv4.

Table 6-1 DHCPv6 message types, values, and defining standards. The approximately equivalent message
          types for DHCPv4 are given to the right.

                                DHCPv6
DHCPv6 Message                  Value       Reference      DHCPv4 Message              Reference
SOLICIT                         1           [RFC3315]      DISCOVER                    [RFC2132]

ADVERTISE                       2           [RFC3315]      OFFER                       [RFC2132]

REQUEST                         3           [RFC3315]      REQUEST                     [RFC2132]

CONFIRM                         4           [RFC3315]      REQUEST                     [RFC2132]

RENEW                           5           [RFC3315]      REQUEST                     [RFC2132]

REBIND                          6           [RFC3315]      DISCOVER                    [RFC2132]

REPLY                           7           [RFC3315]      ACK/NAK                     [RFC2132]

RELEASE                         8           [RFC3315]      RELEASE                     [RFC2132]

DECLINE                         9           [RFC3315]      DECLINE                     [RFC2132]

Table 6-1 DHCPv6 message types, values, and defining standards. The approximately equivalent message
          types for DHCPv4 are given to the right (continued ).

                                DHCPv6
DHCPv6 Message                  Value       Reference      DHCPv4 Message              Reference
RECONFIGURE                     10          [RFC3315]      FORCERENEW                  [RFC3203]

INFORMATION-REQUEST             11          [RFC3315]      INFORM                      [RFC2132]

RELAY-FORW                      12          [RFC3315]      N/A

RELAY-REPL                      13          [RFC3315]      N/A

LEASEQUERY                      14          [RFC5007]      LEASEQUERY                  [RFC4388]

LEASEQUERY-REPLY                15          [RFC5007]      LEASE{UNASSIGNED,           [RFC4388]
                                                           UNKNOWN,ACTIVE}
LEASEQUERY-DONE                 16          [RFC5460]      LEASEQUERYDONE              [ID4LQ]
LEASEQUERY-DATA                 17          [RFC5460]      N/A                         N/A
N/A                             N/A         N/A            BULKLEASEQUERY              [ID4LQ]

              In DHCPv6, most interesting information, including addresses, lease times,
         location of services, and client and server identifiers, is carried in options. Two of
         the more important concepts used with these options are called the Identity Asso-
         ciation (IA) and the DHCP Unique Identifier (DUID). We discuss them next.

         6.2.5.3 Identity Association (IA)
         An Identity Association (IA) is an identifier used between a DHCP client and server
         to refer to a collection of addresses. Each IA comprises an IA identifier (IAID)
         and associated configuration information. Each client interface that requests a
         DHCPv6-assigned address requires at least one IA. Each IA can be associated with
         only a single interface. The client chooses the IAID to uniquely identify each IA,
         and this value is then shared with the server.
              The configuration information associated with an IA includes one or more
         addresses and associated lease information (T1, T2, and total lease duration val-
         ues). Each address in an IA has both a preferred and a valid lifetime [RFC4862],
         which define the address’s lifecycle. The types of addresses requested may be
         regular addresses or temporary addresses [RFC4941]. Temporary addresses are
         derived in part from random numbers to help improve privacy by frustrating the
         tracking of IPv6 hosts based on IPv6 addresses. Temporary addresses are ordinar-
         ily assigned at the same time nontemporary addresses are assigned but are regen-
         erated using a different random number more frequently.
              When responding to a request, a server assigns one or more addresses to a
         client’s IA based on a set of address assignment policies determined by the server’s
         administrator. Generally, such policies depend on the link on which the request

         arrived, standard information about the client (see DUID in Section 6.2.5.4), and
         other information supplied by the client in DHCP options. The formats of the IA
         option for nontemporary and temporary addresses are as shown in Figure 6-13.

                                                                                                                      

         237,21B,$B1$                   2SWLRQ?/HQJWK            237,21B,$B7$                       2SWLRQ?/HQJWK

                        ,$,'? ??E\WHV                                            ,$,'? ??E\WHV

                             7?
                                                                          ,$B7$?2SWLRQV? YDULDEOH
                             7?

                   ,$B1$?2SWLRQV? YDULDEOH                                      ,$?IRU?7HPSRUDU\?
                                                                                 $GGUHVV?2SWLRQ

                    ,$?IRU?1RQWHPSRUDU\?
                      $GGUHVV?2SWLRQ

Figure 6-13 The format for a DHCPv6 IA for nontemporary addresses (left) and temporary addresses (right).
            Each option may include additional options describing particular IPv6 addresses and corre-
            sponding leases.

             The main difference between a nontemporary and a temporary address IA
         option, as shown in Figure 6-13, is the inclusion of the T1 and T2 values in the
         nontemporary case. These values are expected, as they are also the values used in
         DHCPv4. For temporary addresses, the lack of T1 and T2 is made possible because
         the lifetimes are generally determined based upon the T1 and T2 values assigned
         to a nontemporary address that has been acquired previously. Details of tempo-
         rary addresses are given in [RFC4941].

         6.2.5.4 DHCP Unique Identifier (DUID)
         A DHCP Unique Identifier (DUID) identifies a single DHCPv6 client or server and
         is designed to be persistent over time. It is used by servers to identify clients for
         the selection of addresses (as part of IAs) and configuration information, and
         by clients to identify the server in which they are interested. DUIDs are variable
         in length and are treated as opaque values by both clients and servers for most
         purposes.
              DUIDs are supposed to be globally unique yet easy to generate. To satisfy
         these concerns simultaneously, [RFC3315] defines three different types of possible
         DUIDs but also mentions that these are not the only three types that might ever be
         created. The three types of DUIDs are as follows:

              l. DUID-LLT: a DUID based on link-layer address plus time
              2. DUID-EN: a DUID based on enterprise number and vendor assignment
              3. DUID-LL: a DUID based on link-layer address only

    The standard format for encoding a DUID begins with a 2-byte identifier indi-
cating which type of DUID is being expressed. The current list is maintained by
the IANA [ID6PARAM]. This is followed by a 16-bit hardware type derived from
[RFC0826] in the cases of DUID-LLT and DUID-LL, and a 32-bit Private Enterprise
Number in the case of DUID-EN.

    Note
    A Private Enterprise Number (PEN) is a 32-bit value given out by the IANA to an
    enterprise. It is usually used in conjunction with the SNMP protocol for network
    management purposes. About 38,000 of them have been assigned as of mid-
    2011. The current list is available from the IANA [IEPARAM].

    The first form of DUID, DUID-LLT, is the recommended form. Following
the hardware type, it includes a 32-bit timestamp containing the number of sec-
onds since midnight (UTC), January 1, 2000 (mod 232). This rolls over (returns
to zero) in the year 2136. The last portion is a variable-length link-layer address.
The link-layer address can be selected from any of the host’s interfaces, and the
same DUID should be used, once selected, for traffic on any interface. This form of
DUID is required to be stable even if the network interface from which the DUID
was derived is removed. Thus, it requires the host system to maintain stable stor-
age. The DUID-LL form is very similar but is recommended for systems lacking
stable storage (but having a stable link-layer address). The RFC says that a DUID-
LL must not be used by clients or servers that cannot determine if the link-layer
address they are using is associated with a removable interface.

6.2.5.5 Protocol Operation
The DHCPv6 protocol operates much like its DHCPv4 counterpart. Whether or
not a client initiates the use of DHCP is dependent on configuration options car-
ried in an ICMPv6 Router Advertisement message the host receives (see Chapter
8). Router advertisements include two important bit fields. The M field is the Man-
aged Address Configuration flag and indicates that IPv6 addresses can be obtained
using DHCPv6. The O field is the Other Configuration flag and indicates that infor-
mation other than IPv6 addresses is available using DHCPv6. Both fields, along
with several others, are specified in [RFC5175]. Any combination of the M and O
bit fields is possible, although having M on and O off is probably the least useful
combination. If both are off, DHCPv6 is not used, and address assignment takes
place using stateless address autoconfiguration, described in Section 6.3. Having
M off and O on indicates that clients should use stateless DHCPv6 and obtain their
addresses using stateless address autoconfiguration. The DHCPv6 protocol oper-
ates using the messages defined in Table 6-1 and illustrated in Figure 6-14.
     Typically, a client starting out first determines what link-local address to use
and performs an ICMPv6 Router Discovery operation (see Chapter 8) to determine
if there is a router on the attached network. A router advertisement includes the M
and O bit fields mentioned previously. If DHCPv6 is in use, at least the M bit field

                                      &OLHQW             5RXWHU

                                            5287(5?
                                            62/,&,7

                                                   5?
                                             5287( (
                 0?DQG?2?)ODJV?6HOHFW       $'9(5
                                                  7,6                                  6HOHFWHG?
               '+&3Y??2SHUDWLQJ?0RGH                                                  '+&3?6HUYHU
                            &OLHQW?6WDUWV
                        0D\?8VH?=HUR?,3?                     62/,&,7
                                                  QXOO???PFDVW?
                                                                 [LG??'8,'??R               'HWHUPLQHV
                        6RXUFH?$GGUHVV                                           SWLRQV
                                                                                            &RQILJXUDWLRQ
                                                                7,6( ,'??RSWLRQV            2WKHUV?0D\?$'9(57,6(
                        &ROOHFWV?5HSOLHV                  $'9(5
                                                              VV??VHUY
                                                                       HU?
                                                               DGGUH
            6HOHFWV?6HUYHU?&RQILJXUDWLRQ       PFDVW??[LG??,3

                                                            5(48(6
                                                  PFDVW??D
                                                            GGUHVV??V
                                                                            7
               7ZR?
                                                                        HUYHU?,'??[
                                                                                     LG     &RPPLWV
             0HVVDJH                                                                        &RQILJXUDWLRQ
             ([FKDQJH                                         5(3/<             QV
                                                                     LG??RSWLR
                                                         PFDVW??[
                             &RQILJXUHG

                             9HULI\LQJ
                        5HFRPPHQGHG                    &KHFN?IR
                                                                       U?&RQIOLFW
                                                              H?J???'$'

                                                             '(&/,1
                                                                            (
                                                              ,I?&RQIOLFW

Figure 6-14   Basic operation of DHCPv6. A client determines whether or not to use DHCPv6 from
                    information carried in ICMPv6 router advertisements. If used, DHCPv6 operations are
                    similar to those in DHCPv4 but differ significantly in the details.

      is set and the client multicasts (see Chapter 9) the DHCPSOLICIT message to find
      DHCPv6 servers. A response comes in the form of one or more DHCPADVERTISE
      messages, indicating the presence of at least one DHCPv6 server. These messages
      constitute two of the so-called four-message exchange operations of DHCPv6.
           In cases where the location of a DHCPv6 server is already known or an address
      need not be allocated (e.g., stateless DHCPv6 or the Rapid Commit option is being
      used—see Section 6.2.9), the four-message exchange can be shortened to become
      a two-message exchange, in which case only the REQUEST and REPLY messages
      are used. A DHCPv6 server commits a binding formed from the combination of
      a DUID, IA type (temporary, nontemporary, or prefix—see Section 6.2.5.3), and
      IAID. The IAID is a 32-bit number chosen by the client. Each binding can have
      one or more leases, and one or more bindings can be manipulated using a single
      DHCPv6 transaction.

      6.2.5.6 Extended Example
      Figure 6-15 shows an example of a Windows Vista (Service Pack 1) machine attach-
      ing to a wireless network. Its IPv4 stack has been disabled. It begins by assigning
      its link-local address and checking to see if that address is already being used.
Figure 6-15 DAD for the client system’s link-local address is a Neighbor Solicitation for its own IPv6 address.

           In Figure 6-15 we see the ICMPv6 Neighbor Solicitation (DAD) for the client’s
      optimistic address fe80::fd26:de93:5ab7:405a. (DAD is described in more detail
      when we discuss stateless address autoconfiguration in Section 6.3.2.1.) The packet
      is sent to the corresponding solicited-node address ff02::1:ffb7:405a. It optimisti-
      cally assumes that this address is not otherwise in use on the link, so it continues
      on immediately with a Router Solicitation (RS) (see Figure 6-16).
           The RS shown in Figure 6-16 is sent to the All Routers multicast address ff02::2.
      It induces each router on the network to respond with a Router Advertisement
      (RA), which carries the important M and O bits the client requires to determine
      what to do next.

          Note
          This example shows a router solicitation being sent from an optimistic address
          including a source link-layer address option (SLLAO), in violation of [RFC4429].
          The problem here is potential pollution of neighbor caches in any listening IPv6
          routers. They will process the option and establish a mapping in their neighbor
          caches between the tentative address and the link-layer address that may be a
          duplicate. However, this is very unlikely and is probably not of significant concern.
          Nonetheless, a pending “optimistic” option [IDDN], if standardized, will allow a
          router solicitation to include an SLLAO that avoids this issue.

           The RA in Figure 6-17 indicates the presence of a router, including its SLLAO
      of 00:04:5a:9f:9e:80, which will be useful to the client for encapsulating subsequent
      link-layer frames destined for the router. The Flags field indicates that the M and
      O bit fields are both enabled (set to 1), so the client should proceed with DHCPv6,
      both for obtaining its addresses as well as for obtaining other configuration infor-
      mation. This is accomplished by soliciting a DHCPv6 server (see Figure 6-18).
           The DHCPv6 SOLICIT message shown in Figure 6-18 includes a transaction
      ID (as in DHCPv4), an elapsed time (0, not shown), and the DUID consisting of a
      time and 6-byte MAC address. In this example, the MAC address 00:14:22:f4:19:5f
      is the MAC address of the wired Ethernet interface on this client, which is not the
      interface being used to send the SOLICIT message. Recall that for DUID-LL and
      DUID-TLL types of DUIDs the link-layer information should be the same across
      interfaces. The IA is for a nontemporary address, and the client has selected the
      IAID 09001302. The time values are left at 0 in the request, meaning that the client
      is not expressing a particular desire; they will be determined by the server.
           The next option is the FQDN option specified by [RFC4704]. It is used to carry
      the FQDN of the client but also to affect how DHCPv6 and DNS interact (see Sec-
      tion 6.4 on DHCP and DNS interaction). This option is used to enable dynamic
      updates to FQDN-to-IPv6 address mapping by client or server. (The reverse is
      generally handled by the server.) The first portion of this option contains three
Figure 6-16   The Router Solicitation induces a nearby router to provide a Router Advertisement. The solicitation message is sent to the All Routers address
                    (ff02::2).

Figure 6-17   A Router Advertisement indicates that addresses are managed (available by assignment using
              DHCPv6) and that other information (e.g., DNS server) is also available using DHCPv6. This net-
              work uses stateful DHCPv6. IPv6 Router Advertisement messages use ICMPv6 (see Chapter 8).

         bit fields: N (server should not perform update), O (client request overridden by
         server), and S (server should perform update). The second portion of the option
         contains a domain name, which may be fully qualified or not.

               Note
               The Wireshark tool indicates that the FQDN name record in Figure 6-18 is mal-
               formed and speculates that the packet may have been generated by a MS Vista
               client, which indeed it was. The reason the field is malformed is because the origi-
               nal specification for this option allowed a simple domain name encoding using
               ASCII characters. This method has been deprecated by [RFC4704], and the two
               encodings are not directly compatible. Microsoft provides a “hotfix” to address
               this issue for Vista systems. Microsoft Windows 7 systems exhibit behavior com-
               pliant with [RFC4704].

              Other information in the solicitation message includes the identification of the
         vendor class and requested option list. In this case, the vendor class data includes
         the string "MSFT 5.0", which can be used by a DHCPv6 server to determine what
         types of processing the client is capable of doing. In response to the client’s solici-
         tation, the server responds with an ADVERTISE message (see Figure 6-19).

Figure 6-18   The DHCPv6 SOLICIT message requests the location of one or more DHCPv6 servers and includes
              information identifying the client and the options in which it is interested.

             The ADVERTISE message shown in Figure 6-19 provides a wealth of infor-
         mation to the client. The Client Identifier option echoes the client’s configuration
         information. The Server Identifier option gives the time plus a link-layer address
         of 10:00:00:00:09:20 to identify the server. The IA has the value IAID 09001302
         (provided by the client) and includes the global address 2001:db8:0:f101::10fd with
         preferred lifetime and valid lifetime of 130 and 200s, respectively (fairly short
         timeouts). The status code of 0 indicates success. Also provided with the DHCPv6

Figure 6-19   The DHCPv6 ADVERTISE message includes an address and lease, plus DNS server IPv6 address
              and domain search list.

         advertisement is the DNS Recursive Name Server option [RFC3646] indicating a
         server address of 2001:db8:0:f101::1 and a Domain Search List option containing
         the string home. Note that the server does not include an FQDN option, as it does
         not implement that option.
              The next two packets are a conventional Neighbor Solicitation and Neighbor
         Advertisement messages between the client and the router, which we do not detail
         further. That exchange is followed by the client’s request for a commitment of the
         global nontemporary address 2001:db8:0:f101::10fd (see Figure 6-20).
              The REQUEST message shown in Figure 6-20 is very similar to the SOLICIT
         message but includes the information carried in the ADVERTISE message from
         the server (address, T1, and T2 values). The transaction ID remains the same for
         all of the DHCPv6 messages we have seen. The exchange is completed with the
         REPLY message, which is identical to the ADVERTISE message except for the dif-
         ferent message type and therefore is not detailed.

Figure 6-20   The DHCPv6 REQUEST message is similar to a SOLICIT message but includes information
              learned from the server’s ADVERTISE message.

             The DHCPv6 messages exchanged in this example are typical of a system
         when it boots or is attached to a new network. As with DHCPv4, it is possible to
         induce a system to perform the release or acquisition of this information by hand.
         For example, in Windows the following command will release the data acquired
         using DHCPv6:

         C:\> ipconfig /release6

         and the following command will acquire it:

         C:\> ipconfig /renew6

             The type of information acquired by DHCP and assigned to the local inter-
         face can be ascertained with another variant of this command that we have seen
         before. Here is an excerpt of its output:

         C:\> ipconfig /all
         ...
         Wireless LAN adapter Wireless Network Connection:

              Connection-specific DNS Suffix . : home
              Description . . . . . . . . . . . : Intel(R) PRO/Wireless 3945ABG
                                                  Network Connection
              Physical Address. . . . . . . . . : 00-13-02-20-B9-18
              DHCP Enabled. . . . . . . . . . . : Yes

         Autoconfiguration Enabled . . . . : Yes
         IPv6 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 2001:db8:0:f101::12cd(Preferred)
         Lease Obtained. . . . . . . . . . : Sunday, December 21, 2008
                                             11:30:45 PM
         Lease Expires . . . . . . . . . . : Sunday, December 21, 2008
                                             11:37:04 PM
         Link-local IPv6 Address . . . . . :
                                       fe80::fd26:de93:5ab7:405a%9(Preferred)
         Default Gateway . . . . . . . . . : fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80%9
         DHCPv6 IAID . . . . . . . . . . . : 150999810
         DHCPv6 Client DUID. . . . . . . . :
                              00-01-00-01-0D-D1-4B-2E-00-14-22-F4-19-5F
         DNS Servers . . . . . . . . . . . : 2001:db8:0:f101::1
         NetBIOS over Tcpip. . . . . . . . : Disabled
         Connection-specific DNS Suffix Search List :
                                             home

           Here we can see the link-layer address of the system (00:13:02:20:b9:18).
      Note how this address was never used as a basis for forming the IPv6 addresses
      in this example.

      6.2.5.7 DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation (DHCPv6-PD and 6rd)
      Although the discussion so far has revolved around configuring hosts, DHCPv6
      can also be used to configure routers. This works by having one router delegate a
      range of address space to another router. The range of addresses is described by
      an IPv6 address prefix. The prefix is carried in a DHCP Prefix option, defined by
      [RFC3633]. This is used in situations where the delegating router, which now acts
      as a DHCPv6 server as well, does not require detailed topology information about
      the network to which the prefix is being delegated. Such a situation can arise, for
      example, when an ISP gives out a range of IP addresses to be used and potentially
      reassigned by a customer. In such a circumstance, the ISP may choose to delegate
      a prefix to the customer’s premises equipment using DHCPv6-PD.
           With prefix delegation, a new form of IA called an IA_PD is defined. Each
      IA_PD consists of an IAID and associated configuration information and is simi-
      lar to an IA for addresses, as discussed previously. DHCPv6-PD is useful not only
      for prefix delegation for fixed routers, but is also suggested to be used when rout-
      ers (and their attached subnets) can be mobile [RFC6276].
           A special form of PD (6rd, described in [RFC5569]) has been created for support-
      ing IPv6 rapid deployment by service providers. The OPTION_6RD (212) option
      [RFC5969] holds the IPv6 6rd prefix that is used in assigning IPv6 addresses at a
      customer’s site based on the customer’s assigned IPv4 address. IPv6 addresses are
      algorithmically assigned by taking the service provider’s provisioned 6rd prefix as
      the first n bits, with n being recommended as less than 32. A customer’s assigned
      unicast IPv4 address is then appended as the next 32 (or fewer) bits, resulting in an
      IPv6 6rd delegated prefix that is handled identically to DHCPv6-PD and is recom-
      mended to be 64 bits or shorter in length to allow automatic address configuration
      (see Section 6.4) to operate without problems.

            The OPTION_6RD option is variable in length and includes the follow-
        ing values: the IPv4 mask length, 6rd prefix length, 6rd prefix, and a list of 6rd
        relay addresses (IPv4 addresses of relays that provide 6rd). The IPv4 mask length
        gives the number of bits from the IPv4 address to use in assigning IPv6 addresses
        (counted from the left).

6.2.6   Using DHCP with Relays
        In most simple networks, a single DHCP server is made available directly to cli-
        ents on the same LAN. However, in more complicated enterprises it may be neces-
        sary or convenient to relay DHCP traffic through one or more DHCP relay agents,
        as illustrated in Figure 6-21.

                        1HWZRUN?6HJPHQW?                       1HWZRUN?6HJPHQW?
                               $                                      %
                                                                              '+&3?6HUYHU

                                                 5HOD\?$JHQW
                                                                   0HVVDJHV?ZLWK
                                                                                     Q
                                                               5HOD\?$JHQW?,QIRUPDWLR

                                              QWLRQDO
                                      &RQYH VDJHV
                                        & 3 ?0 HV
                                     '+

                             '+&3?&OLHQW

Figure 6-21   A DHCP relay agent extends the operation of DHCP beyond a single network segment.
                      Information carried only between relays and DHCPv4 servers can be carried in the
                      Relay Agent Information option. Relaying in DHCPv6 works in a similar fashion but
                      with a different set of options.

             A relay agent is used to extend the operation of DHCP across multiple network
        segments. In Figure 6-21 the relay between network segments A and B forwards
        DHCP messages and may annotate the messages with additional information
        using options or by filling in empty fields. Note that in ordinary circumstances,
        a relay does not participate in all DHCP traffic exchanged between a client and
        a server. Rather, it relays only those messages that are broadcast (or multicast in
        IPv6). Such messages are usually exchanged when a client is obtaining its address
        for the first time. Once a client has acquired an IP address and the server’s IP
        address using the Server Identification option, it can carry out a unicast conversa-
        tion with the server that does not involve the relay. Note that relay agents have tra-
        ditionally been layer 3 devices and tend to incorporate routing capabilities. After
        discussing the basics of layer 3 relays, we will look briefly at alternatives that oper-
        ate (mostly) at layer 2.

      6.2.6.1 Relay Agent Information Option
      In the original concept of a BOOTP or DHCP relay [RFC2131], a relay agent served
      the purpose only of relaying a message from one subnet to another that would
      otherwise not be passed on by a router. This allowed systems that could not
      yet perform indirect delivery to acquire an address from a centralized location.
      This is sensible for a network operating in an enterprise under one administra-
      tive authority, but in cases where DHCP is used at a subscriber’s premises and
      the DHCP infrastructure is provided elsewhere (e.g., an ISP), more information
      may be required. There are a number of possible reasons. For example, the ISP
      may not trust the subscriber completely, or billing and logging may be associated
      with other information not available in the basic DHCP protocol. It has therefore
      become useful to include extra information in the messages that pass between the
      relay and the server. The Relay Agent Information option (for DHCPv4, abbrevi-
      ated RAIO) [RFC3046] provides ways to include such information for IPv4 net-
      works. IPv6 works somewhat differently, and we cover it in the following section.
          The RAIO for DHCPv4 specified in [RFC3046] is really a meta-option, in
      the sense that it specifies a framework in which a number of suboptions can be
      defined. Many such suboptions have been defined, including several that are used
      by ISPs to identify from which user, circuit, or network a request is coming. In
      many cases we shall see that a suboption of the DHCPv4 information option has a
      corresponding IPv6 option.
          Because some of the information conveyed between a relay and a server may
      be important to secure, the DHCP Authentication suboption of the RAIO has been
      defined in [RFC4030]. It provides a method to ensure data integrity of the mes-
      sages exchanged between relay and server. The approach is very similar to the
      DHCP deferred authentication method (see Section 6.2.7), except the SHA-1 algo-
      rithm is used instead of the MD5 algorithm (see Chapter 18).

      6.2.6.2 Relay Agent Remote-ID Suboption and IPv6 Remote-ID Option
      One common requirement placed upon a relay is to identify the client making a
      DHCP request with information beyond what the client itself provides. A sub-
      option of the Relay Agent Information option, called the Remote-ID suboption,
      provides a way to identify the requesting DHCP client using a number of nam-
      ing approaches that are locally interpreted (e.g., caller ID, user name, modem ID,
      remote IP address of a point-to-point link). The DHCPv6 Relay Agent Remote-ID
      option [RFC4649] provides the same capability but also includes an extra field,
      the enterprise number, which indicates the vendor associated with the identify-
      ing information. This format of the Remote-ID information is then specified in a
      vendor-specific way based on the enterprise number. A common method is to use
      a DUID for the remote ID.

      6.2.6.3 Server Identifier Override
      In some cases a relay may wish to interpose itself for processing between a
      DHCP client and server. This can be accomplished with a special Server Identifier

Override suboption [RFC5107]. The suboption is a variant of the RAIO mentioned
previously.
     Ordinarily, a relay forwards SOLICIT messages and may append options to
these messages as they pass from client to server. Relays are necessary in this cir-
cumstance because the client is likely to not yet have an acceptable IP address and
only sends its messages to the local subnet using broadcast or multicast address-
ing. Once a client receives and selects its address, it can talk directly to the DHCP
server based upon the server’s identity carried in the Server Identifier option. In
effect, this cuts the relay out of subsequent transactions between client and server.
     It is often useful to allow the relay to include a variety of options (e.g., RAIO
carrying a circuit ID) for other types of messages, such as REQUEST, in addition
to SOLICIT. This option includes a 4-byte value specifying the IPv4 address to use
in the Server Identifier option present in DHCPREPLY messages formed by serv-
ers. The Server Identifier Override option is supposed to be used in conjunction
with the Relay Agents Flag suboption [RFC5010]. This suboption of the RAIO is a
set of flags that carry information from relay to server. So far, only one such flag
is defined: whether the destination address on the initial message from the client
used broadcast or unicast addressing. The server may make different address allo-
cation decisions based upon the setting of this flag.

6.2.6.4 Lease Query and Bulk Lease Query
In some environments it is useful to allow a third-party system (such as a relay
or access concentrator) to learn the address bindings for a particular DHCP client.
This facility is provided by DHCP leasequery ([RFC4388][RFC6148] for DHCPv4
and [RFC5007] for DHCPv6). In the case of DHCPv6, it can also provide lease
information for delegated prefixes. In Figure 6-21, the relay agent may “glean”
information from DHCP packets that pass through it in order to influence what
information is provided to the DHCP server. Such information may be kept by the
relay but may be lost upon relay failure. The DHCPLEASEQUERY message allows
such an agent to reacquire this type of information on demand, usually when
relaying traffic for which it has lost a binding. The DHCPLEASEQUERY message
supports four types of queries for DHCPv4: IPv4 address, MAC address, Client
Identifier, and Remote ID. For DHCPv6, it supports two: IPv6 address and Client
Identifier (DUID).
    DHCPv4 servers may respond to lease queries with one of the follow-
ing types of messages: DHCPLEASEUNASSIGNED, DHCPLEASEACTIVE, or
DHCPLEASEUNKNOWN. The first message indicates that the responding server
is authoritative for the queried value but no current associated lease is assigned.
The second form indicates that a lease is active, and the lease parameters (includ-
ing T1 and T2) are provided. There is no particular presumed use for this infor-
mation; it is made available to the requestor for whatever purposes it desires.
DHCPv6 servers respond with a LEASEQUERY-REPLY message that contains
a Client Data option. This option, in turn, includes a collection of the following
options: Client ID, IPv6 Address, IPv6 Prefix, and Client Last Transaction Time.

      The last value is the time (in seconds) since the server last communicated with
      the client in question. A LEASEQUERY-REPLY message may also contain the fol-
      lowing two options: Relay Data and Client Link. The first includes the data last
      sent from a relay about the associated query, and the second indicates the link on
      which the subject client has one or more address bindings. Once again, this infor-
      mation is used for whatever purposes the requestor desires.
           An extension to lease query called Bulk Leasequery (BL) [RFC5460][ID4LQ]
      allows multiple bindings to be queried simultaneously, uses TCP/IP rather than
      UDP/IP, and supports a wider range of query types. BL is designed as a special
      service for obtaining binding information and is not really part of conventional
      DHCP. Thus, clients wishing to obtain conventional configuration information do
      not use BL. One particular use of BL is when DHCP is being used for prefix del-
      egation. In this case, it is common for a router to be acting as a DHCP-PD client. It
      obtains a prefix and then provides an address from the address range represented
      by the prefix as an assignment to conventional DHCP clients. However, if such a
      router fails or reboots, it may lose the prefix information and have a difficult time
      recovering because the conventional lease query mechanism requires an identifier
      for the binding in order to form the query. BL helps this situation, and others, by
      generalizing the set of possible query types.
           BL provides several extensions to basic lease query. First, it uses TCP/IP (port
      547 for IPv6 and port 67 for IPv4) instead of UDP/IP. This change allows for large
      amounts of query information to be returned for a single query, as may be neces-
      sary when retrieving a large number of delegated prefixes. BL also provides a Relay
      Identifier option to allow queries to identify the querier more easily. A BL query
      can then be based on relay identifier, link address (network segment), or relay ID.
           The Relay ID DHCPv6 option and Relay ID DHCPv4 suboption [ID4RI] may
      include a DUID that identifies the relay agent. Relays can insert this option in mes-
      sages they forward, and the server can use it to associate bindings it receives with
      the particular relay providing them. BL supports queries by address and DUID
      specified in [RFC5007] and [RFC4388] but also queries by relay ID, link address,
      and remote ID. These newer queries are supported only on TCP/IP-based servers
      that support BL. Conversely, BL servers support only LEASEQUERY messages, not
      the full set of ordinary DHCP messages.
           BL extends the basic lease query mechanism with the LEASEQUERY-DATA
      and LEASEQUERY-DONE messages. When responding successfully to a query, a
      server first includes a LEASEQUERY-REPLY message. If additional information is
      available, it includes a set of LEASEQUERY-DATA messages, one per binding, and
      completes the set with a LEASEQUERY-DONE message. All messages pertaining
      to the same group of bindings share a common transaction ID, the same one pro-
      vided in the initial LEASEQUERY-REQUEST message.

      6.2.6.5 Layer 2 Relay Agents
      In some network environments, there are layer 2 devices (e.g., switches, bridges)
      that are located near end systems that relay and process DHCP requests. These

        layer 2 devices do not have a full TCP/IP implementation stack and are not address-
        able using IP. As a result, they cannot act as conventional relay agents. To deal with
        this issue, [IDL2RA] and [RFC6221] specify how layer 2 “lightweight” DHCP relay
        agents (LDRAs) should behave, for IPv4 and IPv6, respectively. When referring to
        relay behaviors, interfaces are labeled as client-facing or network-facing, and as
        either trusted or untrusted. Network-facing interfaces are topologically closer to
        DHCP servers, and trusted interfaces are those where it is assumed that arriving
        packets are not spoofed.
             The primary issue for IPv4 LDRAs is how to handle the DHCP giaddr field and
        insert a RAIO when the LDRA itself has no IP layer information. The approach
        recommended by [IDL2RA] is to have LDRAs insert the RAIO into DHCP requests
        received from clients but not fill in the giaddr field. The resulting DHCP message
        is sent in a broadcast fashion to one or more DHCP servers, as well as any other
        receiving LDRAs. Such messages are flooded (i.e., sent on all interfaces except
        the one upon which the message was received) unless received on an untrusted
        interface. LDRAs receiving such a message already including a RAIO do not add
        another such option but perform flooding. Responses (e.g., DHCPOFFER mes-
        sages) sent using broadcast may be intercepted by the LDRA, which in turn strips
        the RAIO and uses its information to forward the response to the original request-
        ing client. Many LDRAs also intercept unicast DHCP traffic. In these cases, the
        RAIO is also created or stripped as necessary. Note that compatible DHCP serv-
        ers must support the ability to process and return DHCP messages containing
        RAIOs without a valid giaddr field, whether such messages are sent using unicast
        or broadcast.
             IPv6 LDRAs process DHCPv6 traffic by creating RELAY-FORW and RELAY-
        REPL messages. ADVERTISE, REPLY, RECONFIGURE, and RELAY-REPL mes-
        sages received on client-facing interfaces are discarded. In addition, RELAY-FORW
        messages received on untrusted client-facing interfaces are also discarded as a
        security precaution. RELAY-FORW messages are built containing options that
        identify the client-facing interface (i.e., Link-Address field, Peer-Address field, and
        Interface-ID option). The Link-Address field is set to 0, the Peer-Address field is set
        to the client’s IP address, and the Interface-ID option is set to a value configured
        in the LDRA. When receiving a RELAY-REPL message containing a Link-Address
        field with value 0, the LDRA decapsulates the included message and sends it to
        toward the client on the interface specified in the received Interface-ID option
        (provided by the server). RELAY-FORW messages received on client-facing inter-
        faces are modified by incrementing the hop count. Messages other than RELAY-
        REPL messages received on network-facing interfaces are dropped.

6.2.7   DHCP Authentication
        While we ordinarily discuss various security vulnerabilities at the end of each
        chapter (as we do in this one), for DHCP it is worth mentioning them here. It
        should be apparent that if the smooth operation of DHCP is interfered with, hosts

      are likely to be configured with erroneous information and significant disruption
      could result. Unfortunately, as we have discussed so far, DHCP has no provision
      for security, so it is possible for unauthorized DHCP clients or servers to be set
      up, either intentionally or accidentally, that could cause havoc with an otherwise
      functioning network.
           In an attempt to mitigate these problems, a method to authenticate DHCP
      messages is specified in [RFC3118]. It defines a DHCP option, the Authentication
      option, with the format shown in Figure 6-22.

                                                                                         

                            &RGH            /HQJWK           3URWRFRO      $OJRULWKP

                            5'0
                                                  5HSOD\?'HWHFWLRQ
                                                  ELWV??EDVHG?RQ?5'0

                                             $XWKHQWLFDWLRQ?,QIRUPDWLRQ
                                             YDULDEOH??EDVHG?RQ?3URWRFRO

Figure 6-22   The DHCP Authentication option includes replay detection and can use various meth-
                    ods for authentication. Specified back in 2001, this option is not widely used today.

           The purpose of the Authentication option is to help determine whether a
      DHCP message has come from an authorized sender. The Code field is set to 90,
      and the Length field gives the number of bytes in the option (not including the
      Code or Length fields). If the Protocol and Algorithm fields have the value 0, the
      Authentication Information field holds a simple shared configuration token. As long as
      the configuration token matches at the client and server, the message is accepted.
      This could be used, for example, to hold a password or similar text string, but such
      traffic could be intercepted by an attacker, so this method is not very secure. It
      might help to fend off accidental DHCP problems, however.
           A somewhat more secure method involves so-called deferred authentication,
      indicated if the Protocol and Algorithm fields are set to 1. In this case, the client’s
      DHCPDISCOVER or DHCPINFORM message includes an Authentication option,
      and the server responds with authentication information included in its DHCPOF-
      FER or DHCPACK message. The authentication information includes a message
      authentication code (MAC; see Chapter 18), which provides authentication of the
      sender and an integrity check on the message contents. Assuming that the server
      and client have a shared secret, the MAC can be used to ensure that the client is
      trusted by the server and vice versa. It can also be used to ensure that the DHCP
      messages exchanged between them have not been modified or replayed from an

        earlier DHCP exchange. The replay detection method (RDM) is determined by
        the value of the RDM field. For RDM set to 0, the Replay Detection field contains a
        monotonically increasing value (e.g., timestamp). Received messages are checked
        to ensure that this value always increases. If the value does not increase, it is
        likely that an earlier DHCP message is simply being replayed (captured, stored,
        and played back later). It is conceivable that the value in the Replay Detection field
        could fail to advance in a situation where packets are reordered, but this is highly
        unlikely in a LAN (where DHCP is most prevalent) because only a single routing
        path is ordinarily used between the DHCP client and server.
             There are (at least) two reasons why DHCP authentication has not seen wide-
        spread use. First, the approach requires shared keys to be distributed between a
        DHCP server and each client requiring authentication. Second, the Authentication
        option was specified after DHCP was already in relatively widespread use. None-
        theless, [RFC4030] builds upon this specification to help secure DHCP messages
        passed through relay agents (see Section 6.2.6).

6.2.8   Reconfigure Extension
        In ordinary operation, a DHCP client initiates the renewal of address bindings.
        [RFC3203] defines the reconfigure extension and associated DHCPFORCERENEW
        message. This extension allows a server to cause a single client to change to the
        Renewing state and attempt to renew its lease by an otherwise ordinary opera-
        tion (i.e., DHCPREQUEST). A server that does not wish to renew the lease for the
        requested address may respond with a DHCPNAK, causing the client to restart
        in the INIT state. The client would then begin again using a DHCPDISCOVER
        message.
             The purpose of this extension is to cause the client to reestablish an address or
        to cause it to lose its address as the result of some significant change of state within
        the network. This could happen, for example, if the network is being adminis-
        tratively taken down or renumbered. Because this message is such an obvious
        candidate for a DoS attack, it must be authenticated using DHCP authentication.
        Because DHCP authentication is not in widespread use, neither is the reconfigure
        extension.

6.2.9   Rapid Commit
        The DHCP Rapid Commit option [RFC4039] allows a DHCP server to respond
        to the DHCPDISCOVER message with a DHCPACK, effectively skipping the
        DHCPREQUEST message and ultimately using a two-message exchange instead
        of a four-message exchange. The motivation for this option is to quickly configure
        hosts that may change their point of network attachment frequently (i.e., mobile
        hosts). When only a single DHCP server is available and addresses are plentiful,
        this option should be of no significant concern.

            To use rapid commit, a client includes the option in a DHCPDISCOVER mes-
       sage; it is not permitted to include it in any other message. Similarly, a server uses
       this option only in DHCPACK messages. When a server responds with this option,
       the receiving client knows that the returned address may be used immediately. If
       it should determine later that the address is already in use by another system (e.g.,
       via ARP), the client sends a DHCPDECLINE message and abandons the address. It
       may also voluntarily relinquish the address it has received using a DHCPRELEASE
       message.

6.2.10 Location Information (LCI and LoST)
       In some cases, it is useful for a host being configured to become aware of its loca-
       tion in the world. Such information may be encoded using, for example, latitude,
       longitude, and altitude. An IETF effort known as Geoconf (“Geographic configu-
       ration”) resulted in [RFC6225], which specifies how to provide such geospatial
       Location Configuration Information (LCI) to clients using the GeoConf (123) and
       GeoLoc (144) DHCP options. Geospatial LCI includes not only the value of the lati-
       tude, longitude, and altitude coordinates, but also resolution indicators for each.
       LCI can be used for a number of purposes, including emergency services. If a
       caller using an IP phone requests emergency assistance, LCI can be used to indi-
       cate where the emergency is taking place.
            Although the physical location information just mentioned is useful to locate
       a particular individual or system, sometimes it is important to know the civic
       location of an entity. The civic location expresses location in terms of geopoliti-
       cal institutions such as country, city, district, street, and other such parameters.
       Civic location information can be provided using DHCP in the same way a phys-
       ical location can, using the same LCI structure as is used with geospatial LCI.
       [RFC4776] defines the GEOCONF_CIVIC (99) option for carrying civic location
       LCI. This form of LCI is trickier than the geospatial information because the geo-
       political method for naming locations varies by country. An additional complexity
       arises because such names may also require languages and character sets beyond
       the English and ASCII language and characters ordinarily used with DHCP. There
       is also a concern regarding the privacy of location in general, not just with respect
       to DHCP. The IETF is undertaking this issue in a framework called “Geopriv.” See,
       for example, [RFC3693] for more information.
            An alternative high-layer protocol known as the HTTP-Enabled Location Deliv-
       ery (HELD) protocol [RFC5985] may also be used to provide location information.
       Instead of encoding the LCI directly in DHCP messages, DHCP options OPTION_
       V4_ACCESS_DOMAIN (213) and OPTION_V6_ACCESS_DOMAIN (57) provide
       the FQDN of a HELD server for IPv4 and IPv6, respectively [RFC5986].
            Once a host knows its location, it may need to contact services associated with
       the location (e.g., the location of the nearest hospital). The IETF Location-to-Service
       Translation (LoST) framework [RFC5222] accomplishes this using an application-
       layer protocol accessed using a location-dependent URI. The DHCP options

      OPTION_V4_LOST (137) and OPTION_V6_LOST (51) provide for variable-length
      encodings of an FQDN specifying the name of a LoST server for DHCPv4 and
      DHCPv6, respectively [RFC5223]. The encoding is in the same format used by
      DNS for encoding domain names (see Chapter 11).

6.2.11 Mobility and Handoff Information (MoS and ANDSF)
      In response to the increased use of mobile computers and smartphones accessing
      the Internet with cellular technology, frameworks and related DHCP options have
      been specified to convey information about the cellular configuration and hand-
      overs between different wireless networks. At present, there are two sets of DHCP
      options relating to this information: IEEE 802.21 Mobility Services (MoS) Discovery
      and Access Network Discovery and Selection Function (ANDSF). The latter framework
      is being standardized by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), one of the
      organizations responsible for creating cellular data communications standards.
           The IEEE 802.21 standard [802.21-2008] specifies a framework for media-
      independent handoff (MIH) services between various network types, including
      those defined by IEEE (802.3, 802.11, 802.16), those defined by 3GPP, and those
      defined by 3GPP2. A design of such a framework in the IETF context is provided
      in [RFC5677]. MoS provides three types of services known as information ser-
      vices, command services, and event services. Roughly speaking, these services
      provide information about available networks, functions for controlling link
      parameters, and notification of link status changes. The MoS Discovery DHCP
      options [RFC5678] provide a means for a mobile node to acquire the addresses or
      domain names of servers providing each of these services using either DHCPv4
      or DHCPv6. For IPv4, the OPTION-IPv4_Address-MoS option (139) contains a
      vector of suboptions containing IP addresses for servers providing each of the
      services. A suboption of the OPTION-IPv4_FQDN-MoS option (140) provides a
      vector of FQDNs for servers for each of the services. Similar options, OPTION-
      IPv6_Address-MoS (54) and OPTION-IPv6_FQDN (55), provide equivalent capa-
      bilities for IPv6.
           Based upon 3GPP’s ANDSF specification, [RFC6153] defines DHCPv4 and
      DHCPv6 options for carrying ANDSF information. In particular, it defines options
      for mobile devices to discover the address of an ANDSF server. ANDSF servers
      are configured by cellular infrastructure operators and may hold information
      such as the availability and access policies of multiple transport networks (e.g.,
      simultaneous use of 3G and Wi-Fi).
           The ANDSF IPv4 Address Option (142) contains a vector of IPv4 addresses for
      ANDSF servers. The addresses are provided in preference order (first is most pre-
      ferred). The ANDSF IPv6 Address Option (143) contains a vector of IPv6 addresses
      for ANDSF servers. To request ANDSF information using DHCPv4, the mobile node
      includes an ANDSF IPv4 Address option in the Parameter Request List. To request
      ANDSF information using DHCPv6, the client includes an ANDSF IPv6 Address
      option in the Option Request Option (ORO) (see Section 22.7 of [RFC3315]).

6.2.12 DHCP Snooping
        DHCP “snooping” is a capability that some switch vendors offer in their prod-
        ucts that inspects the contents of DHCP messages and ensures that only those
        addresses listed on an access control list are able to exchange DHCP traffic. This
        can help to protect against two potential problems. First, a “rogue” DHCP server is
        limited in the damage it can do because other hosts are not able to hear its DHCP
        address offers. Also, the technique can limit the allocation of addresses to a partic-
        ular set of MAC addresses. While this provides some protection, MAC addresses
        can be changed in a system fairly easily using operating system commands, so
        this technique offers only limited protection.

6.3     Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)
        While most routers have their addresses configured manually, hosts can be
        assigned addresses manually, using an assignment protocol like DHCP, or auto-
        matically using some sort of algorithm. There are two forms of automatic assign-
        ment, depending on what type of address is being formed. For addresses that are
        to be used only on a single link (link-local addresses), a host need only find some
        appropriate address not already in use on the link. For addresses that are to be
        used for global connectivity, however, some portion of the address must generally
        be managed. There are mechanisms in both IPv4 and IPv6 for link-local address
        autoconfiguration, whereby a host determines its address(es) largely without help.
        This is called stateless address autoconfiguration (SLAAC).

6.3.1   Dynamic Configuration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses
        In cases where a host without a manually configured address attaches to a network
        lacking a DHCP server, IP-based communication is unable to take place unless
        the host somehow generates an IP address to use. [RFC3927] describes a mecha-
        nism whereby a host can automatically generate its own IPv4 address from the
        link-local range 169.254.1.1 through 169.254.254.254 using the 16-bit subnet mask
        255.255.0.0 (see [RFC5735]). This method is known as dynamic link-local address
        configuration or Automatic Private IP Addressing (APIPA). In essence, a host selects
        a random address in the range to use and checks to see if that address is already
        in use by some other system on the subnetwork. This check is implemented using
        IPv4 ACD (see Chapter 4).

6.3.2   IPv6 SLAAC for Link-Local Addresses
        The goal of IPv6 SLAAC is to allow nodes to automatically (and autonomously)
        self-assign link-local IPv6 addresses. IPv6 SLAAC is described in [RFC4862]. It
                     Section 6.3 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)       277

involves three major steps: obtaining a link-local address, obtaining a global
address using stateless autoconfiguration, and detecting whether the link-local
address is already in use on the link. Stateless autoconfiguration can be used with-
out routers, in which case only link-local addresses are assigned. When routers are
present, a global address is formed using a combination of the prefix advertised
by a router and locally generated information. SLAAC can also be used in con-
junction with DHCPv6 (or manual address assignment) to allow a host to obtain
information in addition to its address (called “stateless” DHCPv6). Hosts that per-
form SLAAC can be used on the same network as those configured using stateful
or stateless DHCPv6. Generally, stateful DHCPv6 is used when finer control is
required in assigning address to hosts, but it is expected that stateless DHCPv6 in
combination with SLAAC will be the most common deployment option.
     In IPv6, tentative (or optimistic) link-local addresses are selected using proce-
dures specified in [RFC4291] and [RFC4941]. They apply only to multicast-capable
networks and are assigned infinite preferred and valid lifetimes once established.
To form the numeric address, a unique number is appended to the well-known
link-local prefix fe80::0 (of appropriate length). This is accomplished by setting
the right-most N bits of the address to be equal to the (N-bit-long) number, the
left-most bits equal to the 10-bit link-local prefix 1111111010, and the rest to 0. The
resulting address is placed into the tentative (or optimistic) state and checked for
duplicates (see the next section).

6.3.2.1 IPv6 Duplicate Address Detection (DAD)
IPv6 DAD uses ICMPv6 Neighbor Solicitation and Neighbor Advertisement mes-
sages (see Chapter 8) to determine if a particular (tentative or optimistic) IPv6
address is already in use on the attached link. For purposes of this discussion,
we refer only to tentative addresses, but it is understood that DAD applies to opti-
mistic addresses as well. DAD is specified in [RFC4862] and is recommended to
be used every time an IPv6 address is assigned to an interface manually, using
autoconfiguration, or using DHCPv6. If a duplicate address is discovered, the pro-
cedure causes the tentative address to not be used. If DAD succeeds, the tentative
address transitions to the preferred state and can be used without restriction.
     DAD is performed as follows: A node first joins the All Nodes multicast address
and the Solicited-Node multicast address of the tentative address (see Chapter 9).
To check for use of an address duplicate, a node sends one or more ICMPv6 Neigh-
bor Solicitation messages. The source and destination IPv6 addresses of these mes-
sages are the unspecified address and Solicited-Node address of the target address
being checked, respectively. The Target Address field is set to the address being
checked (the tentative address). If a Neighbor Advertisement message is received
in response, DAD has failed, and the address being checked is abandoned.

          Note
          As a consequence of joining multicast groups, MLD messages are sent (see
          Chapter 9), but their transmission is delayed by a random interval according to
          [RFC4862] to avoid congesting the network when many nodes simultaneously
          join the All Hosts group (e.g., after a restoration of power). For DAD, these MLD
          messages are used to inform MLD-snooping switches to forward multicast traffic
          as necessary.

           When an address has not yet successfully completed DAD, any received
      neighbor solicitations for it are treated in a special way, as this is indicative of
      some other host’s intention to use the same address. If such messages are received,
      they are dropped, the current tentative address is abandoned, and DAD fails.
           If DAD fails, by receiving a similar neighbor solicitation from another node
      or a neighbor advertisement for the target address, the address is not assigned to
      an interface and does not become a preferred address. If the address is a link-local
      address being configured based on an interface identifier derived from a local
      MAC address, it is unlikely that the same procedure will ultimately produce a
      nonconflicting address, so the use of this address is abandoned and administrator
      input is required. If the address is based on a different form of interface identi-
      fier, IPv6 operations may be retried using another address based on an alternative
      tentative address.

      6.3.2.2 IPv6 SLAAC for Global Addresses
      Once a node has acquired a link-local address, it is likely to require one or more
      global addresses as well. Global addresses are formed using a process similar to
      that for link-local SLAAC but using a prefix provided by a router. Such prefixes
      are carried in the Prefix option of a router advertisement (see Chapter 8), and a
      flag indicates whether the prefix should be used in forming global addresses with
      SLAAC. If so, the prefix is combined with an interface identifier (e.g., the same one
      used in forming a link-local address if the privacy extension is not being used) to
      form a global address. The preferred and valid lifetimes of such addresses are also
      determined by information present in the Prefix option.

      6.3.2.3 Example
      The trace in Figure 6-23 shows the series of events an IPv6 (Windows Vista/SP1)
      host uses when allocating its addresses with SLAAC. The system first selects a
      link-local address based on the link-local prefix of fe80::/64 and a random number.
      This method is designed to enhance the privacy of a user by making the address of
      the host system change over time [RFC4941]. The other common method involves
      using the bits of the MAC address in forming the link-local address. It performs
      DAD on this address (fe80::fd26:de93:5ab7:405a) to look for conflicts.
Figure 6-23   During SLAAC, a host begins by performing DAD on the tentative link-local address it wishes to use by sending an ICMPv6 Neighbor Solicita-
                    tion message for this address from the unspecified address.

             Figure 6-23 shows the operation of DAD, which involves the host sending an
         NS to see if its selected link-local address is in use. It then quickly performs an RS
         to determine how to proceed (see Figure 6-24).

Figure 6-24 The ICMPv6 RS message induces a nearby router to supply configuration information such as the
            global network prefix in use on the attached network.

              The Router Solicitation message shown in Figure 6-24 is sent to the All Rout-
         ers multicast address (ff02::2) using the autoconfigured link-local IPv6 address as
         a source address. The response is given in an RA sent to the All Systems multicast
         address (ff02::1), so that all attached systems can see (see Figure 6-25).
              The RA shown in Figure 6-25 is sent from fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80, the link-
         local address of the router, to the All Systems multicast address ff02::1. The Flags
         field in the RA, which may contain several configuration options and extensions
         [RFC5175], is set to 0, indicating that addresses are not “managed” on this link
         by DHCPv6. The Prefix option indicates that the global prefix 2001:db8::/64 is
         in use on the link. The prefix length of 64 is not carried but is instead defined
         according to [RFC4291]. The Flags field value of 0xc0 associated with the Pre-
         fix option indicates that the prefix is on-link (can be use in conjunction with a
         router) and the auto flag is set, meaning that the prefix can be used by the host
         to configure other addresses automatically. It also includes the Recursive DNS
         Server (RDNSS) option [RFC6106], which indicates that a DNS server is available
         at the address 2001::db8::1. The SLLAO indicates that the router’s MAC address is
         00:04:5a:9f:9e:80. This information is made available for any node to populate its
         neighbor cache (the IPv6 equivalent of the IPv4 ARP cache; Neighbor Discovery is
         discussed in Chapter 8).
                                   Section 6.3 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)                 281

Figure 6-25   An ICMPv6 RA message provides the location and availability of a default router plus the global
              address prefix in use on the network. It also includes the location of a DNS server and indicates
              whether the router sending the advertisement can also act as a Mobile IPv6 home agent (no in this
              case). The client may use some or all of this information in configuring its operation.

              After an exchange of Neighbor Solicitation and Neighbor Advertisement mes-
         sages between the client and the router, the client performs another DAD opera-
         tion on the new (global) address it selects (see Figure 6-26).
              The address 2001:db8::fd26:de93:5ab7:405a has been chosen by the client
         based on the prefix 2001::db8 carried in the router advertisement it received ear-
         lier. The low-order bits of this address are based on the same random number as
         was used to configure its link-local address. As such, the Solicited-Node multicast
         address ff02::1:ffb7:405a is the same for DAD for both addresses. After this address
         has been tested for duplication, the client allocates another address and applies
         DAD to it (see Figure 6-27).

Figure 6-26 DAD for the global address derived from the prefix 2001:db8::/64 is sent to the same
                  Solicited-Node multicast address as the first packet.

Figure 6-27 DAD for the address 2001:db8::9cf4:f812:816d:5c97.

          The DAD operation in Figure 6-27 is for the address 2001:db8::9cf4:f812:816d:
      5c97. This address is a temporary IPv6 address, generated using a different ran-
      dom number for its lower-order bits for privacy reasons. The difference between
                     Section 6.3 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)     283

the two global addresses here is that the temporary address has a shorter lifetime.
Lifetimes are computed as the lower (smaller) of the following two values: the life-
times included in the Prefix Information option received in the RA and a local pair
of defaults. In the case of Windows Vista, the default valid lifetime is one week and
the default preferred lifetime is one day. Once this message has completed, the cli-
ent has performed SLAAC for its link-local address, plus two global addresses.
This is enough addressing information to perform local or global communication.
The temporary address will change periodically to help enhance privacy. In cases
where privacy protection is not desired, the following command can be employed
to disable this feature in Windows:

C:\> netsh interface ipv6 set privacy state=disabled

In Linux, temporary addresses can be enabled using this set of commands:

Linux# sysctl –w net.ipv6.conf.all.use_tempaddr=2

Linux# sysctl –w net.ipv6.conf.default.use_tempaddr=2

and disabled using these commands:

Linux# sysctl –w net.ipv6.conf.all.use_tempaddr=0

Linux# sysctl –w net.ipv6.conf.default.use_tempaddr=0

6.3.2.4 Stateless DHCP
We have mentioned that DHCPv6 can be used in a “stateless” mode where the
DHCPv6 server does not assign addresses (or keep any per-client state) but
does provide other configuration information. Stateless DHCPv6 is specified in
[RFC3736] and combines SLAAC with DHCPv6. It is believed that this combi-
nation is an attractive deployment option because network administrators need
not be directly concerned with address pools as they have been when deploying
DHCPv4.
     In a stateless DHCPv6 deployment, nodes are assumed to have obtained their
addresses using some method other than DHCPv6. Thus, the DHCPv6 server does
not need to handle any of the address management messages specified in Table
6-1. In addition, it does not need to handle any of the options required for estab-
lishing IA bindings. This simplifies the server software and server configuration
considerably. The operation of relay agents is unchanged.
     Stateless DHCPv6 clients use the DHCPv6 INFORMATION-REQUEST mes-
sage to request information that is provided in REPLY messages from servers. The
INFORMATION-REQUEST message includes an Option Request option listing

      the options about which the client wishes to know more. The INFORMATION-
      REQUEST may include a Client Identifier option, which allows answers to be cus-
      tomized for particular clients.
          To be a compliant stateless DHCPv6 server, a system must implement the fol-
      lowing messages: INFORMATION-REQUEST, REPLY, RELAY-FORW, and RELAY-
      REPL. It also must implement the following options: Option Request, Status Code,
      Server Identifier, Client Message, Server Message, Interface-ID. The last three
      are used when relay agents are involved. To be a useful stateless DHCPv6 server,
      several other options will likely be necessary: DNS Server, DNS Search List, and
      possibly SIP Servers. Other potentially useful, but not required, options include
      Preference, Elapsed Time, User Class, Vendor Class, Vendor-Specific Information,
      Client Identifier, and Authentication.

      6.3.2.5 The Utility of Address Autoconfiguration
      The utility of address autoconfiguration for IP is typically limited because routers
      that may be on the same network as the client are configured with particular IP
      address ranges in use that differ from the addresses a client is likely to autoconfig-
      ure. This is especially true for the IPv4 (APIPA) case, as the private link-local prefix
      169.254/16 is very unlikely to be used by a router. Therefore, the consequence of
      self-assigning an IP address is that local subnet access may work, but Internet
      routing and name services (DNS) are likely to fail. When DNS fails, much of the
      common Internet “experience” fails with it. Thus, it is often more useful to have a
      client fail to get an IP address (which is relatively easily detected) than to allow it
      to obtain one that cannot really be used effectively.

          Note
          There are name services other than conventional DNS that may be of use for
          link-local addressing, including Bonjour/ZeroConf (Apple), LLMNR, and NetBIOS
          (Microsoft). Because these have evolved over time from different vendors, and
          are not established IETF standards, the exact behavior involved when mapping
          names to addresses in the local environment varies considerably. See Chapter 11
          for more details on local alternatives to DNS.

          The use of APIPA can be disabled, which prevents a system from self-assign-
      ing an IP address. In Windows, this is accomplished by creating the following
      registry key (the key is a single line but is wrapped here for illustration):

      HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\Tcpip\Parameters\
      IPAutoconfigurationEnabled

      This REG_DWORD value may be set to 0 to disable APIPA for all network inter-
      faces. In Linux, the file /etc/sysconfig/network can be modified to include
      the following directive:

      NOZEROCONF=yes
                                             Section 6.4 DHCP and DNS Interaction       285

      This disables the use of APIPA for all network interfaces. It is also possible to
      disable APIPA for specific interfaces by modifying the per-interface configura-
      tion files (e.g., /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0 for the first
      Ethernet device).
           In the case of IPv6 SLAAC, it is relatively easy to obtain a global IPv6 address,
      but the relationship between a name and its address is not secured, leading to a
      potential set of unpleasant consequences (see Chapters 11 and 18). Thus, it may
      still be desirable to avoid SLAAC in deployments for the time being. To disable
      SLAAC for IPv6 global addresses, there are two methods. First, the Router Adver-
      tisement messages provided by the local router can be arranged to turn off the
      “auto” flag in the Prefix option (or configure it to not provide a Prefix option, as
      illustrated in the preceding example). In addition, a local configuration setting
      causes a client to avoid autoconfiguration of global addresses.
           To disable SLAAC in a Linux client, the following command may be given:

      Linux# sysctl –w net.ipv6.conf.all.autoconf=0

      To do so on a Mac OS or FreeBSD system, at least for link-local addresses, the fol-
      lowing command should be used:

      FreeBSD# sysctl –w net.inet6.ip6.auto_linklocal=0

      And, finally, for Windows:

      C:\> netsh
      netsh> interface ipv6
      netsh interface ipv6> set interface {ifname} managedaddress=disabled

      where {ifname} should be replaced with the appropriate interface name (in this
      example, “Wireless Network Connection”). Note that the behavior of these
      configuration commands sometimes changes over time. Please check the operat-
      ing system documentation for the current method if these changes do not perform
      as expected.

6.4   DHCP and DNS Interaction
      One of the important parts of the configuration information a DHCP client typi-
      cally receives when obtaining an IP address is the IP address of a DNS server. This
      allows the client system to convert DNS names to the IPv4 and/or IPv6 addresses
      required by the protocol implementation to make transport-layer connections.
      Without a DNS server or other way to map names to addresses, most users would
      find the system nearly useless for accessing the Internet. If the local DNS is work-
      ing properly, it should be able to provide address mappings for the Internet as a
      whole, but also for local private networks (like .home mentioned earlier), if prop-
      erly configured.

          Because DNS mappings for local private networks are cumbersome to manage
      by hand, it is convenient to couple the act of providing a DHCP-assigned address
      with a method for updating the DNS mappings corresponding to that address.
      This can be done either using a combined DHCP/DNS server or with dynamic DNS
      (see Chapter 11).
          A combined DNS/DHCP server (such as the Linux dnsmasq package) is a
      server program that can be configured to give out IP address leases and other
      information but that also reads the Client Identifier or Domain Name present in a
      DHCPREQUEST and updates an internal DNS database with the name-to-address
      binding before responding with the DHCPACK. In doing so, any subsequent DNS
      requests initiated either by the DHCP client or by other systems interacting with
      the same DNS server are able to convert between the name of the client and its
      freshly assigned IP address.

6.5   PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE)
      For most LANs and some WAN connections, DHCP provides the most com-
      mon method for configuring client systems. For WAN connections such as DSL,
      another method based on PPP is often used instead. This method involves carry-
      ing PPP on Ethernet and is called PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE). PPPoE is used in cases
      where the WAN connection device (e.g., DSL modem) acts as a switch or bridge
      instead of a router. PPP is preferred as a basis for establishing connectivity by
      some ISPs because it may provide finer-grain configuration control and audit logs
      than other configuration options such as DHCP. To provide Internet connectivity,
      some device such as a user’s PC must implement the IP routing and addressing
      functions. Figure 6-28 shows the typical use case.

                                                                  ,6 3

                                                                  $FFHVV
                                                                &RQFHQWUDWRU
                                    3 RLQW?WR?3 RLQW?
                                       ( WKHUQHW                                  7HOHSKRQH
                         +RPH?3 &
                                                          /
                                                        '6 HP
                                                                                   1HWZRUN
                                                          G
                                                        0R

                                                 $FWV?DV?EULGJH

                          +RPH?/$1                                  :LUH??IURP?
                                                                    7HOHSKRQH?
                                                                    &RPSDQ\

Figure 6-28   A simplified view of DSL service using PPPoE as provided to a customer. The home PC
                    implements the PPPoE protocol and authenticates the subscriber with the ISP. It may
                    also act as a router, DHCP server, DNS server, and/or NAT device for the home LAN.
                                               Section 6.5 PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE)            287

     The figure shows an ISP providing services to many customers using DSL.
DSL provides a point-to-point digital link that can operate simultaneously with a
conventional analog telephone line (called plain old telephone service or POTS). This
simultaneous use of the customer’s physical phone wires is accomplished using
frequency division multiplexing—the DSL information is carried on higher fre-
quencies than POTS. A filter is required when attaching conventional telephone
handsets to avoid interference from the higher DSL frequencies. The DSL modem
effectively provides a bridged service to a PPP port on the ISP’s access concentrator
(AC), which interconnects the customer’s modem line and the ISP’s networking
equipment. The modem and AC also support the PPPoE protocol, which the user
has elected in this example to configure on a home PC attached to the DSL modem
using a point-to-point Ethernet network (i.e., an Ethernet LAN using only a single
cable).
     Once the DSL modem has successfully established a low-layer link with the
ISP, the PC can begin the PPPoE exchange, as defined in the informational docu-
ment [RFC2516] and shown in Figure 6-29.

                           3HHU??                            3HHU??
                           &OLHQW           0HVVDJHV         6HUYHU
                                            ([FKDQJHG
                          'LVFRYHU
                                               3$'
                                            %URD ,
                                                GFDV
                                                     W
                                                                2IIHU
                                              3$'2 W
                                                    V
                                              8QLFD
                          &KRRVH
                                              3$'5
                                             8QLFD
                                                   VW
                                                               3UHSDUH
                                              3$'6 W
                                                    V
                                              8QLFD
                                           333?6HVVLRQ
                             &ORVH
                                              3$'7
                                             8QLFD
                                                   VW
                                                                &ORVH

Figure 6-29   The PPPoE message exchange starts in a Discovery stage and establishes a PPP Session
              stage. Each message is a PAD message. PADI requests responses from PPPoE servers.
              PADO offers connectivity. PADR expresses the client’s selection among multiple pos-
              sible servers. PADS provides an acknowledgment to the client from the selected server.
              After the PAD exchanges, a PPP session begins. The PPP session can be terminated by
              either side sending a PADT message or when the underlying link fails or is shut down.

          The protocol includes a Discovery phase and a PPP Session phase. The Discov-
      ery phase involves the exchange of several PPPoE Active Discovery (PAD) messages:
      PADI (Initiation), PADO (Offer), PADR (Request), PADS (Session Confirmation).
      Once the exchange is complete, an Ethernet-encapsulated PPP session proceeds
      and ultimately concludes with either side sending a PADT (Termination) message.
      The session also concludes if the underlying connection is broken. PPPoE mes-
      sages use the format shown in Figure 6-30 and are encapsulated in the Ethernet
      payload area.

                     6HW?WR??[??IRU?7KLV?9HUVLRQ?RI?
                                333R(
                                                                                                     
                     9HU     7\SH            &RGH                          6HVVLRQ?,'
                      ELWV   ??ELWV          ??ELWV            ???ELWV??YDOXH???GXULQJ?'LVFRYHU\
                                    /HQJWK
                            ELWV??OHQJWK?RI?SD\ORDG

                                              3D\ORDG? YDULDEOH

                               >3$'?0HVVDJHV?&RQWDLQ?7/9?7DJV?LQ?3D\ORDG?$UHD@

                     333R(?(WKHUQHW?W\SHV                  &RGH?YDOXHV
                          [????? 'LVFRYHU\                 ?????[??? 3$',
                          [????? 333?6HVVLRQ               ?????[??? 3$'2
                                                                [??? 3$'5
                                                                [??? 3$'6
                                                                [$?? 3$'7
                                                                [??? 333?VHVVLRQ

Figure 6-30    PPPoE messages are carried in the payload area of Ethernet frames. The Ethernet Type
                     field is set to 0x8863 during the Discovery phase and 0x8864 when carrying PPP session
                     data. For PAD messages, a TLV scheme is used for carrying configuration information,
                     similar to DHCP options. The PPPoE Session ID is chosen by the server and conveyed
                     in the PADS message.

          In Figure 6-30, the PPPoE Ver and Type fields are both 4 bits long and contain
      the value 0x1 for the current version of PPPoE. The Code field contains an indica-
      tion of the PPPoE message type, as shown in the lower right part of Figure 6-30.
      The Session ID field contains the value 0x0000 for PADI, PADO, and PADR mes-
      sages and contains a unique 16-bit number in subsequent messages. The same
      value is maintained during the PPP Session phase. PAD messages contain one
      or more tags, which are TLVs arranged as a 16-bit TAG_TYPE field followed by a
      16-bit TAG_LENGTH field and a variable amount of tag value data. The values and
      meanings of the TAG_TYPE field are given in Table 6-2.
                                         Section 6.5 PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE)      289

Table 6-2 PPPoE TAG_TYPE values, name, and purpose. PAD messages may contain one or more
          tags.

Value       Name                   Purpose
0x0000      End-of-List            Indicates that no further tags are present. TAG_
                                   LENGTH must be 0.
0x0101      Service-Name           Contains a UTF-8-encoded service name (for ISP use).
0x0102      AC-Name                Contains a UTF-8-encoded string identifying the
                                   access concentrator.
0x0103      Host-Uniq              Binary data used by client to match messages; not
                                   interpreted by AC.
0x0104      AC-Cookie              Binary data used by AC for DoS protection; echoed
                                   by client.
0x0105      Vendor-Specific        Not recommended; see [RFC2516] for details.
0x0110      Relay-Session-ID       May be added by a relay relaying PAD traffic.
0x0201      Service-Name-Error     The requested Service-Name tag cannot be honored
                                   by AC.
0x0202      AC-System-Error        The AC experienced an error in performing a
                                   requested action.
0x0203      Generic-Error          Contains a UTF-8 string describing an
                                   unrecoverable error.

     To see PPPoE in action, we can monitor the exchange between a home system
such as the home PC from Figure 6-28 and an access concentrator. The Discovery
phase and first PPP session packet are shown in Figure 6-31.
     Figure 6-31 shows the expected exchange of PADI, PADO, PADR, and PADS
messages. Each contains the Host-Uniq tag with value 9c3a0000. Messages coming
from the concentrator also include the value 90084090400368-rback37.snfcca in the
AC-Name tag. The PADS message can be seen in more detail in Figure 6-32.
     In Figure 6-32, the PADS message indicates the establishment of a PPP ses-
sion for the client and the use of the session ID 0xecbd. The AC-Name tag is also
maintained to indicate the originating AC. The Discovery phase is now complete,
and a regular PPP session (see Chapter 3) can commence. Figure 6-33 shows the
first PPP session packet.
     The figure indicates the beginning of the PPP Session phase within the PPPoE
exchange. The PPP session begins with link configuration (PPP LCP) by the client
sending a Configuration Request (see Chapter 3). It indicates that the client wishes
to use the Password Authentication Protocol, a relatively insecure method, for
authenticating itself to the AC. Once the authentication exchange is complete and
various link parameters are exchanged (e.g., MRU), IPCP is used to obtain and
configure the assigned IP address. Note that additional configuration information
(e.g., IP addresses of the ISP’s DNS servers) may need to be obtained separately
and, depending on the ISP’s configuration, configured by hand.

Figure 6-31 The PPPoE exchange begins with a PADI message sent to the Ethernet broadcast address. Subsequent messages use unicast addressing. In this
                  exchange, only the Host-Uniq and AC-Name tags are used. The PPP session begins with the fifth packet, which begins a PPP link configuration
                  exchange that ultimately assigns the system’s IPv4 address using the IPCP (see Chapter 3).
                                                           Section 6.5 PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE)              291

Figure 6-32 The PPPoE PADS message confirms the association between the client and the access concentrator.
            This message also defines the session ID as 0xecbd, which is used in subsequent PPP session packets.

Figure 6-33 The first PPP message of the PPPoE session is a Configuration Request. The Ethernet type has changed
            to 0x8864 to indicate an active PPP session, and the Session ID is set to 0xecbd. In this case, the PPP
            client wishes to authenticate using the (relatively insecure) Password Authentication Protocol.

6.6   Attacks Involving System Configuration
      A wide variety of attacks can be mounted relating to system and network configu-
      ration. They range from deploying unauthorized clients or unauthorized servers
      that interfere with DHCP to various forms of DoS attacks that involve resource
      exhaustion, such as requesting all possible IP addresses a server may have to give
      out. Many of these problems are widespread because the older IPv4-based proto-
      cols used for address configuration were designed for networks where trust was
      assumed, and the newer ones have seen little deployment to date. (Secured deploy-
      ments are even rarer.) Therefore, none of these attacks are directly addressed by
      typical DHCP deployments, although link-layer authentication (e.g., WPA2 as
      used with Wi-Fi networks) helps to limit the number of unauthorized clients that
      are able to attach to a particular network.
           An effort is under way within the IETF to provide security for IPv6 Neighbor
      Discovery, which, when or if it is deployed, would directly impact the security
      of operating networks using SLAAC. The trust and threat assumptions are out-
      lined in [RFC3756] from 2004, and the Secure Neighbor Discovery (SEND) protocol
      is defined in [RFC3971]. SEND applies IPsec (see Chapter 18) to Neighbor Discov-
      ery packets, in combination with cryptographically generated addresses (CGAs)
      [RFC3972]. Such addresses are derived from a keyed hash function, so they can be
      generated only by a system holding the appropriate key material.

6.7   Summary
      A basic set of configuration information is required for a host or router to operate
      on the Internet or on a private network using Internet protocols. At a minimum,
      routers typically require the assignment of addressing information, whereas hosts
      require addresses, a next-hop router, and the location of a DNS server. DHCP is
      available for both IPv4 as well as IPv6, but the two are not directly interoperable.
      DHCP allows appropriately configured servers to lease one or more addresses to
      requesting clients for a defined period of time. Clients renew their leases if they
      require ongoing use. DHCP can also be used by the client to acquire additional
      information, such as the subnet mask, default routers, vendor-specific configura-
      tion information, DNS server, home agents, and default domain name. DHCP can
      be used through relay agents when a client and server are located on different net-
      works. Several extensions to DHCP allow for additional information to be carried
      between a relay agent and server when this is used. DHCPv6 can also be used to
      delegate a range of IPv6 address space to a router.
          With IPv6, a host typically uses multiple addresses. An IPv6 client is able to
      generate its link-local address autonomously by combining a special link-local
      IPv6 prefix with other local information such as bits derived from one of its
      MAC addresses or from a random number to help promote privacy. To obtain
      a global address, it can obtain a global address prefix from either ICMP Router
                                                             Section 6.8 References     293

      Advertisement messages or from a DHCPv6 server. DHCPv6 servers may operate
      in a “stateful” mode, in which they lease IPv6 addresses to requesting clients, or a
      “stateless” mode, in which they provide configuration information other than the
      addresses.
           PPPoE carries PPP messages over Ethernet to establish Internet connectiv-
      ity with ISPs, especially those ISPs that provide service using DSL. When using
      PPPoE, a user usually has a DSL modem with an Ethernet port acting as a bridge
      or switch. PPPoE first exchanges a set of Discovery messages to determine the
      identity of an access controller and establish a PPP session. After the Discovery
      phase is successfully completed, PPP traffic, which can be encapsulated in Eth-
      ernet and carry various protocols such as IP, may continue until the PPPoE asso-
      ciation is terminated, either intentionally or as a result of disconnection of the
      underlying link. When PPPoE is used, the PPP protocol’s configuration capabili-
      ties such as IPCP (discussed in Chapter 3) are ultimately responsible for assigning
      the IP address to the client system.
           DHCP and the ICMPv6 router advertisements used with IPv6 stateless auto-
      configuration are ordinarily deployed without security mechanisms being applied
      to them. Because of this, they are susceptible to a number of attacks, including net-
      work access by unauthorized clients, operation of rogue DHCP servers that give
      out bogus addresses and cause various forms of denial of service, and resource
      exhaustion attacks in which a client may request more addresses than are avail-
      able. Most of these attacks can be mitigated by security mechanisms that have
      been added to DHCP such as DHCP authentication and the relatively recent SEND
      protocol. However, these are not commonly found in operation today.

6.8   References
      [802.21-2008] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part
      21: Media Independent Handover Services,” Nov. 2008.
      [F07] R. Faas, “Hands On: Configuring Apple’s NetBoot Service, Part 1,” Comput-
      erworld, Sept. 2007.
      [GC89] C. Gray and D. Cheriton, “Leases: An Efficient Fault-Tolerant Mechanism
      for Distributed File Cache Consistency,” Proc. ACM Symposium on Operating Sys-
      tem Principles (SOSP), 1989.
      [IARP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/arp-parameters
      [IBDP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/bootp-dhcp-parameters
      [ID4LQ] K. Kinnear, B. Volz, M. Stapp, D. Rao, B. Joshi, N. Russell, and P. Kurapati,
      “Bulk DHCPv4 Lease Query,” Internet draft-ietf-dhc-dhcpv4-bulk-leasequery,
      work in progress, Apr. 2011.

      [ID4RI] B. Joshi, R. Rao, and M. Stapp, “The DHCPv4 Relay Agent Identifier Sub-
      option,” Internet draft-ietf-dhc-relay-id-suboption, work in progress, June 2011.
      [ID6PARAM] http://www.iana.org/assignments/dhcpv6-parameters
      [IDDN] G. Daley, E. Nordmark, and N. Moore, “Tentative Options for Link-
      Layer Addresses in IPv6 Neighbor Discovery,” Internet draft-ietf-dna-tentative
      (expired), work in progress, Oct. 2009.
      [IDL2RA] B. Joshi and P. Kurapati, “Layer 2 Relay Agent Information,” Internet
      draft-ietf-dhc-l2ra, work in progress, Apr. 2011.
      [IEPARAM] http://www.iana.org/assignments/enterprise-numbers
      [MKB928233] Microsoft Knowledge Base Article 928233 at http://support
      .microsoft.com
      [MS-DHCPN] Microsoft Corporation, “[MS-DHCPN]: Dynamic Host Configura-
      tion Protocol (DHCP) Extensions for Network Access Protection (NAP),” http://
      msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc227316.aspx, Oct. 2008.
      [RFC0826] D. Plummer, “Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or Converting
      Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet Address for Transmission on
      Ethernet Hardware,” Internet RFC 0826/STD 0037, Nov. 1982.
      [RFC0951] W. J. Croft and J. Gilmore, “Bootstrap Protocol,” Internet RFC 0951,
      Sept. 1985.
      [RFC1542] W. Wimer, “Clarifications and Extensions for the Bootstrap Protocol,”
      Internet RFC 1542, Oct. 1993.
      [RFC2131] R. Droms, “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol,” Internet RFC 2131,
      Mar. 1997.
      [RFC2132] S. Alexander and R. Droms, “DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor
      Extensions,” Internet RFC 2132, Mar. 1997.
      [RFC2241] D. Provan, “DHCP Options for Novell Directory Services,” Internet
      RFC 2241, Nov. 1997.
      [RFC2242] R. Droms and K. Fong, “NetWare/IP Domain Name and Informa-
      tion,” Internet RFC 2242, Nov. 1997.
      [RFC2516] L. Mamakos, K. Lidl, J. Evarts, D. Carrel, D. Simone, and R. Wheeler,
      “A Method for Transmitting PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE),” Internet RFC 2516
      (informational), Feb. 1999.
      [RFC2563] R. Troll, “DHCP Option to Disable Stateless Auto-Configuration in
      IPv4 Clients,” Internet RFC 2563, May 1999.
      [RFC2937] C. Smith, “The Name Service Search Option for DHCP,” Internet RFC
      2937, Sept. 2000.
                                                       Section 6.8 References      295

[RFC3004] G. Stump, R. Droms, Y. Gu, R. Vyaghrapuri, A. Demirtjis, B. Beser, and
J. Privat, “The User Class Option for DHCP,” Internet RFC 3004, Nov. 2000.
[RFC3011] G. Waters, “The IPv4 Subnet Selection Option for DHCP,” Internet RFC
3011, Nov. 2000.
[RFC3046] M. Patrick, “DHCP Relay Agent Information Option,” Internet RFC
3046, Jan. 2001.
[RFC3118] R. Droms and W. Arbaugh, eds., “Authentication of DHCP Messages,”
Internet RFC 3118, June 2001.
[RFC3203] Y. T’Joens, C. Hublet, and P. De Schrijver, “DHCP Reconfigure Exten-
sion,” Internet RFC 3203, Dec. 2001.
[RFC3315] R. Droms, ed., J. Bound, B. Volz, T. Lemon, C. Perkins, and M. Carney,
“Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6),” Internet RFC 3315,
July 2003.
[RFC3396] T. Lemon and S. Cheshire, “Encoding Long Options in the Dynamic
Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4),” Internet RFC 3396, Nov. 2002.
[RFC3442] T. Lemon, S. Cheshire, and B. Volz, “The Classless Static Route Option
for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) Version 4,” Internet RFC 3442,
Dec. 2002.
[RFC3633] O. Troan and R. Droms, “IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic Host Con-
figuration Protocol (DHCP) Version 6,” Internet RFC 3633, Dec. 2003.
[RFC3646] R. Droms, ed., “DNS Configuration Options for Dynamic Host Con-
figuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6),” Internet RFC 3646, Dec. 2003.
[RFC3693] J. Cuellar, J. Morris, D. Mulligan, J. Peterson, and J. Polk, “Geopriv
Requirements,” Internet RFC 3693 (informational), Feb. 2004.
[RFC3736] R. Droms, “Stateless Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)
Service for IPv6,” Internet RFC 3736, Apr. 2004.
[RFC3756] P. Nikander, ed., J. Kempf, and E. Nordmark, “IPv6 Neighbor Discov-
ery (ND) Trust Models and Threats,” Internet RFC 3756 (informational), May
2004.
[RFC3925] J. Littlefield, “Vendor-Identifying Vendor Options for Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol Version 4 (DHCPv4),” Internet RFC 3925, Oct. 2004.
[RFC3927] S. Cheshire, B. Aboba, and E. Guttman, “Dynamic Configuration of
IPv6 Link-Local Addresses,” Internet RFC 3927, May 2005.
[RFC3971] J. Arkko, ed., J. Kempf, B. Zill, and P. Nikander, “SEcure Neighbor
Dicovery (SEND),” Internet RFC 3971, Mar. 2005.

      [RFC3972] T. Aura, “Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA),” Internet
      RFC 3972, Mar. 2005.
      [RFC4030] M. Stapp and T. Lemon, “The Authentication Suboption for the
      Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) Relay Agent Option,” Internet
      RFC 4030, Mar. 2005.
      [RFC4039] S. Park, P. Kim, and B. Volz, “Rapid Commit Option for the Dynamic
      Host Configuration Protocol Version 4 (DHCPv4),” Internet RFC 4039, Mar. 2005.
      [RFC4174] C. Monia, J. Tseng, and K. Gibbons, “The IPv4 Dynamic Host Configu-
      ration Protocol (DHCP) Option for the Internet Storage Name Service,” Internet
      RFC 4174, Sept. 2005.
      [RFC4280] K. Chowdhury, P. Yegani, and L. Madour, “Dynamic Host Configu-
      ration Protocol (DHCP) Options for Broadcast and Multicast Control Servers,”
      Internet RFC 4280, Nov. 2005.
      [RFC4291] R. Hinden and S. Deering, “IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture,”
      Internet RFC 4291, Feb. 2006.
      [RFC4361] T. Lemon and B. Sommerfield, “Node-Specific Client Identifiers for
      Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol Version Four (DHCPv4),” Internet RFC
      4361, Feb. 2006.
      [RFC4388] R. Woundy and K. Kinnear, “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
      (DHCP) Leasequery,” Internet RFC 4388, Feb. 2006.
      [RFC4429] N. Moore, “Optimistic Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) for IPv6,”
      Internet RFC 4429, Apr. 2006.
      [RFC4436] B. Aboba, J. Carlson, and S. Cheshire, “Detecting Network Attachment
      in IPv4 (DNAv4),” Internet RFC 4436, Mar. 2006.
      [RFC4649] B. Volz, “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv6) Relay
      Agent Remote-ID Option,” Internet RFC 4649, Aug. 2006.
      [RFC4702] M. Stapp, B. Volz, and Y. Rekhter, “The Dynamic Host Configuration
      Protocol (DHCP) Client Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) Option,” Internet
      RFC 4702, Oct. 2006.
      [RFC4704] B. Volz, “The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (IPv6)
      Client Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) Option,” Internet RFC 4704, Oct.
      2006.
      [RFC4776] H. Schulzrinne, “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4 and
      DHCPv6) Option for Civic Addresses Configuration Information,” Internet RFC
      4776, Nov. 2006.
      [RFC4833] E. Lear and P. Eggert, “Timezone Options for DHCP,” Internet RFC
      4833, Apr. 2007.
                                                     Section 6.8 References    297

[RFC4862] S. Thomson, T. Narten, and T. Jinmei, “IPv6 Stateless Address Auto-
configuration,” Internet RFC 4862, Sept. 2007.
[RFC4941] T. Narten, R. Draves, and S. Krishnan, “Privacy Extensions for State-
less Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6,” Internet RFC 4941, Sept. 2007.
[RFC5007] J. Brzozowski, K. Kinnear, B. Volz, and S. Zeng, “DHCPv6 Lease-
query,” Internet RFC 5007, Sept. 2007.
[RFC5010] K. Kinnear, M. Normoyle, and M. Stapp, “The Dynamic Host Configu-
ration Protocol Version 4 (DHCPv4) Relay Agent Flags Suboption,” Internet RFC
5010, Sept. 2007.
[RFC5107] R. Johnson, J. Kumarasamy, K. Kinnear, and M. Stapp, “DHCP Server
Identifier Override Suboption,” Internet RFC 5107, Feb. 2008.
[RFC5175] B. Haberman, ed., and R. Hinden, “IPv6 Router Advertisement Flags
Option,” Internet RFC 5175, Mar. 2008.
[RFC5192] L. Morand, A. Yegin, S. Kumar, and S. Madanapalli, “DHCP Options
for Protocol for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA) Authentica-
tion Agents,” Internet RFC 5192, May 2008.
[RFC5222] T. Hardie, A. Newton, H. Schulzrinne, and H. Tschofenig, “LoST: A
Location-to-Service Translation Protocol,” Internet RFC 5222, Aug. 2008.
[RFC5223] H. Schulzrinne, J. Polk, and H. Tschofenig, “Discovering Location-to-
Service Translation (LoST) Servers Using the Dynamic Host Configuration Proto-
col (DHCP),” Internet RFC 5223, Aug. 2008.
[RFC5460] M. Stapp, “DHCPv6 Bulk Leasequery,” Internet RFC 5460, Feb. 2009.
[RFC5569] R. Despres, “IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4 Infrastructures (6rd),”
Internet RFC 5569 (informational), Jan. 2010.
[RFC5677] T. Melia, ed., G. Bajko, S. Das, N. Golmie, and JC. Zuniga, “IEEE 802.21
Mobility Services Framework Design (MSFD),” Internet RFC 5677, Dec. 2009.
[RFC5678] G. Bajko and S. Das, “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4
and DHCPv6) Options for IEEE 802.21 Mobility Services (MoS) Discovery,” Inter-
net RFC 5678, Dec. 2009.
[RFC5735] M. Cotton and L. Vegoda, “Special-Use IPv4 Addresses,” Internet RFC
5735/BCP 0153, Jan. 2010.
[RFC5969] W. Townsley and O. Troan, “IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4 Infra-
structures (6rd)—Protocol Specification,” Internet RFC 5969, Aug. 2010.
[RFC5985] M. Barnes, ed., “HTTP-Enabled Location Delivery (HELD),” Internet
RFC 5985, Sept. 2010.

      [RFC5986] M. Thomson and J. Winterbottom, “Discovering the Local Location
      Information Server (LIS),” Internet RFC 5986, Sept. 2010.
      [RFC6059] S. Krishnan and G. Daley, “Simple Procedures for Detecting Network
      Attachment in IPv6,” Internet RFC 6059, Nov. 2010.
      [RFC6106] J. Jeong, S. Park, L. Beloeil, and S. Madanapalli, “IPv6 Router Adver-
      tisement Options for DNS Configuration,” Internet RFC 6106, Nov. 2010.
      [RFC6148] P. Kurapati, R. Desetti, and B. Joshi, “DHCPv4 Lease Query by Relay
      Agent Remote ID,” Internet RFC 6148, Feb. 2011.
      [RFC6153] S. Das and G. Bajko, “DHCPv4 and DHCPv6 Options for Access Net-
      work Discovery and Selection Function (ANDSF) Discovery,” Internet RFC 6153,
      Feb. 2011.
      [RFC6221] D. Miles, ed., S. Ooghe, W. Dec, S. Krishnan, and A. Kavanagh, “Light-
      weight DHCPv6 Relay Agent,” Internet RFC 6221, May 2011.
      [RFC6225] J. Polk, M. Linsner, M. Thomson, and B. Aboba, ed., “Dynamic Host
      Configuration Protocol Options for Coordinate-Based Location Configuration
      Information,” Internet RFC 6225, Mar. 2011.
      [RFC6276] R. Droms, P. Thubert, F. Dupont, W. Haddad, and C. Bernardos,
      “DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation for Network Mobility (NEMO),” Internet RFC 6276,
      July 2011.
