      7

      Firewalls and Network Address
      Translation (NAT)

7.1   Introduction
      During the early years of the Internet and its protocols, most network designers
      and developers were from universities or other entities engaged in research. These
      researchers were generally friendly and cooperative, and the Internet system was
      not especially resilient to attack, but not many people were interested in attack-
      ing it, either. By the late 1980s and especially the early to mid-1990s the Internet
      had gained the interest of the mass population and ultimately people interested
      in compromising its security. Successful attacks became commonplace, and many
      problems were caused by bugs or unplanned protocol operations in the software
      implementations of Internet hosts. Because some sites had a large number of end
      systems with various versions of operating system software, it became very dif-
      ficult for system administrators to ensure that all the various bugs in these end
      systems had been fixed. Furthermore, for obsolete systems, this task was all but
      impossible. Fixing the problem would have required a way to control the Internet
      traffic to which the end hosts were exposed. Today, this is provided by a firewall—
      a type of router that restricts the types of traffic it forwards.
           As firewalls were being deployed to protect enterprises, another problem
      was becoming important: the number of available IPv4 addresses was dimin-
      ishing, with a threat of exhaustion. Something would have to be done with the
      way addresses were allocated and used. One of the most important mechanisms
      developed to deal with this, aside from IPv6, is called Network Address Translation
      (NAT). With NAT, Internet addresses need not be globally unique, and as a conse-
      quence they can be reused in different parts of the Internet, called address realms.
      Allowing the same addresses to be reused in multiple realms greatly eased the
      problem of address exhaustion. As we shall see, NAT can also be synergistically
      combined with firewalls to produce combination devices that have become the

        most popular types of routers used to connect end users, including home net-
        works and small enterprises, to the Internet. We shall now explore both firewalls
        and NATs in further detail.

7.2     Firewalls
        Given the enormous management problems associated with trying to keep end
        system software up-to-date and bug-free, the focus of resisting attacks expanded
        from securing end systems to restricting the Internet traffic allowed to flow to end
        systems by filtering out some traffic using firewalls. Today, firewalls are common,
        and several different types have evolved.
            The two major types of firewalls commonly used include proxy firewalls and
        packet-filtering firewalls. The main difference between them is the layer in the pro-
        tocol stack at which they operate, and consequently the way IP addresses and port
        numbers are used. The packet-filtering firewall is an Internet router that drops
        datagrams that (fail to) meet specific criteria. The proxy firewall operates as a
        multihomed server host from the viewpoint of an Internet client. That is, it is the
        endpoint of TCP and UDP transport associations; it does not typically route IP
        datagrams at the IP protocol layer.

7.2.1   Packet-Filtering Firewalls
        Packet-filtering firewalls act as Internet routers and filter (drop) some traffic. They
        can generally be configured to discard or forward packets whose headers meet
        (or fail to meet) certain criteria, called filters. Simple filters include range compari-
        sons on various parts of the network-layer or transport-layer headers. The most
        popular filters involve undesired IP addresses or options, types of ICMP mes-
        sages, and various UDP or TCP services, based on the port numbers contained in
        each packet. As we shall see, the simplest packet-filtering firewalls are stateless,
        whereas the more sophisticated ones are stateful. Stateless packet-filtering fire-
        walls treat each datagram individually, whereas stateful firewalls are able associ-
        ate packets with either previously observed packets or packets that arrive in the
        future to make inferences about datagrams or streams—either those belonging to
        a single transport association or those IP fragments that constitute an IP datagram
        (see Chapter 10). IP fragmentation can significantly complicate a firewall’s job, and
        stateless packet-filtering firewalls are easily confused by fragments.
             A typical packet-filtering firewall is shown in Figure 7-1. Here, the firewall is
        an Internet router with three network interfaces: an “inside,” an “outside,” and a
        third “DMZ” interface. The DMZ subnet provides access to an extranet or DMZ
        where servers are deployed for Internet users to access. Network administrators
        install filters or access control lists (ACLs, basically policy lists indicating what
        types of packets to discard or forward) in the firewall. Typically, these filters con-
        servatively block traffic from the outside that may be harmful and liberally allow
        traffic to travel from inside to outside.
                                                                               Section 7.2 Firewalls       301

                               '0=?( [WUDQHW
                              ,QWHUQHW?6 HUYHUV

                                                           3 DFNHW?)LOWHULQJ
                                                               )LUHZDOO
                       ( QWHUSULVH?                                                 ,QWHUQHW
                          +RPH                                                      2XWVLGH
                          ,QVLGH

                                       2XWJRLQJ?5XOHV                 ,QFRPLQJ?5XOHV
                                        0RVW?$OORZHG                 0RVW?1RW?$OORZHG

                                                                        ( [DPSOHV?
                                                                  $OORZ?7&3 ?8'3 ?,&03 ?
                                                                   '16 ?UHSO\?WUDIILF?DQG
                                                                        '0=?WUDIILF

Figure 7-1 A typical packet-filtering firewall configuration. The firewall acts as an IP router between
                   an “inside” and an “outside” network, and sometimes a third “DMZ” or extranet net-
                   work, allowing only certain traffic to pass through it. A common configuration allows
                   all traffic to pass from inside to outside but only a small subset of traffic to pass in
                   the reverse direction. When a DMZ is used, only certain services are permitted to be
                   accessed from the Internet.

7.2.2   Proxy Firewalls
        Packet-filtering firewalls act as routers that selectively drop packets. Other types
        of firewalls, called proxy firewalls, are not really Internet routers in the true sense.
        Instead, they are essentially hosts running one or more application-layer gateways
        (ALGs)—hosts with more than one network interface that relay traffic of certain
        types between one connection/association and another at the application layer.
        They do not typically perform IP forwarding as routers do, although more sophis-
        ticated proxy firewalls are now available that combine various functions.
             Figure 7-2 illustrates a proxy firewall. For this type of firewall, clients on the
        inside of the firewall are usually configured in a special way to associate (or con-
        nect) with the proxy instead of the actual end host providing the desired service.
        (Applications capable of operating with proxy firewalls this way include con-
        figuration options for it.) These firewalls act as multihomed hosts, and their IP
        forwarding capability, if present, is typically disabled. As with packet-filtering
        firewalls, a common configuration is to have an “outside” interface assigned a
        globally routable IP address and for its “inner” interface to be configured with a
        private IP address. Thus, proxy firewalls support the use of private address realms.

                                                     3UR[\?)LUHZDOO

           (QWHUSULVH?                                                                       ,QWHUQHW
             +RPH                                                                            2XWVLGH
             ,QVLGH
                                      2XWJRLQJ?      $SSOLFDWLRQ?VHUYLFH?     ,QFRPLQJ?
                                     FRQQHFWLRQV       DJHQW?IRU?HDFK?       FRQQHFWLRQV?
                                    WHUPLQDWHG?DW?   VXSSRUWHG?VHUYLFH?        RQO\?WR?
                                       ILUHZDOO       UXQV?RQ?ILUHZDOO?     UXQQLQJ?SUR[\?
                                                          PDFKLQH              DJHQWV

Figure 7-2   The proxy firewall acts as a multihomed Internet host, terminating TCP connections and
                   UDP associations at the application layer. It does not act as a conventional IP router but
                   rather as an ALG. Individual applications or proxies for each service supported must be
                   enabled for communication to take place through the proxy firewall.

           While this type of firewall can be quite secure (some people believe this type
      is fundamentally more secure than packet-filtering firewalls), this security comes
      at a cost of brittleness and lack of flexibility. In particular, because this style of
      firewall must contain a proxy for each transport-layer service, any new services
      to be used must have a corresponding proxy installed and operated for connec-
      tivity to take place through the proxy. In addition, each client must typically be
      configured to find the proxy (e.g., using the Web Proxy Auto-Discovery Protocol,
      or WPAD [XIDAD], although there are some alternatives—so-called capturing
      proxies that catch all traffic of a certain type regardless of destination address).
      With respect to deployment, these firewalls work well in environments where all
      types of network services being accessed are known with certainty in advance,
      but they may require significant intervention from network operators to support
      additional services.
           The two most common forms of proxy firewalls are HTTP proxy firewalls
      [RFC2616] and SOCKS firewalls [RFC1928]. The first type, also called Web proxies,
      work only for the HTTP and HTTPS (Web) protocols, but because these protocols
      are so popular, such proxies are commonly used. These proxies act as Web serv-
      ers for internal clients and as Web clients when accessing external Web sites. Such
      proxies often also operate as Web caches. These caches save copies of Web pages so
      that subsequent accesses can be served directly from the cache instead of from the
      originating Internet Web server. Doing so can reduce latency to display Web pages
      and improve the experience of users accessing the Web. Some Web proxies are
      also used as content filters, which attempt to block access to certain Web sites based
      on a “blacklist” of prohibited sites. Conversely, a number of so-called tunneling
      proxy servers are available on the Internet. These servers (e.g., psiphon, CGIProxy)
      essentially perform the opposite function—to allow users to avoid being blocked
      by content filters.

           The SOCKS protocol is more generic than HTTP for proxy access and is appli-
      cable to more services than just the Web. Two versions of SOCKS are currently
      in use: version 4 and version 5. Version 4 provides the basic support for proxy
      traversal, and version 5 adds strong authentication, UDP traversal, and IPv6
      addressing. To use a SOCKS proxy, an application must be written to use SOCKS
      (it must be “socksified”) and configured to know about the location of the proxy
      and which version of SOCKS to use. Once this is accomplished, the client uses the
      SOCKS protocol to request the proxy to perform network connections and, option-
      ally, DNS lookups.

7.3   Network Address Translation (NAT)
      NAT is essentially a mechanism for allowing the same sets of IP addresses to be
      reused in different parts of the Internet. The primary motivation for the creation
      of NAT was the limited and diminishing availability of IP address space. The most
      common use case for a NAT is when a site with a single Internet connection is
      assigned a small range of IP addresses (perhaps only a single address), but there
      are multiple computers requiring Internet access. When all incoming and outgo-
      ing traffic passes through a single NAT device that partitions the inside (private)
      address realm from the global Internet address realm, all the internal systems
      can be provided Internet connectivity as clients using locally assigned, private IP
      addresses. Allowing privately addressed systems to offer services on the Internet,
      however, is somewhat more complicated. We discuss this case in Section 7.3.4.
           NAT was introduced to solve two problems: address depletion and con-
      cerns regarding the scalability of routing. At the time of its introduction (early
      1990s), NAT was suggested as a stopgap, temporary measure to be used until the
      deployment of some protocol with a larger number of addresses (ultimately, IPv6)
      became widespread. Routing scalability was being tackled with the development
      of Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR; see Chapter 2). NAT is popular because
      it reduces the need for globally routable Internet addresses but also because it
      offers some degree of natural firewall capability and requires little configuration.
      Perhaps ironically, the development and eventual widespread use of NAT has con-
      tributed to significantly slow the adoption of IPv6. Among its other benefits, IPv6
      was intended to make NAT unnecessary [RFC4864].
           Despite its popularity, NAT has several drawbacks. The most obvious is that
      offering Internet-accessible services from the private side of a NAT requires spe-
      cial configuration because privately addressed systems are not directly reach-
      able from the Internet. In addition, for a NAT to work properly, every packet in
      both directions of a connection or association must pass through the same NAT.
      This is because the NAT must actively rewrite the addressing information in each
      packet in order for communication between a privately addressed system and a
      conventionally addressed Internet host to work. In many ways, NATs run counter
      to a fundamental tenet of the Internet protocols: the “smart edge” and “dumb
      middle.” To do their job, NATs require connection state on a per-association (or

      per-connection) basis and must operate across multiple protocol layers, unlike con-
      ventional routers. Modifying an address at the IP layer also requires modifying
      checksums at the transport layer (see Chapters 10 and 13 regarding the pseudo-
      header checksum to see why).
          NAT poses problems for some application protocols, especially those that
      send IP addressing information inside the application-layer payload. The File
      Transfer Protocol (FTP) [RFC0959] and SIP [RFC5411] are among the best-known
      protocols of this type. They require a special application-layer gateway function
      that rewrites the application content in order to work unmodified with NAT or
      other NAT traversal methods that allow the applications to determine how to
      work with the specific NAT they are using. A more complete list of considerations
      regarding NAT appears in [RFC3027]. Despite their numerous problems, NATs
      are very widely used, and most network routers (including essentially all low-end
      home routers) support it. Today, NATs are so prevalent that application designers
      are encouraged to make their applications “NAT-friendly” [RFC3235]. It is worth
      mentioning that despite its shortcomings, NAT supports the basic protocols (e.g.,
      e-mail, Web browsing) that are needed by millions of client systems accessing the
      Internet every day.
          A NAT works by rewriting the identifying information in packets transit-
      ing through a router. Most commonly this happens for two directions of a data
      transfer. In its most basic form, NAT involves rewriting the source IP address of
      packets as they are forwarded in one direction and the destination IP addresses of
      packets traveling in the reverse direction (see Figure 7-3). This allows the source
      IP address in outgoing packets to become one of the NAT router’s Internet-facing
      interfaces instead of the originating host’s. Thus, to a host on the Internet, packets
      coming from any of the hosts on the privately addressed side of the NAT appear
      to be coming from a globally routable IP address of the NAT router.

                                               

                                  
                     
                                                   1$7                    ,QWHUQHW

                                                         3 XEOLF?,3 ?$GGUHVV?                +RVW?´6HHVv?
                                                                                             2QO\?3 XEOLF?
                                                          $VVLJQHG?E\?,6 3                  ,3 ?$GGUHVVHV

                   3 ULYDWH?,3 ?$GGUHVVLQJ?5HDOP????      3 XEOLF?,3 ?$GGUHVVLQJ?5HDOP?
                          +RPH?( QWHUSULVH                            ,QWHUQHW

Figure 7-3 A NAT isolates private addresses and the systems using them from the Internet. Packets
                 with private addresses are not routed by the Internet directly but instead must be trans-
                 lated as they enter and leave the private network through the NAT router. Internet hosts
                 see traffic as coming from a public IP address of the NAT.

                Most NATs perform both translation and packet filtering, and the packet-filtering
           criteria depend on the dynamics of the NAT state. The choice of packet-filtering
           policy may have a different granularity—for example, the treatment of unsolic-
           ited packets (those not associated with packets originating from behind the NAT)
           received by the NAT may depend on source and destination IP address and/or
           source and destination port number. The behavior may vary between NATs or in
           some cases vary over time through the same NAT. This presents challenges for
           applications that must operate behind a wide variety of NATs.

7.3.1      Traditional NAT: Basic NAT and NAPT
           The precise behavior of a NAT remained unspecified for many years. Nonetheless,
           a taxonomy of NAT types has emerged, based largely on observing how different
           implementations of the NAT idea behave. The so-called traditional NAT includes
           both basic NAT and Network Address Port Translation (NAPT) [RFC3022]. Basic NAT
           performs rewriting of IP addresses only. In essence, a private address is rewritten
           to be a public address, often from a pool or range of public addresses supplied
           by an ISP. This type of NAT is not the most popular because it does not help to
           dramatically reduce the need for IP addresses—the number of globally routable
           addresses must equal or exceed the number of internal hosts that wish to access
           the Internet simultaneously. A much more popular approach, NAPT involves
           using the transport-layer identifiers (i.e., ports for TCP and UDP, query identifiers
           for ICMP) to differentiate which host on the private side of the NAT is associated
           with a particular packet (see Figure 7-4). This allows a large number of internal
           hosts (i.e., multiple thousands) to access the Internet simultaneously using a lim-
           ited number of public addresses, often only a single one. We shall ordinarily use
           the term NAT to include both traditional NAT and NAPT unless the distinction is
           important in a particular context.

 6UF?,3?????????????             6UF?,3?????????????     6UF?,3?????????????             6UF?,3?????????????

  6UF?3RUW???????                 6UF?3RUW???????         6UF?3RUW???????                6UF?3RUW???????

 6UF?,3??????????????            6UF?,3?????????????     6UF?,3??????????????           6UF?,3?????????????
                        1$7                                                     1$37
  6UF?3RUW???????                 6UF?3RUW???????         6UF?3RUW???????                 6UF?3RUW??????

 6UF?,3??????????????            6UF?,3?????????????     6UF?,3??????????????           6UF?,3?????????????

  6UF?3RUW???????                 6UF?3RUW???????         6UF?3RUW???????                6UF?3RUW???????

Figure 7-4 A basic IPv4 NAT (left) rewrites IP addresses from a pool of addresses and leaves port numbers
           unchanged. NAPT (right), also known as IP masquerading, usually rewrites address to a single
           address. NAPT must sometimes rewrite port numbers in order to avoid collisions. In this case, the
           second instance of port number 23479 was rewritten to use port number 3000 so that returning
           traffic for 192.168.1.2 could be distinguished from the traffic returning to 192.168.1.35.

           The addresses used in a private addressing realm “behind” or “inside” a NAT
      are not enforced by anyone other than the local network administrator. Thus, it is
      possible for a private realm to make use of global address space. In principle, this
      is acceptable. However, when such global addresses are owned and being used
      by another entity on the Internet, local systems in the private realm would most
      likely be unable to reach the public systems using the same addresses because the
      close proximity of the local systems would effectively “mask” the visibility of the
      farther-away systems using the same addresses. To avoid this undesirable situa-
      tion, there are three IPv4 address ranges reserved for use with private address-
      ing realms [RFC1918]: 10.0.0.0/8, 172.16.0.0/12, and 192.168.0.0/16. These address
      ranges are often used as default values for address pools in embedded DHCP
      servers (see Chapter 6).
           As suggested earlier, a NAT provides some degree of security similar to that
      of a firewall. By default, all systems on the private side of the NAT cannot be
      reached from the Internet. In most NAT deployments, the internal systems use
      private addresses. Consequently, communications between hosts in the private
      addressing realm and those in the public realm can be facilitated only with partic-
      ipation from the NAT, according to its usage policies and behavior. While a large
      variety of policies may be used in practice, a common policy allows almost all
      outgoing and returning traffic (associated with outgoing traffic) to pass through
      the NAT but blocks almost all incoming new connection requests. This behav-
      ior inhibits “probing” attacks that attempt to ascertain which IP addresses have
      active hosts available to exploit. In addition, a NAT (especially a NAPT) “hides”
      the number and configuration of internal addresses from the outside. Some users
      feel this topology information is proprietary and should remain confidential. NAT
      helps by providing so-called topology hiding.
           As we shall now explore, NATs are tailored to the protocols and applications
      that they need to support, so it is difficult to discuss NAT behavior without also
      mentioning the particular protocol(s) it is being asked to handle. Thus, we now
      turn to how NAT behaves with each major transport protocol and how it may be
      used in mixed IPv4/IPv6 environments. Many of the behavioral specifics for NATs
      have been the subject of the IETF Behavior Engineering for Hindrance Avoidance
      (BEHAVE) working group. BEHAVE has produced a number of documents, start-
      ing in 2007, that clarify consistent behaviors for NATs. These documents are useful
      for application writers and NAT developers so that a consistent expectation can be
      established as to how NATs should operate.

      7.3.1.1 NAT and TCP
      Recall from Chapter 1 that the primary transport-layer protocol for the Internet,
      TCP, uses an IP address and port number to identify each end of a connection. A
      connection is identified by the combination of two ends; each unique TCP con-
      nection is identified by two IP addresses and two port numbers. When a TCP
      connection starts, an “active opener” or client usually sends a synchronization
      (SYN) packet to a “passive opener” or server. The server responds with its own

SYN packet, which also includes an acknowledgment (ACK) of the client’s SYN.
The client then responds with an ACK to the server. This “three-way handshake”
establishes the connection. A similar exchange with finish (FIN) packets is used
to gracefully close a connection. The connection can also be forcefully closed right
away using a reset (RST) packet. (See Chapter 13 for more detail on TCP connec-
tions.) The behavioral requirements for traditional NAT with TCP are defined in
[RFC5382] and relate primarily to the TCP three-way handshake.
     Referring to the example home network in Figure 7-3, consider a TCP con-
nection initiated by the wireless client at 10.0.0.126 destined for the Web server
on the host www.isoc.org (IPv4 address 212.110.167.157). Using the following
notation to indicate IPv4 addresses and port numbers—(source IP:source port;
destination IP:destination port)—the packet initiating the connection on the pri-
vate segment might be addressed as (10.0.0.126:9200; 212.110.167.157:80). The NAT/
firewall device, acting as the default router for the client, receives the first packet.
The NAT notices that the incoming packet is a new connection (because the SYN
bit in the TCP header is turned on; see Chapter 13). If policy permits (which it
typically does because this is an outgoing connection), the source IP address
is modified in the packet to reflect the routable IP address of the NAT router’s
external interface. Thus, when the NAT forwards this packet, the addressing is
(63.204.134.177:9200; 212.110.167.157:80). In addition to forwarding the packet, the
NAT creates internal state to remember the fact that a new connection is being
handled by the NAT (called a NAT session). At a minimum, this state includes an
entry (called a NAT mapping) containing the source port number and IP address
of the client. This becomes useful when the Internet server replies. The server
replies to the endpoint (63.204.134.177:9200), the external NAT address, using the
port number chosen initially by the client. This behavior is called port preservation.
By matching the destination port number on the received datagram against the
appropriate NAT mapping, the NAT is able to ascertain the internal IP address of
the client that made the initial request. In our example, this address is 10.0.0.126, so
the NAT rewrites the response packet from (212.110.167.157:80; 63.204.134.177:9200)
to (212.110.167.157:80; 10.0.0.126:9200) and forwards it. The client then receives a
response to its request and for most purposes is now connected to the server.
     This example conveys how a basic NAT session is established in the nor-
mal case, but not how the session is cleared. Session state is removed if FINs
are exchanged, but not all TCP connections are cleared gracefully. Sometimes a
computer is simply turned off, which can leave stale NAT mappings in the NAT’s
memory. Thus, a NAT must also remove mappings thought to have “gone dead”
because of a lack of traffic (or if an RST segment indicates some other form of
problem).
     Most NATs include a simplified version of the TCP connection establishment
procedures and can distinguish between connection success and failure. In par-
ticular, when an outgoing SYN segment is observed, a connection timer is acti-
vated, and if no ACK is seen before the timer expires, the session state is cleared.
If an ACK does arrive, the timer is canceled and a session timer is created, with a

      considerably longer timeout (e.g., hours instead of minutes). When this happens,
      the NAT may send an additional packet to the internal endpoint, just to double-
      check if the session is indeed dead (called probing). If it receives an ACK, the NAT
      realizes that the connection is still active, resets the session timer, and does not
      delete the session. If it receives either no response (after a close timer has expired)
      or an RST segment, the connection has gone dead, and the state is cleared.
           [RFC5382], a product of the BEHAVE working group, notes that a TCP con-
      nection can be configured to send “keepalive” packets (see Chapter 17), and the
      default rate is one packet every 2 hours, if enabled. Otherwise, a TCP connection
      can remain established indefinitely. While a connection is being set up or cleared,
      however, the maximum idle time is 4 minutes. Consequently, [RFC5382] requires
      (REQ-5) that a NAT wait at least 2 hours and 4 minutes before concluding that
      an established connection is dead and at least 4 minutes before concluding that a
      partially opened or closed connection is dead.
           One of the tricky problems for a TCP NAT is handling peer-to-peer applica-
      tions operating on hosts residing on the private sides of multiple NATs [RFC5128].
      Some of these applications use a simultaneous open whereby each end of the con-
      nection acts as a client and sends SYN packets more or less simultaneously. TCP is
      able to handle this case by responding with SYN + ACK packets that complete the
      connection faster than with the three-way handshake, but many existing NATs do
      not handle it properly. [RFC5382] addresses this by requiring (REQ-2) that a NAT
      handle all valid TCP packet exchanges, and simultaneous opens in particular.
      Some peer-to-peer applications (e.g., network games) use this behavior. In addi-
      tion, [RFC5382] specifies that an inbound SYN for a connection about which the
      NAT knows nothing should be silently discarded. This can occur when a simulta-
      neous open is attempted but the external host’s SYN arrives at the NAT before the
      internal host’s SYN. Although this may seem unlikely, it can happen as a result
      of clock skew, for example. If the incoming external SYN is dropped, the internal
      SYN has time to establish a NAT mapping for the same connection represented by
      the external SYN. If no internal SYN is forthcoming in 6s, the NAT may signal an
      error to the external host.

      7.3.1.2 NAT and UDP
      The NAT behavioral requirements for unicast UDP are defined in [RFC4787].
      Most of the same issues arise when performing NAT on a collection of UDP data-
      grams as arise when performing NAT on TCP. UDP is somewhat different, how-
      ever, because there are no connection establishment and clearing procedures as
      there are in TCP. More specifically, there are no indicators such as the SYN, FIN,
      and RST bits to indicate that a session is being created or destroyed. Furthermore,
      the participants in an association may not be completely clear. UDP does not use
      a 4-tuple to identify a connection like TCP; instead, it can rely on only the two
      endpoint address/port number combinations. To handle these issues, UDP NATs
      use a mapping timer to clear NAT state if a binding has not been used “recently.”
      There is considerable variation in the values used for this timer to determine what

“recently” means, but [RFC4787] requires the timer to be at least 2 minutes and rec-
ommends that it be 5 minutes. A related consideration is when the timer should be
considered refreshed. Timers can be refreshed when packets travel from the inside
to the outside of the NAT (NAT outbound refresh behavior) or vice versa (NAT
inbound refresh behavior). [RFC4787] requires NAT outbound refresh behavior to
be true. Inbound behavior may or may not be true.
    As we discussed in Chapter 5 (and will see again in Chapter 10), UDP and IP
packets can be fragmented. Fragmentation allows for a single IP packet to span
multiple chunks (fragments), each of which is treated as an independent data-
gram. However, because of the layering of UDP above IP, an IP fragment other
than the first one does not contain the port number information needed by NAPT
to operate properly. This also applies to TCP and ICMP. Thus, in general, frag-
ments cannot be handled properly by simple NATs or NAPTs.

7.3.1.3 NAT and Other Transport Protocols (DCCP, SCTP)
Although TCP and UDP are by far the most widely used Internet transport pro-
tocols, there are two other protocols for which NAT behaviors have been defined
or are being defined. The Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) [RFC4340]
provides a congestion-controlled datagram service. [RFC5597] gives NAT behav-
ioral requirements with respect to DCCP, and [RFC5596] gives a modification to
DCCP to support a TCP-like simultaneous open procedure for use with DCCP. The
Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) [RFC4960] provides a reliable messag-
ing service that can accommodate hosts with multiple addresses. Considerations
for NAT with SCTP are given in [HBA09] and [IDSNAT].

7.3.1.4 NAT and ICMP
ICMP, the Internet Control Message Protocol, is detailed in Chapter 8. It provides
status information about IP packets and can also be used for making certain mea-
surements and gathering information about the state of the network. The NAT
behavioral requirements for ICMP are defined in [RFC5508]. There are two issues
involved when NAT is used for ICMP. ICMP has two categories of messages: infor-
mational and error. Error messages generally contain a (partial or full) copy of the
IP packet that induced the error condition. They are sent from the point where
an error was detected, often in the middle of the network, to the original sender.
Ordinarily, this presents no difficulty, but when an ICMP error message passes
through a NAT, the IP addresses in the included “offending datagram” need to
be rewritten by the NAT in order for them to make sense to the end client (called
ICMP fix-up). For informational messages, the same issues arise, but in this case
most message types are of a query/response or client/server nature and include
a Query ID field that is handled much like port numbers for TCP or UDP. Thus,
a NAT handling these types of messages can recognize outgoing informational
requests and set a timer in anticipation of a returning response.

      7.3.1.5 NAT and Tunneled Packets
      In some cases, tunneled packets (see Chapter 3) are to be sent through a NAT.
      When this happens, not only must a NAT rewrite the IP header, but it may also
      have to rewrite the headers or payloads of other packets that are encapsulated in
      them. One example of this is the Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) header
      used with the Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP; see Chapter 3). When
      the GRE header is passed through a NAT, its Call-ID field could conflict with the
      NAT’s (or with other hosts’ tunneled connections). If the NAT fails to handle this
      mapping appropriately, communication is not possible. As we might imagine,
      additional levels of encapsulation serve only to complicate a NAT’s job further.

      7.3.1.6 NAT and Multicast
      So far we have discussed only unicast IP traffic with NATs. NATs can be config-
      ured to support multicast traffic (see Chapter 9), although this is rare. [RFC5135]
      gives the requirements for handling multicast traffic through NATs. In effect, to
      support multicast traffic a NAT is augmented with an IGMP proxy (see [RFC4605]
      and Chapter 9). In addition, the destination IP addresses and port numbers of
      packets traveling from a host on the outside to the inside of NAT are not modified.
      For traffic flowing from inside to outside, the source addresses and port numbers
      may be modified according to the same behaviors as with unicast UDP.

      7.3.1.7 NAT and IPv6
      Given the tremendous popularity of NAT for IPv4, it is natural to wonder whether
      NAT will be used with IPv6. At present, this is a contentious issue [RFC5902].
      To many protocol designers, NAT arose as a necessary but undesirable “wart”
      that has added a tremendous amount of complexity to the design of every other
      protocol. Consequently, there is staunch resistance to supporting the use of NAT
      with IPv6 based on the idea that saving address space is unnecessary with IPv6
      and that other desirable NAT features (e.g., firewall-like functionality, topology
      hiding, and privacy) can be better achieved using Local Network Protection (LNP)
      [RFC4864]. LNP represents a collection of techniques with IPv6 that match or
      exceed the properties of NATs.
           Aside from its packet-filtering properties, NAT supports the coexistence of
      multiple address realms and thereby helps to avoid the problem of a site having
      to change its IP addresses when it switches ISPs. For example, [RFC4193] defines
      Unique Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses (ULAs) that could conceivably be used with an
      experimental version of IPv6-to-IPv6 prefix translation called NPTv6 [RFC6296]. It
      uses an algorithm instead of a table to translate IPv6 addresses to (different) IPv6
      addresses (e.g., in different realms) based on their prefix and as a result does not
      require keeping per-connection state as with conventional NAT. In addition, the
      algorithm modifies addresses in such a way that the resulting checksum compu-
      tation for common transport protocols (TCP, UDP) remains the same. This sig-
      nificantly reduces the complexity of NAT because it does not have to modify the

        data in a packet beyond the network layer and does not require access to trans-
        port layer port numbers in order to operate properly. However, applications that
        require access to a NAT’s external address must still use a NAT traversal method
        or depend on an ALG. In addition, NPTv6 does not by itself offer the packet-fil-
        tering capabilities of a firewall, so additional deployment considerations must be
        made.

7.3.2   Address and Port Translation Behavior
        There has been considerable variation in the way NATs operate. Most of the details
        relate to the specifics of the address and port mappings. One of the primary goals
        of the BEHAVE working group in IETF was to clarify the common behaviors and
        set guidelines as to which are the most appropriate. To better understand the
        issues involved, we begin with a generic NAT mapping example (see Figure 7-5).

                                                                                    
                                                      )LUVW?

                                                                                  \
                                                   $VVRFLDWLRQ

                                                                              <?
                                                          ;? ?[?
                                     ;?[                  1$7                        2XWVLGH
                                                                                 ([WHUQDO??3XEOLF

                                                          ;? ?[?
                                                                              <?

                                 ,QVLGH                   6HFRQG?
                            ,QWHUQDO??3ULYDWH            $VVRFLDWLRQ
                                                                                  \?

Figure 7-5 A NAT’s address and port behavior is characterized by what its mappings depend on.
                   The inside host uses IP address:port X:x to contact Y1:y1 and then Y2:y2. The address and
                   port used by the NAT for these associations are X1′:x1′ and X2′:x2′, respectively. If X1′:x1′
                   equals X2′:x2′ for any Y1:y1 or Y2:y2, the NAT has endpoint-independent mappings. If
                   X1′:x1′ equals X2′:x2′ if and only if Y1 equals Y2, the NAT has address-dependent map-
                   pings. If X1′:x1′ equals X2′:x2′ if and only if Y1:y1 equals Y2:y2, the NAT has address-
                   and port-dependent mappings. A NAT with multiple external addresses (i.e., where X1′
                   may not equal X2′) has an address pooling behavior of arbitrary if the outside address is
                   chosen without regard to inside or outside address. Alternatively, it may have a pooling
                   behavior of paired, in which case the same X1 is used for any association with Y1.

            In Figure 7-5, we use the notation X:x to indicate that a host in the private
        addressing realm (inside host) uses IP address X with port number x (for ICMP,
        the query ID is used instead of the port number). The IP address X is ordinarily

            chosen from the private IPv4 address space defined in [RFC1918]. To reach the
            remote address/port combination Y:y, the NAT establishes a mapping using an
            external (usually a public, globally routable) address X1′ and port number x1′.
            Assuming that the internal host contacts Y1:y1 followed by Y2:y2, the NAT estab-
            lishes mappings X1′:x1′ and X2′:x2′, respectively. In most cases, X1′ equals X2′
            because most sites use only a single globally routable IP address. The mapping is
            said to be reused if x1′ equals x2′. If x1′ and x2′ equal x, the NAT implements port
            preservation, mentioned earlier. In some cases, port preservation is not possible,
            so the NAT must deal with port collisions as suggested by Figure 7-4.
                 Table 7-1 and Figure 7-5 summarize the various NAT port and address behav-
            iors based on definitions from [RFC4787]. Table 7-1 also gives filtering behaviors
            that use similar terminology and that we discuss in Section 7.3.3. For all common
            transports, including TCP and UDP, the required NAT address- and port-handling
            behavior is endpoint-independent (a similar behavior is recommended for ICMP).
            The purpose of this requirement is to help applications that attempt to determine
            the external addresses used for their traffic to work more reliably. We discuss this
            in more detail in Section 7.4 when we discuss NAT traversal.

Table 7-1    A NAT’s overall behavior is defined by both its translation and filtering behaviors. Each of these
             may be independent of host address, dependent on address, or dependent on both address and port
             number.

Behavior Name           Translation Behavior         Filtering Behavior
Endpoint-               X1′:x1′ = X2′:x2′ for all    Allows any packets for X1:x1 as long as any X1′:x1′
independent             Y2:y2 (required)             exists (recommended for greatest transparency)
Address-                X1′:x1′ = X2′:x2′ iff        Allows packets for X1:x1 from Y1:y1 as long as X1
dependent               Y1 = Y2                      has previously contacted Y1 (recommended for
                                                     more stringent filtering)
Address- and            X1′:x1′ = X2′:x2′ iff        Allows packets for X1:x1 from Y1:y1 as long as X1
port-dependent          Y1:y1 = Y2:y2                has previously contacted Y1:y1

                 As stated previously, a NAT may have several external addresses available to
            use. The set of addresses is typically called the NAT pool or NAT address pool. Most
            moderate to large-scale NATs use address pools. Note that NAT address pools are
            distinct from the DHCP address pools discussed in Chapter 6, although a single
            device may need to handle both NAT and DHCP address pools. One question
            in such environments is that when a single host behind the NAT opens multiple
            simultaneous connections, is each assigned the same external IP address (called
            address pairing) or not? A NAT’s IP address pooling behavior is said to be arbitrary
            if there is no restriction on which external address is used for any association. It
            is said to be paired if it implements address pairing. Pairing is the recommended
            NAT behavior for all transports. If pairing is not used, the communication peer

        of an internal host may erroneously conclude that it is communicating with dif-
        ferent hosts. For NATs with only a single external address, this is obviously not a
        problem.
             A very brittle type of NAT overloads not only addresses but also ports (called
        port overloading). In this case, the traffic of multiple internal hosts may be rewrit-
        ten to the same external IP address and port number. This is a dangerous prospect
        because if multiple hosts associate with a service on the same external host, it is
        no longer possible to determine the appropriate destination for traffic returning
        from the external host. For TCP, this is a consequence of all four elements of the
        connection identifier (source and destination address and port numbers) being
        identical in the external network among the various connections. Such behavior
        is now disallowed.
             Some NATs implement a special feature called port parity. Such NATs attempt
        to preserve the “parity” (evenness or oddness) of port numbers. Thus, if x1 is even,
        x1′ is even and vice versa. Although not as strong as port preservation, such behav-
        ior is sometimes useful for specific application protocols that use special port
        numberings (e.g., the Real-Time Protocol, abbreviated RTP, has traditionally used
        multiple ports, but there are proposed methods for avoiding this issue [RFC5761]).
        Port parity preservation is a recommended NAT feature but not a requirement. It
        is also expected to become less important over time as more sophisticated NAT
        traversal methods become widespread.

7.3.3   Filtering Behavior
        When a NAT creates a binding for a TCP connection, UDP association, or vari-
        ous forms of ICMP traffic, not only does it establish the address and port map-
        pings, but it must also determine its filtering behavior for the returning traffic if
        it acts as a firewall, which is the common case. The type of filtering a NAT per-
        forms, although logically distinct from its address- and port-handling behavior, is
        often related. In particular, the same terminology is used: endpoint-independent,
        address-dependent, and address- and port-dependent.
             A NAT’s filtering behavior is usually related to whether it has established an
        address mapping. Clearly, a NAT lacking any form of address mapping is unable
        to forward any traffic it receives from the outside to the inside because it would
        not know which internal destination to use. For the most common case of outgo-
        ing traffic, when a binding is established, filtering is disabled for relevant return
        traffic. For NATs with endpoint-independent behavior, as soon as any mapping
        is established for an internal host, any incoming traffic is permitted, regardless
        of source. For address-dependent filtering behavior, traffic destined for X1:x1
        is permitted from Y1:y1 only if Y1 had been previously contacted by X1:x1. For
        those NATs with address- and port-dependent filtering behavior, traffic destined
        for X1:x1 is permitted from Y1:y1 only if Y1:y1 had been previously contacted
        by X1:x1. The difference between the last two is that the last form takes the port
        number y1 into account.

7.3.4   Servers behind NATs
        One of the most obvious problems with NATs is that a system wishing to provide
        a service from behind a NAT is not directly reachable from the outside. Consider
        the example in Figure 7-3 once again. If the host with address 10.0.0.3 is to pro-
        vide a service to the Internet, it cannot be reached without participation from the
        NAT, for at least two reasons. First, the NAT is acting as the Internet router, so it
        must agree to forward the incoming traffic destined for 10.0.0.3. Second, and more
        important, the IP address 10.0.0.3 is not routable through the Internet and cannot
        be used to identify the server by hosts in the Internet. Instead, the external address
        of the NAT must be used to find the server, and the NAT must arrange to properly
        rewrite and forward the appropriate traffic to the server so that it can operate. This
        process is most often called port forwarding or port mapping.
             With port forwarding, incoming traffic to a NAT is forwarded to a specific
        configured destination behind the NAT. By employing NAT with port forward-
        ing, it is possible to allow servers to provide services to the Internet even though
        they may be assigned private, nonroutable addresses. Port forwarding typically
        requires static configuration of the NAT with the address of the server and the
        associated port number whose traffic should be forwarded. The port forwarding
        directive acts like an always-present static NAT mapping. If the server’s IP address
        is changed, the NAT must be updated with the new addressing information. Port
        forwarding also has the limitation that it has only one set of port numbers for each
        of its (IP address, transport protocol) combinations. Thus, if the NAT has only a
        single external IP address, it can forward only a single port of the same transport
        protocol to at most one internal machine (e.g., it could not support two indepen-
        dent Web servers on the inside being remotely accessible using TCP port 80 from
        the outside).

7.3.5   Hairpinning and NAT Loopback
        An interesting issue arises when a client wishes to reach a server and both reside on
        the same, private side of the same NAT. NATs that support this scenario implement
        so-called hairpinning or NAT loopback. Referring to Figure 7-6, assume that host X1
        attempts to establish a connection to host X2. If X1 knows the private address-
        ing information, X2:x2, there is no problem because the connection can be made
        directly. However, in some cases X1 knows only the public address information,
        X2′:x2′. In these cases, X1 attempts to contact X2 using the NAT with destination
        X2′:x2′. The hairpinning process takes place when the NAT notices the existence of
        the mapping between X2′:x2′ and X2:x2 and forwards the packet to X2:x2 residing
        on the private side of the NAT. At this point a question arises as to which source
        address is contained in the packet heading to X2:x2—X1:x1 or X1′:x1′?
            If the NAT presents the hairpinned packet to X2 with source addressing
        information X1′:x1′, the NAT is said to have “external source IP address and port”
        hairpinning behavior. This behavior is required for TCP NAT [RFC5382]. The

                                                ;?
                                     ;??[?
                                                                  ;? ?[?
                                                 6ZLWFK           1$7
                                                                  ;? ?[?
                                     ;??[?
                                                ;?
Figure 7-6   A NAT that implements hairpinning or NAT loopback allows a client to reach a server on
                     the same side of the NAT using the server’s external IP address and port numbers. That
                     is, X1 can reach X2:x2 using the addressing information X2′:x2′.

        justification for requiring this behavior is for applications that identify their peers
        using globally routable addresses. In our example, X2 may be expecting an incom-
        ing connection from X1′ (e.g., because of coordination from a third-party system).

7.3.6   NAT Editors
        Together, packets using the UDP and TCP transport protocols account for most
        of the IP traffic carried on the Internet. These transport protocols, by themselves,
        can be supported by NAT without additional complexity because their formats are
        well understood. When application-layer protocols used in conjunction with them
        carry transport-layer or lower-layer information such as IP addresses, the NAT
        problem becomes considerably more complicated. The most common example is
        FTP [RFC0959]. In normal operation, it communicates transport- and network-layer
        endpoint information (an IP address and port number) so that additional connec-
        tions can be made when bulk data is to be transferred. This requires a NAT to
        rewrite not only the IP addresses and port numbers in the IP and TCP portions of a
        datagram, but also some of the application payload itself. NATs with this capability
        are sometimes called NAT editors. If a NAT changes the size of a packet’s appli-
        cation payload, considerable work may be required. For example, TCP numbers
        every byte in the data transfer using sequence numbers (see Chapter 15), so if the
        size of a packet is changed, the sequence numbers also require modification. PPTP
        [RFC2637] also requires a NAT editor for transparent operation (see Chapter 3).

7.3.7   Service Provider NAT (SPNAT) and Service Provider IPv6 Transition
        A relatively recent development involves the idea of moving NATs from the
        customer premises into the ISP. This is sometimes called service provider NAT
        (SPNAT), carrier-grade NAT (CGN), or large-scale NAT (LSN) and is intended to
        further mitigate the IPv4 address depletion problem. With SPNAT, it is conceivable

      that many ISP customers could share a single global IPv4 address. In effect, this
      moves the point of aggregation from the edge of the customer to the edge of the
      ISP. In its basic form, there is no functional difference between conventional NAT
      and SPNAT; the difference is really in the proposed domain of use. However, mov-
      ing the NAT function from customer to ISP raises security concerns and brings
      into question whether individual end users are able to deploy Internet servers
      and control firewall policy [MBCB08]. A study from 2009 found that a significant
      number of users accept incoming connections, largely because of peer-to-peer
      programs [ANM09].
           SPNAT can help with the IPv4 address depletion problem, but IPv6 is viewed
      as the ultimate solution. For a number of reasons already discussed, however, IPv6
      deployment has lagged expectations. Originally, a scheme known as dual-stack
      (see [RFC4213]), whereby each system uses both IPv6 and IPv4 addresses, was
      intended to support transition to IPv6, but this approach was anticipated to be
      temporary and rendered unnecessary long before the depletion of IPv4 addresses.
      An arguably more pragmatic approach is now being undertaken that combines
      tunneling, address translation, and dual-stack systems in various configurations.
      We’ll discuss some of these in Section 7.6 after exploring the methods that have
      been developed for dealing with existing NATs.

7.4   NAT Traversal
      As an alternative to the complexity of placing ALGs and NAT editors in NAT
      devices, an application may attempt to perform its own NAT traversal. Usually
      this involves the application trying to ascertain the external IP address and port
      numbers that will be used when its traffic passes through a NAT and modifying
      its protocol operations accordingly. If an application is distributed across the net-
      work (e.g., has multiple clients and servers, some of which are not behind NATs),
      the servers can be used to shuttle (copy) data between the clients that connect
      from behind NATs or enable such clients to discover each other’s NAT bindings
      and possibly facilitate direct communication. Using a server to copy data between
      clients is usually a last-resort option because of the overheads involved and poten-
      tial for abuse. Consequently, most approaches attempt to provide for some method
      that allows direct communication.
           Direct methods have been popular for peer-to-peer file sharing, games, and
      communication applications. However, such techniques are often confined to a
      particular application, meaning that each new distributed application requiring
      NAT traversal tends to implement its own method(s). This can lead to redundancy
      and interoperability problems, ultimately increasing users’ frustration and cost.
      To combat this situation, a standard approach for handling NAT traversal has
      been established, and it depends on a collection of several distinct, subordinate
      protocols that we discuss in the following sections. For now, we begin with one of
      the more robust yet nonstandard approaches used by distributed applications. We
      then move on to standardized frameworks for NAT traversal.

7.4.1   Pinholes and Hole Punching
        As discussed previously, a NAT typically includes both traffic rewriting and fil-
        tering capabilities. When a NAT mapping is established, traffic for a particular
        application is usually permitted to traverse the NAT in both directions. Such map-
        pings are narrow; they usually apply only to a single application for its duration of
        execution. These types of mappings are called pinholes, because they are designed
        to permit only a certain temporary traffic flow (e.g., a pair of IP address and port
        number combinations). Pinholes are usually established and removed dynami-
        cally as a consequence of communication between programs.
            A method that attempts to allow two or more systems, each behind a NAT,
        to communicate directly using pinholes is called hole punching. It is described for
        UDP in Section 3.3 of [RFC5128] and for TCP in Section 3.4. To punch a hole, a
        client contacts a known server using an outgoing connection that establishes a
        mapping in its local NAT. When another client contacts the same server, the server
        has connections to each of the clients and knows their external addressing infor-
        mation. It then exchanges the client external addressing information between the
        clients. Once this information is known, a client can attempt a direct connection to
        the other client(s). The popular Skype peer-to-peer application uses this approach
        (and some others).
            Referring to Figure 7-7, assume client A contacts server S1 followed by client B.
        S1 will have learned A’s and B’s external addressing information: IPv4 addresses
        192.0.2.201 and 203.0.113.100, respectively. By sending B’s information to A and vice
        versa, A can attempt to contact B directly at its external address (and vice versa).
        Whether this will work depends on the type of NATs that have been deployed.
        NAT state for the (A,S1) connection lives in N1 and NAT state for (B,S1) lives in
        both N2 and N3. If all NATs are endpoint-independent, this is sufficient for direct
        connections to be possible. Any other type of NAT will not accept traffic from
        other than S1 and will thus prohibit direct communication. Said another way, this
        approach fails if both hosts are behind NATs with address-dependent or address-
        and port-dependent mapping behavior.

7.4.2   UNilateral Self-Address Fixing (UNSAF)
        Applications employ a number of methods to determine the addresses their
        traffic will use when passed through a NAT. This is called fixing (learning and
        maintaining) the addressing information. There are indirect and direct methods
        for address fixing. The indirect methods involve inferring a NATs behavior by
        exchanging traffic through the NAT. The direct methods involve a direct conver-
        sation between the application and the NAT itself using one or more special pro-
        tocols (that are not currently IETF standards). Considerable effort within IETF has
        gone into development of the indirect methods, and they are widely supported in
        certain applications, with VoIP applications being the most popular. Some of the
        direct methods are now supported by some NATs. These methods also provide for

                                                          6HUYHU
                                                            6?
                                                                   3XEOLF?,3?$GGUHVV?
                                   3XEOLF?,3?$GGUHVV?                ?????????????
                                                                    $VVLJQHG?E\?,63
                                    $VVLJQHG?E\?,63                                           'RXEOH?1$7
                                                                                   1?     7
                                                                                        1$        ????????

                     
                                   1?
                                     1$
                                        7
                                                        ,QWHUQHW                                                ????????
                    

                                                                            6HUYHU                           ????????????
                                                                                              1? 7
                                                                              6?                  1$

                        &OLHQW?$                                                        ???????????

                                                                                                       &OLHQW?%

Figure 7-7 Applications running on clients behind a NAT may require help from a server to engage
                 in direct communication. In hole punching, a server, often specialized for a specific
                 application, provides rendezvous information among clients that first establish NAT
                 state and then perform direct communication, if possible. Some applications attempt to
                 “fix” (determine and maintain) the addresses (and port numbers) their traffic will be
                 assigned when passing through a NAT using standard generic protocols. These methods
                 may encounter troubles in certain situations such as environments with multiple levels
                 of NAT. In this example, client A’s external address visible at S1 is 192.0.2.201 and client
                 B’s is 203.0.113.100. At S2, however, B’s external address is 10.0.1.1.

      basic configuration of NATs, so we discuss them later in the context of NAT setup
      and configuration.
          An application attempting to fix its address without help from the NAT per-
      forms the address fixing in a so-called unilateral fashion. Applications that do
      so are said to perform UNilateral Self-Address Fixing (UNSAF) [RFC3424]. As the
      name suggests, such methods are considered to be undesirable in the long run
      but a necessary evil for the time being. UNSAF involves a set of heuristics and
      is not guaranteed to work in all cases, especially because NAT behaviors vary
      significantly based on vendor and particular circumstance. The BEHAVE docu-
      ments mentioned earlier are aimed at specifying more consistent NAT behavior. If
      widely adopted, UNSAF methods will work more reliably.
          In most cases of interest, UNSAF methods operate in a client/server fashion
      similar to hole punching, but with added generality. Figure 7-7 illustrates some
      of the hazards that can arise in this situation. One issue is the lack of a single
      “outside” address realm for every NAT. In this example, there are two levels of
      NAT between client B and server S1. This situation can cause complications. For
      example, if an application on B wishes to obtain its “outside” address by using
      UNSAF with a server, it receives different answers depending on whether it con-
      tacts server S1 or S2. Finally, because UNSAF uses servers that are distinct from

        the NATs, there is always the possibility that the NAT behavior reported will
        change over time or become inconsistent with what the UNSAF approach reports.
            Given the various problems with NATs and UNSAF, the IAB, an elected group
        of architectural advisers within the IETF, has indicated that UNSAF protocol pro-
        posals must include responses to the concerns in their specifications:

            1. Define a limited-scope problem that the “short-term” UNSAF proposal
               addresses.
            2. Define an exit strategy/transition plan.
            3. Discuss what design decisions make the approach “brittle.”
            4. Identify requirements for longer-term, sound technical solutions.
            5. Discuss any noted practical issues or experiences known.

             This is an unusual list of requirements imposed on a protocol specification,
        but it results from long-standing interoperability problems between different
        NATs and NAT traversal techniques. Despite all the aforementioned problems,
        UNSAF methods are commonly used, partly because a wide range of NATs are
        found in operation today with little consistent behavior. We now look at how these
        methods are used as building blocks to form robust, general-purpose NAT tra-
        versal techniques to maximize the chances that communication among systems
        behind NATs, even between systems across multiple NATs such as the one illus-
        trated in Figure 7-7, will be possible.

7.4.3   Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)
        One of the primary workhorses for UNSAF and NAT traversal is called Session
        Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN) [RFC5389]. STUN has evolved from a previ-
        ous version called Simple Tunneling of UDP through NATs, now known as “classic
        STUN.” Classic STUN has been used with VoIP/SIP applications for some time
        but has been revised to be a tool that can be used by other protocols for perform-
        ing NAT traversal. Applications requiring a complete solution for NAT traversal
        are recommended to begin with other mechanisms we discuss in Section 7.4.5
        (e.g., ICE and SIP-Outbound). These frameworks may make use of STUN in one
        or more particular ways called STUN usages. Usages may extend the set of basic
        STUN operations, message types, or error codes defined in [RFC5389].
             STUN is a relatively simple client/server protocol that is able to ascertain
        the external IP address and port numbers being used on a NAT in most circum-
        stances. It can also keep NAT bindings current by using keepalive messages. It
        requires a cooperating server on the “other” side of a NAT to be effective, and sev-
        eral public STUN servers are configured with globally reachable IP addresses and
        are available for use on the Internet. The main job of a STUN server is to echo back
        STUN requests sent to it in a way that allows the client addressing information to

      be fixed. As with UNSAF methods in general, the approach is not foolproof. How-
      ever, the attraction of STUN is that it does not require modification of network
      routers, application protocols, or servers. It requires only that clients implement
      the STUN request protocol, and that at least one STUN server be available in an
      appropriate location. STUN was envisioned as a “temporary” measure (as were
      many standard protocols now in widespread use a decade or more after their cre-
      ation) until a more sophisticated direct protocol was developed and implemented,
      or NATs became obsolete because of the adoption of IPv6.
           STUN operates using UDP, TCP, or TCP with Transport Layer Security (TLS; see
      Chapter 18). STUN usage specifications define which transport protocols are sup-
      ported for the particular usage. It uses port 3478 for UDP and TCP, and 3479 for
      TCP/TLS. The STUN base protocol has two types of transactions: request/response
      transactions and indication transactions. Indications do not require a response and
      can be generated by either the client or the server. All messages include a type,
      length, magic cookie with value 0x2112A442, and a random 96-bit transaction ID
      used for matching requests with responses or for debugging. Each message begins
      with two 0 bits and may contain zero or more attributes. STUN message types are
      defined in the context of methods that support a particular STUN usage. The vari-
      ous STUN parameters, including method and attribute numbers, are maintained
      by the IANA [ISP]. Attributes have their own types and can vary in length. The
      basic STUN header, most often located immediately following a UDP transport
      header in an IP packet, is shown in Figure 7-8.
           The basic STUN header is 20 bytes in length (see Figure 7-8), and the Mes-
      sage Length field provides for an entire STUN message length of 216 - 1 bytes (the
      20-byte header length is not included in the Message Length field), although mes-
      sages are always padded to a multiple of 4 bytes so this field always has its 2
      low-order bits set to 0. STUN messages sent over UDP/IP are supposed to form IP
      datagrams less than the path MTU, if known, to avoid fragmentation (see Chapter
      10). If not known, the entire datagram length (including IP and UDP headers and
      any options) should be less than 576 bytes (IPv4) or 1280 bytes (IPv6). STUN has
      no provision for cases where a response might exceed the path MTU in the reverse
      direction, so servers should arrange to use messages of appropriate size.
           STUN messages carried over UDP/IP are not reliable, so STUN applications
      are required to implement their own reliability. This is accomplished by resend-
      ing messages thought to be lost. The retransmission interval is based on the esti-
      mated time to send and receive a message from the peer called the round-trip time
      (RTT). RTT computation and setting retransmission timers will be a major con-
      sideration when we discuss TCP (see Chapter 14). STUN uses a similar approach,
      but with minor modifications to the standard TCP values. See [RFC5389] for more
      details. Reliability issues for STUN over TCP/IP or TCP-with-TLS/IP are handled
      by TCP. Multiple pending STUN transactions can be supported over TCP-based
      connections.
           STUN attributes are encoded in a TLV arrangement, a technique used by sev-
      eral other Internet protocols. The type and length portions of a TLV are each 16

                                                                                                                               

                              6 781?0HVVDJH?7\SH                                           0HVVDJH?/HQJWK
                      
                                       ELWV                                                    ???ELWV
                                                          0DJLF?&RRNLH
                                                    ELWV?ZLWK?YDOXH??[????$???
     %DVLF
    6 781?
                                                                                                                                    6 781?
    +HDGHU?
       E\WHV
                                                                                                                                  +HDGHU?DQG?
                                                                7UDQVDFWLRQ?,'                                                     $WWULEXWHV
                                                                      ELWV

                                                            $WWULEXWHV? LI?DQ\

                                                                                                             ELQGLQJ
                                                                                                             DOORFDWH
                                                                                                             UHIUHVK                STUN
                                                                                                             VHQG                  Methods
                                                     0HWKRG? ???ELWV                           ??????????????GDWD
                                                                                                                                 (see [RFC5766])
                                                                                                             FUHDWH?SHUPLVVLRQ
                                                                                                             FKDQQHO?ELQG

     0HVVDJH?7\SH           0    0    0?   0?   0?    &?   0?    0?   0?   &?   0?   0?   0?    0?
       ( QFRGLQJ            ??   ??   ?    ?    ?     ?    ?     ?    ?    ?    ?    ?    ?     ?

                                                                                    UHTXHVW
                                                                                    LQGLFDWLRQ
                                                       &ODVV? ??ELWV            ????UHVSRQVH?
                                                                                 VXFFHVV
                                                                                    UHVSRQVH? HUURU

Figure 7-8     STUN messages always begin with two 0 bits and are usually encapsulated in UDP, although
               TCP is also allowed. The Message Type field gives both the method (e.g., binding) as well as class
               (request, response, error, or success). The Transaction ID is a random 96-bit number used to match
               requests with responses, or for debugging in the case of indications. Each STUN message can hold
               zero or more attributes, depending on the particular usage of STUN.

          bits, and the value portion is variable-length (up to 64KB, if supported), but pad-
          ded to the next multiple of 4 bytes (padding bits may be any value). The same
          attribute type may appear more than once in the same STUN message, although
          only the first is necessarily processed by a receiver. Attributes with type numbers
          below 0x8000 are called comprehension-required attributes, and the others are called
          comprehension-optional attributes. If a STUN agent receives a message containing
          comprehension-required attributes it does not know how to process, it generates
          an error. Most of the attributes defined to date are comprehension-required [ISP].
               [RFC5389] defines a single STUN method called binding, which can be used in
          either request/response or indication transactions for address fixing and keeping
          NAT bindings current. It also defines 11 attributes, given in Table 7-2.

Table 7-2    STUN, defined in [RFC5389] and sometimes called STUN2, replaces classic STUN. These 11 attri-
             butes may be used by a STUN2-compliant client or server.

Name                                Value         Purpose/Use
MAPPED-ADDRESS                      0x0001        Contains an address family indicator and the
                                                  reflexive transport address (IPv4 or IPv6)
USERNAME                            0x0006        User name and password; used for message
                                                  integrity checks (up to 513 bytes)
MESSAGE-INTEGRITY                   0x0008        Message authentication code value on the STUN
                                                  message (see Chapter 18 and [RFC5389])
ERROR-CODE                          0x0009        Contains 3-bit error class, 8-bit error code value,
                                                  and variable-length textual description of error
UNKNOWN-ATTRIBUTES                  0x000A        Used with error messages to indicate the unknown
                                                  attributes (one 16-bit value per attribute)
REALM                               0x0014        Indicates the authentication “realm” name for long-
                                                  term credentials
NONCE                               0x0015        Nonrepeated value optionally carried in requests
                                                  and responses (see Chapter 18) to prevent replay
                                                  attacks
XOR-MAPPED-ADDRESS                  0x0020        XORed version of MAPPED-ADDRESS
SOFTWARE                            0x8022        Textual description of the software that sent the
                                                  message (e.g., manufacturer and version number)
ALTERNATE-SERVER                    0x8023        Provides an alternate IP address for a client to use;
                                                  encoded as with MAPPED-ADDRESS
FINGERPRINT                         0x8028        CRC-32 of message XORed with 0x5354554E; must
                                                  be last attribute if used (optional)

                 Referring to Figure 7-5, a STUN client with addressing information X:x is
            often interested in determining X1′:x1′, called the reflexive transport address or
            mapped address. A STUN server at Y1:y1 includes the reflexive transport address
            in a MAPPED-ADDRESS attribute in a STUN message returned to the client. The
            MAPPED-ADDRESS attribute holds an 8-bit Address Family field, a 16-bit Port
            Number field, and either a 32-bit or 128-bit Address field, depending on whether
            IPv4 or IPv6 is indicated by the Address Family field (0x01 for IPv4; 0x02 for IPv6).
            This attribute is included to remain backward-compatible with classic STUN. The
            more important attribute is the XOR-MAPPED-ADDRESS attribute, which holds
            exactly the same value as the MAPPED-ADDRESS attribute, but XORed with the
            magic cookie value (for IPv4) or a concatenation with the magic cookie and trans-
            action ID values (for IPv6). The reason for using XORed values in this way is to
            detect and bypass generic ALGs that look through packets and rewrite whatever
            IP addresses they find. Such ALGs are very brittle because they may rewrite infor-
            mation that protocols such as STUN require. Experience has shown that XORing
            IP addresses in the packet payload is usually sufficient to bypass such ALGs.

    A STUN client, including most VoIP devices and “softphone” applications such
as pjsua [PJSUA], is initially configured with the IP address(es) or names of one or
more STUN servers. It is desirable to use STUN servers that are likely to “see” the
same IP addresses as the peer to which the application ultimately wishes to talk,
although that may be difficult to determine. Using STUN servers located on the
public Internet (e.g., stun.ekiga.net, stun.xten.com, numb.viagenie.ca)
is usually adequate. Some servers may be discovered using DNS Service (SRV)
records (see Chapter 11). An example STUN binding request is given in Figure 7-9.

Figure 7-9 A STUN binding request. The request contains a 96-bit transaction ID and the SOFT-
           WARE attribute that identifies the client making the request. The attribute contains 10
           characters, but this value is rounded up to the next multiple of 4, giving an attribute
           value of 12. The message length of 16 also includes the 4 bytes used to include the attri-
           bute’s type and length (the STUN header is not included).

    The sample STUN binding request in Figure 7-9 is initiated from a client.
The transaction ID has been selected randomly, and the request is sent to numb
.viagenie.ca (with IPv4 addresses 216.146.46.55 and 216.146.46.59), which is
both a STUN and a TURN server (see Section 7.4.4). The request contains the
SOFTWARE attribute that identifies the client application. In this case, the request
was initiated by pjnath-1.6. This is the “PJSIP NAT helper” application included
with pjsua. The message length includes 4 bytes for the attribute type and length,
plus 12 bytes used to hold the attribute. The length of pjnath-1.6 is only 10 bytes,
but attribute lengths are always rounded up to the nearest 4-byte multiple. After
passing through a NAT, the response is given as shown in Figure 7-10.

Figure 7-10   A STUN binding response containing four attributes. The MAPPED-ADDRESS and XOR-
              MAPPED-ADDRESS attributes contain the server-reflexive addressing information. The other
              attributes are used with an experimental NAT behavior discovery mechanism [RFC5780].

     The binding response shown in Figure 7-10 gives useful information to the client,
encoded as a collection of attributes. The MAPPED-ADDRESS and XOR-MAPPED
address attributes indicate that the STUN server determined the server-reflexive
address of 71.134.182.214:33294. The RESPONSE-ORIGIN and OTHER-ADDRESS
attributes are used by an experimental facility for discovering NAT behavior
[RFC5780]. The first gives the communication endpoint used to send the STUN
message (216.146.46.55:3478, which matches the sending IPv4 address and UDP
port number). The second attribute indicates which source IPv4 address and port
number (216.146.45.59:3479) would have been used if the client requested “change
address” or “change port” behavior. This latter attribute is equivalent to the now-
deprecated CHANGED-ADDRESS attribute in classic STUN. If a change address or
port is specified in a request, a cooperating STUN server attempts to use a different
address when responding to the client, if possible.
     STUN can be used to perform address fixing as well as a number of other
functions called mechanisms, including DNS discovery, a method to redirect to an
alternate server, and message integrity exchanges. Mechanisms are selected in
the context of a particular STUN usage, so in general they are considered optional
STUN features. One of the more important mechanisms provides authentication
and message integrity. It has two forms: the short-term credential mechanism and the
long-term credential mechanism.
     Short-term credentials are intended to last for a single session; the particular
duration is defined by the STUN usage. Long-term credentials last across sessions;
they correspond to a login ID or account. Short-term credentials are often used
in particular message exchanges, and long-term credentials are used when some
particular resource is to be allocated (e.g., with TURN; see Section 7.4.4). Pass-
words are never sent in the clear where they could be intercepted.
     The short-term credential mechanism uses the USERNAME and MESSAGE-
INTEGRITY attributes. Both are required on any request. The USERNAME gives
an indication of which credentials are required and allows the message sender to
use the appropriate shared password in forming an integrity check on the mes-
sage (a MAC computed on the message contents; see Chapter 18). When using
short-term credentials, it is assumed that some form of credential information
(e.g., user name and password) has been exchanged earlier. The credential is used
for forming an integrity check on STUN messages that is encoded in the MES-
SAGE-INTEGRITY attribute. The ability to form a valid MESSAGE-INTEGRITY
attribute value is an indication that the sender holds a current (“fresh”) copy of the
appropriate credential.
     The long-term credential mechanism ensures freshness in a different way,
using a digest challenge. When using this mechanism, a client initially makes a
request without any authentication material. The server rejects the request but pro-
vides a REALM attribute in response. This can be used by the client to determine
which credential is needed to provide adequate authentication, as the client may
have credentials for various services (e.g., multiple VoIP accounts). Along with the
REALM, the server provides a never-reused NONCE value, which the client uses in

        forming a subsequent request. This mechanism also uses a MESSAGE-INTEGRITY
        attribute, but its integrity function is computed by including the NONCE value.
        Thus, it is difficult for an eavesdropper that overheard a previous long-term creden-
        tial exchange to simply replay a validated request (i.e., because the NONCE value
        is different). The use of NONCE values in authentication and related concerns are
        discussed in more detail in Chapter 18. The long-term credential mechanism can-
        not be used to protect STUN indications, as these transactions do not operate as
        request/response pairs.

7.4.4   Traversal Using Relays around NAT (TURN)
        Traversal Using Relays around NAT (TURN) [RFC5766] provides a way for two or
        more systems to communicate even if they are located behind relatively uncoop-
        erative NATs. As a last-resort method to support communication in such circum-
        stances, it involves a relay server that shuttles data between systems that could
        otherwise not communicate. Using extensions to STUN and some TURN-specific
        messages, it supports communication even when most other approaches have
        failed, provided a common server that is not behind a NAT can be reached by each
        client. If all NATs were compliant with the BEHAVE specifications, TURN would
        not be necessary. Direct communication methods (i.e., that do not use TURN) are
        almost always preferable to using TURN servers.
             Referring to Figure 7-11, a TURN client behind a NAT contacts a TURN server,
        usually on the public Internet, and indicates the other systems (called peers) with
        which it wishes to communicate. Finding the server’s address and the appropriate
        protocol to use for communication is accomplished using a special DNS NAPTR
        record (see Chapter 11 and [RFC5928]) or by manual configuration. The client
        obtains address and port information, called the relayed transport address, from the
        server, which are the address and port number used by the TURN server to com-
        municate with the peers. The client also obtains its own server-reflexive transport
        address. Peers also have server-reflexive transport addresses that represent their
        external addresses. These addresses are needed by the client and server to perform
        the “plumbing” necessary to interconnect the client and its peers. The method
        used to exchange this addressing information is not defined within the scope of
        TURN. Instead, this information must be exchanged using some other mechanism
        (e.g., ICE; see Section 7.4.5) in order for TURN servers to be used effectively.
             The client uses TURN commands to create and maintain allocations on the
        server. An allocation resembles a multiway NAT binding and includes the (unique)
        relayed transport address that each peer can use to reach the client. Server/peer
        data is sent using straightforward TURN messages traditionally carried in UDP/
        IPv4. Enhancements support TCP [RFC6062] and IPv6 (and also relaying between
        IPv4 and IPv6) [RFC6156]. Server/client data is encapsulated with an indication
        of corresponding peer(s) that sent or should receive the associated data. The cli-
        ent/server connection has been specified for UDP/IPv4, TCP/IPv4, and TCP/IPv4

                                                                           5HOD\HG?7UDQVSRUW?$GGUHVV
                                                                                             

                                                                    6HUYHU           3HHU?$?6HUYHU?5HIOH[LYH?
                                                                                       7UDQVSRUW?$GGUHVV
                                                                                                                        3HHU?$?+RVW?7UDQVSRUW?
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                              $GGUHVV??????????????????
                                     6HUYHU¶V?7UDQVSRUW?$GGUHVV                                                            ?????????????
                                                       

                                                                                                             1?     7
                                                                                                                  1$

                                             1?
                                               1$
                                                    7                ,QWHUQHW
     &OLHQW¶V?+RVW?7UDQVSRUW?
             $GGUHVV??????????????????                                                                                      3HHU?$
                      
                                                                                                             3HHU?%?+RVW?7UDQVSRUW?
                                             &OLHQW¶V?6HUYHU?5HIOH[LYH?                                            $GGUHVV???????????????????
                                                                                              1?
                                                7UDQVSRUW?$GGUHVV                                  1$
                                                                                                     7            ??????????
                                                               
                                   &OLHQW
                                                                   3HHU?%?6HUYHU?5HIOH[LYH?
                                                                     7UDQVSRUW?$GGUHVV
                                                                                   
                                                                                                         3HHU?%

Figure 7-11      Based on [RFC5766], a TURN server helps clients behind “bad” NATs to communicate by relay-
                 ing traffic. Traffic flowing between client and server may use TCP, UDP, or TCP with TLS. Traffic
                 between the server and one or more peers uses UDP. Relaying is a last-resort measure for com-
                 munication; direct methods are preferred if available.

           with TLS. Establishing an allocation requires the client to be authenticated, usu-
           ally using the STUN long-term credential mechanism.
                TURN supports two methods for copying data between a client and its peers.
           The first encodes data using STUN methods called Send and Data, defined in
           [RFC5766], which are STUN indicators and therefore not authenticated. The other
           uses a TURN-specific concept called channels. Channels are communication paths
           between a client and a peer that have less overhead than the Send and Data meth-
           ods. Messages carried over channels use a smaller, 4-byte header that is incompat-
           ible with the larger STUN-formatted messages ordinarily used by TURN. Up to
           16K channels can be associated with an allocation. Channels were developed to
           help some applications such as VoIP that prefer to use relatively small packets to
           reduce latency and overhead.
                In operation, the client makes a request to obtain an allocation using a TURN-
           defined STUN Allocate method. If successful, the server responds with a success
           indicator and the allocated relayed transport address. A request might be denied
           if the client fails to provide adequate authentication to the server. The client must
           now send refresh messages to keep the allocation alive. Allocations expire in 10
           minutes if not refreshed, unless the client included an alternate lifetime value,
           encoded as a STUN LIFETIME attribute, in the allocation request. Allocations
           may be deleted by requesting an allocation with zero lifetime. When an allocation
           expires, so do all of its associated channels.

             Allocations are represented using a “5-tuple.” At the client, the 5-tuple includes
        the client’s host transport address and port number, server transport address and
        port number, and the transport protocol used to communicate with the server. At
        the server, the same 5-tuple is used, except the client’s host transport address and
        port are replaced with its server-reflexive address and port. An allocation may
        have zero or more associated permissions, to limit the patterns of connectivity that
        are permitted through the TURN server. Each permission includes an IP address
        restriction such that only packets with the matching source address received at
        the TURN server have their data payloads forwarded to the corresponding client.
        Permissions are deleted if not refreshed within 5 minutes.
             TURN enhances STUN with six methods, nine attributes, and six error response
        codes. These can be partitioned roughly into support for establishing and maintain-
        ing allocations, authentication, and manipulating channels. The six methods and
        their method numbers are as follows: Allocate (3), Refresh (4), Send (6), Data (7),
        CreatePermission (8), and ChannelBind (9). The first two establish and keep allo-
        cations alive. Send and Data use STUN messages to encapsulate data from client
        to server and vice versa, respectively. CreatePermission establishes or refreshes a
        permission, and ChannelBind associates a particular peer with a 16-bit channel
        number. The error messages indicate problems with TURN features such as authen-
        tication failure or running out of resources (e.g., channel numbers). The nine STUN
        attribute names, values, and purposes defined by TURN are given in Table 7-3.

Table 7-3 STUN attributes defined by TURN

Name                           Value        Purpose/Use
CHANNEL-NUMBER                 0x000C       Indicates what channel associated data belongs to
LIFETIME                       0x000D       Requested allocation timeout (seconds)
XOR-PEER-ADDRESS               0x0012       A peer’s address and port, using XORed encoding
DATA                           0x0013       Holds data for a Send or Data indication
XOR-RELAYED-ADDRESS            0x0016       Server’s address and port allocated for a client
EVEN-PORT                      0x0018       Requests that the relayed transport addressing
                                            information use an even port; optionally requests
                                            allocation of the next port in sequence
REQUESTED-TRANSPORT            0x0019       Used in a client to request that a specific transport
                                            be used in forming the transport address; values are
                                            drawn from the IPv4 Protocol or IPv6 Next Hop header
                                            field values
DONT-FRAGMENT                  0x001A       Requests that the server set the “don’t fragment” bit in
                                            the IPv4 header in packets sent to peers
RESERVATION-TOKEN              0x0022       Unique identifier for a relayed transport address held
                                            by the server; the value is provided to the client as a
                                            reference

Figure 7-12   A TURN allocation request is a STUN message using message type 0x0003. This request
              also includes the REQUESTED-TRANSPORT and SOFTWARE attributes. It does not
              include authentication information. According to STUN long-term credentials, this
              request will fail.

     A TURN request takes the form of a STUN message whose message type is
an allocation request. Figure 7-12 shows an example. According to the STUN long-
term credential mechanism, the initial allocation request shown in Figure 7-12 did
not include authentication information, so it is rejected by the server. The rejection
is indicated by an allocation error response, shown in Figure 7-13.
     The error message in Figure 7-13 provides the REALM attribute (viagenie.
ca) and the NONCE value the client requires to form its next request. The mes-
sage also includes the MESSAGE-INTEGRITY attribute so the client can check that
the message has not been modified and the requested REALM and NONCE are
correct. A subsequent request includes the USERNAME, NONCE, and MESSAGE-
INTEGRITY attributes. See Figure 7-14.
     After receiving the request including long-term credentials, as shown in Fig-
ure 7-14, the server computes its own version of the message integrity value and
compares the result against the MESSAGE-INTEGRITY attribute value. If they
match, this is sufficient information for the TURN server to conclude that the cli-
ent must hold the appropriate password. It then permits the allocation and indi-
cates the result to the client (see Figure 7-15).

Figure 7-13   A TURN allocation error response includes the ERROR-CODE attribute with value
                    401 (Unauthorized). The message is integrity-protected and includes the REALM and
                    NONCE attributes required by the client in forming another, authenticated allocation
                    request.

          The allocation request is successful, as shown in Figure 7-15, and the relayed
      transport address is 216.146.46.55:49261 (note that Wireshark performs the XOR
      operation to display the decoded address). At this point, the client can proceed
      to use the TURN server for relaying to peers. Once this is finished, the allocation
      can be removed. About 4s later, packets 5 and 6 in Figure 7-15 indicate the client’s
      request to remove the allocation. The request is expressed as a refresh with life-
      time set to 0. The server responds with a success indicator and removes the alloca-
      tion. Note that the BANDWIDTH attribute has been included in the allocation and
      refresh success indicators. This attribute, defined by a draft version of [RFC5766]
      but ultimately deprecated, was intended to hold the peak bandwidth, in kilobytes
      per second, permitted on the allocation. This attribute may be redefined in the
      future.

Figure 7-14   A second TURN allocation request includes the USERNAME, REALM, NONCE, and
              MESSAGE-INTEGRITY attributes. These are used by the server to verify integrity of the
              message and the identity of the client. If successful, the server authenticates the request
              and performs the allocation.

    As suggested previously, TURN has the disadvantage that traffic must be
relayed through the TURN server, and this can lead to inefficient routing (i.e.,
the TURN server may be far away from a client and peer that are proximal). In
addition, certain other traffic contents are not passed through from peer to client
using TURN. This includes ICMP values (see Chapter 8), TTL (Hop Limit) field
values, and IP DS Field values. Also, a requesting TURN client must implement the
STUN long-term credential mechanism and have some form of login credential or
account assigned by the TURN server operator. This helps to avoid uncontrolled
use of open TURN servers but creates somewhat greater configuration complexity.

Figure 7-15 A TURN allocation success response. The message is integrity-protected and includes
                    the XOR-RELAYED-ADDRESS attribute, identifying the port and address allocated by
                    the TURN server. The allocation is deleted if not refreshed.

7.4.5   Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE)
        Given the large variety of NATs deployed and the various mechanisms that may
        be necessary to traverse them, a generic facility called Interactive Connectivity
        Establishment (ICE) [RFC5245] has been developed to help UDP-based applications
        hosted behind a NAT establish connectivity. ICE is a set of heuristics by which an
        application can perform UNSAF in a relatively predictable fashion. In its oper-
        ation, ICE makes use of other protocols such as TURN and STUN. A proposal
        extends the use of ICE to TCP-based applications [IDTI].
            ICE works with and extends “offer/answer” protocols, such as the Session
        Description Protocol (SDP) used with unicast SIP connection establishment
        [RFC3264]. These protocols involve an offer of service with an accompanying set
        of service parameters followed by an answer that also includes a set of selected
        options. It is increasingly common to find ICE clients incorporated into VoIP
        applications that use SDP/SIP for establishing communications. However, in
        such circumstances, ICE is used for establishing NAT traversal for media streams
        (such as the audio or video portion of a call carried using RTP [RFC3550] or SRTP

[RFC3711]), while another mechanism, called SIP Outbound [RFC5626], handles
the SIP signaling information such as who is being called. Although in practice
ICE has been used primarily with SIP/SDP-based applications, it can also be used
as a generic NAT traversal mechanism for other applications. One such example
is the use of ICE (over UDP) with Jingle [XEP-0176], defined as an extension to the
core Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) [RFC6120].
     Ordinarily, ICE works to establish communication between two SDP entities
(called agents) by first determining a set of candidate transport addresses that each
agent might use for communicating with the other. Referring to Figure 7-11, these
addresses could be host transport, server-reflexive, or relayed addresses. ICE
may make use of both STUN and TURN to determine the candidate transport
addresses. ICE then orders these addresses according to a priority assignment
algorithm. The algorithm arranges for addresses that provide direct connectivity
to receive greater priority than those that require data relaying. ICE then provides
the set of prioritized addresses to its peer agent, which engages in a similar behav-
ior. Ultimately, two agents agree on the best set of usable address pairs and indicate
the selected results to the other peer. Determination of which candidate transport
addresses are available is accomplished using a sequence of checks encoded as
STUN messages. ICE has several optimizations to decrease the latency of agreeing
on the selected candidate, which are beyond the scope of this discussion.
     ICE begins by attempting to discover all available candidate addresses.
Addresses may be locally assigned transport addresses (multiple if the agent is
multihomed), server-reflexive addresses, or relayed addresses determined by
TURN. After assigning each address a priority, an agent sends the prioritized list
to its peer using SDP. The peer performs the same operation, resulting in each
agent having two prioritized lists. Each agent then forms an identical set of priori-
tized candidate pairs by pairing up the two lists. A set of checks are performed on
the candidate pairs in a particular order to determine which addresses will ulti-
mately be selected. Generally, the priority ordering prefers candidate pairs with
fewer NATs or relays. The candidate pair ultimately selected is determined by a
controlling agent assigned by ICE. The controlling agent nominates which valid can-
didate pairs are to be used, according to its order of preference. The controlling
agent may try all pairs and subsequently make its choice (called regular nomina-
tion) or may use the first viable pair (called aggressive nomination). A nomination
is expressed as a flag in a STUN message referring to a particular pair; aggressive
nomination is performed by setting the nominate flag in every request.
     Checks are sent as STUN binding request messages exchanged between the
two agents using the addressing information being checked. Checks are initiated
by timer, or scheduled as a result of an incoming check from a peer (called a trig-
gered check). Responses arrive in the form of STUN binding responses that contain
addressing information. In some circumstances this may reveal a new server-
reflexive address to the agent (e.g., because a different NAT is used between agents
from the one that was used when the candidate addresses were first determined
using STUN or TURN servers). Should this happen, the agent gains a new address

      called a peer-reflexive candidate, which ICE adds to the set of candidate addresses.
      ICE checks are integrity-checked using STUN’s short-term credential mechanism
      and use the STUN FINGERPRINT attribute. When TURN is used, the ICE cli-
      ent uses TURN permissions to limit the TURN binding to the remote candidate
      address of interest.
           ICE incorporates the concept of different implementations. Lite implementa-
      tions are designed for deployment in systems that do not employ NAT. They do
      not ever act as a controlling agent unless interacting with another Lite implemen-
      tation. They also do not perform the checks mentioned earlier as do full implemen-
      tations. The type of an ICE implementation is indicated in the STUN messages
      it sends. All ICE implementations must comply with STUN [RFC5389], but Lite
      implementations will only ever act as STUN servers. ICE extends STUN with the
      attributes described in Table 7-4.

Table 7-4   STUN attributes defined by ICE

       Name                      Value      Purpose/Use
       PRIORITY                  0x0024     Computed priority of associated candidate address
       USE-CANDIDATE             0x0025     Indicates selection of candidate by controlling agent
       ICE-CONTROLLED            0x8029     Indicates sender of message is controlled agent
       ICE-CONTROLLING           0x802A     Indicates sender of message is controlling agent

           A check is a STUN binding request containing the PRIORITY attribute. The
      value is equal to the value assigned by the algorithm described in Section 4.1.2
      of [RFC5245]. The ICE-CONTROLLING and ICE-CONTROLLED attributes are
      included in STUN requests when the sender is the controlling or controlled agent,
      respectively. A controlling agent may also include a USE-CANDIDATE attribute.
      If present, this attribute indicates which candidate the controlling agent wishes to
      select for subsequent use.

7.5   Configuring Packet-Filtering Firewalls and NATs
      Although NATs frequently require little configuration (unless port forwarding is
      being used), firewalls usually do, and sometimes they require extensive configu-
      ration. In most home networks the same device is providing NAT, IP routing, and
      firewall capabilities and may require some configuration. Although the configu-
      ration is logically separate for each of these, they are sometimes merged, either in
      configuration files, command-line interfaces, Web page controls, or other network
      management tools.
                          Section 7.5 Configuring Packet-Filtering Firewalls and NATs    335

7.5.1   Firewall Rules
        A packet-filtering firewall must be given a set of instructions indicating criteria
        for selecting traffic to be dropped or forwarded. Nowadays when configuring a
        router, the network administrator usually configures a set of one or more ACLs.
        Each ACL consists of a list of rules, and each rule typically contains pattern-match-
        ing criteria and an action. The matching criteria generally allow the rule to express
        the values of packet fields at either the network or transport layer (e.g., source
        and destination IP addresses, port numbers, ICMP type field, etc.) and a direction
        specification. The direction pattern matches traffic in a direction-dependent man-
        ner and allows for a different set of rules to apply for incoming versus outgoing
        traffic. Many firewalls also allow the rules to be applied at a certain point in the
        order of processing within the firewall. Examples of this include the ability to
        specify an ACL to be checked prior to or after the IP routing decision process. In
        some circumstances (especially when more than one interface is used), this flex-
        ibility becomes important.
             When a packet arrives, the matching criteria in the appropriate ACL are con-
        sulted in order. For most firewalls, the first matching rule is acted upon. Typical
        actions include a specification to block or forward the traffic and may also adjust
        a counter or write a log entry. Some firewalls may include additional features as
        well, such as having some packets directed to applications or other hosts. Each
        firewall vendor usually has its own method for specifying rules, although Cisco
        Systems’ ACL format has emerged as a popular format supported by many ven-
        dors of enterprise-class routers. ACLs for home users are typically configured
        using a simple Web interface.
             One of the popular systems for building firewalls is included with modern
        versions of Linux and is called iptables, built using a network filtering capa-
        bility called NetFilter [NFWEB]. It is the evolution of an earlier facility called
        ipchains and provides stateless and stateful packet-filtering support as well as
        NAT and NAPT. We shall examine how it works to get a better understanding of
        the types of capabilities a firewall and modern NAT provide.
             iptables includes the concepts of filter tables and filter chains. A table con-
        tains several predefined chains and may contain zero or more user-defined
        chains. Three predefined tables are named as follows: filter, nat, and mangle.
        The default filter table is for basic packet filtering and contains the predefined
        chains INPUT, FORWARD, and OUTPUT. These actions correspond to packets
        destined for programs running on the firewall router itself, those passing through
        it while being routed, and those originating at the firewall machine. The nat table
        contains the chains PREROUTING, OUTPUT, and POSTROUTING. The mangle
        table has all five chains. It is used for arbitrary rewriting of packets.
             Each filter chain is a list of rules, and each rule has matching criteria and an
        action. The action (called a target) may be to execute a special user-defined chain
        or to perform one of the following predefined actions: ACCEPT, DROP, QUEUE,
        and RETURN. A packet matching a rule with one of these targets is immediately

      acted on. ACCEPT (DROP) means the packet is forwarded (dropped). QUEUE
      means the packet is delivered to a user program for arbitrary processing, and
      RETURN means that processing continues in a previously invoked chain, which
      forms a sort of packet filter chain subroutine call.
          The design of a complete firewall configuration can be fairly complex and is
      specific to the needs of particular users and the types of services they require, so
      we will not attempt to give one here. Instead, the following examples illustrate
      only a small number of the possible uses for iptables. The following gives an
      example Linux firewall configuration file. It is invoked by a shell such as bash:

      EXTIF="ext0"
      INTIF="eth0"
      LOOPBACK_INTERFACE="lo"
      ALL="0.0.0.0/0"                     # matches all

      # set default filter table policies to drop
      iptables -P INPUT DROP
      iptables -P OUTPUT DROP
      iptables -P FORWARD DROP

      # all local traffic OK
      iptables -A INPUT -i $LOOPBACK_INTERFACE -j ACCEPT
      iptables -A OUTPUT -i $LOOPBACK_INTERFACE -j ACCEPT

      # accept incoming DHCP requests on internal interface
      iptables -A INPUT -i $INTIF -p udp -s 0.0.0.0 \
            --sport 67 -d 255.255.255.255 --dport 68 -j ACCEPT

      # drop unusual/suspect TCP traffic with no flags set
      iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --tcp-flags ALL NONE -j DROP

           This example illustrates some of the flexibility one can employ in setting up a
      filter criteria list. Initially, the chains are given a default policy (-P option), which
      affects packets that fail to match any rules. Next, traffic to or from the local com-
      puter (which is delivered using the pseudo interface lo) is given to the ACCEPT
      target (i.e., it is allowed) for the INPUT and OUTPUT chains in the default filter
      table. The –j option indicates “jump” to a particular processing target. Next,
      incoming UDP broadcast traffic originating from IPv4 address 0.0.0.0 and des-
      tined for local/subnet broadcast using the DHCP port numbers (67, 68) is allowed
      in via the internal interface. Next, the Flags fields of incoming TCP segments (see
      Chapter 13) is ANDed with all 1s (ALL) and compared against zero (NONE). A
      match occurs only if all the Flags fields are 0, which is not a very useful TCP seg-
      ment (ordinarily all TCP segments after the first one contain a valid ACK bit, and
      the first one contains a SYN).
           While syntax illustrated by this example is specific to the iptables facility,
      its capabilities are not. Most filtering firewalls are capable of performing similar
      types of checks and actions.
                           Section 7.5 Configuring Packet-Filtering Firewalls and NATs      337

7.5.2   NAT Rules
        In most simple routers, NAT can be configured in conjunction with firewall rules.
        In basic Windows systems, NAT is called Internet Connection Sharing (ICS), and in
        Linux it is called IP masquerading. On Windows XP, for example, ICS has a number
        of special characteristics. It assigns the “internal” IPv4 address as 192.168.0.1 to the
        machine running ICS and starts a DHCP server and DNS server. Other computers
        are assigned addresses in the 192.168.0/24 subnet, with the ICS machine as DNS
        server. Therefore, ICS should not be enabled on networks where these services are
        already being provided by another computer or router, or where the addresses
        might conflict. A registry setting can be used to change the default address range.
            Enabling ICS for an Internet connection on Windows XP can be accomplished
        by using the Network Setup Wizard, or by changing the Advanced properties on
        an already-operating Internet connection (under Settings | Network Connections).
        At this point, the user may also decide to allow other users to control or disable the
        shared Internet connection. This facility, known as Internet Gateway Device Discov-
        ery and Control (IGDDC), uses the Universal Plug and Play framework, described
        in Section 7.5.3, for controlling a local Internet gateway from a client. The functions
        supported include connect and disconnect, along with reading various status mes-
        sages. The Windows firewall facility, which works in conjunction with ICS, sup-
        ports the creation of service definitions. Service definitions are equivalent to port
        forwarding, as defined previously. To enable it, the Advanced property tab on the
        Internet connection is selected and a new service may be added (or an existing
        one edited). The user is then given the opportunity to fill in the appropriate TCP
        and UDP port numbers, both at the external interface and at the internal server
        machine. It thus works as a way to configure NAPT for incoming connections.
            As with Windows, Linux combines the masquerade capability with its fire-
        wall implementation. The following script configures masquerading in a simple
        manner. Note that this script is only for illustration and is not recommended for
        production use.

        EXTIF=”ext0”
        echo "Default FORWARD policy: DROP"
        iptables -P FORWARD DROP

        echo "Enabling NAT on $EXTIF for hosts 192.168.0.0/24"
        iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -o $EXTIF -s 192.168.0.0/24 \
              -j MASQUERADE

        echo "FORWARD policy: DROP unknown traffic"
        iptables -A INPUT -i $EXTIF -m state --state NEW,INVALID -j DROP
        iptables -A FORWARD -i $EXTIF -m state --state NEW,INVALID -j DROP

             Here, the default policy for the FORWARDING chain in the filter table is
        set to DROP. The next item arranges for hosts with IPv4 addresses assigned from
        the 192.168.0.0/24 subnet to have their addresses rewritten for any IPv4 traffic (via

        NAT, implemented by the nat table and -t nat options) after routing has deter-
        mined the external interface to be the appropriate one. Because of the stateful way
        that NAT works, it is now possible to adjust the filter table’s rules to allow only
        traffic associated with a connection known to NAT. The last two lines adjust the
        INPUT and FORWARD chains so that any incoming traffic that is either invalid or
        unknown (NEW) is dropped. The special operators NEW and INVALID are defined
        within the iptables command.

7.5.3   Direct Interaction with NATs and Firewalls: UPnP, NAT-PMP, and PCP
        In many cases, a client system wishes to or needs to interact directly with its fire-
        wall. For example, a firewall may need to be configured or reconfigured for dif-
        ferent services by allowing traffic destined for a particular port to not be dropped
        (establishing a “pinhole”). In cases where a proxy firewall is in use, each client
        must be informed of the proxy’s identity. Otherwise, communication beyond the
        firewall is not possible. A number of protocols have been developed for support-
        ing communication between clients and firewalls. The two most prevalent ones
        are called Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) and the NAT Port Mapping Protocol (NAT-
        PMP). The standards for UPnP are developed by an industry group called the
        UPnP Forum [UPNP]. NAT-PMP is currently an expired draft document within
        the IETF [XIDPMP]. NAT-PMP is supported by most Mac OS X systems. UPnP
        has native support on Windows systems and can be added to Mac OS and Linux
        systems. UPnP is also used in support of consumer electronics device discovery
        protocols for home networks being developed by the Digital Living Network Alli-
        ance (DLNA) [DLNA].
             With UPnP, controlled devices are configured with IP addresses based first
        upon DHCP and using dynamic link-local address configuration (see Chapter 6)
        if DHCP is not available. Next, the Simple Service Discovery Protocol (SSDP) [XIDS]
        announces the presence of the device to control points (e.g., client computers) and
        allows the control points to query the devices for additional information. SSDP
        uses two variants of HTTP with UDP instead of the more standard TCP. They are
        called HTTPU and HTTPMU [XIDMU], and the latter uses multicast addressing
        (IPv4 address 239.255.255.250, port 1900). For SSDP carried on IPv6, the following
        addresses are used: ff01::c (node-local), ff02::c (link-local), ff05::c (site-local), ff08::c
        (organization-local), and ff0e::c (global).
             Subsequent control and event notification (“eventing”) is controlled by the
        General Event Notification Architecture (GENA), which uses the Simple Object Access
        Protocol (SOAP). SOAP supports a client/server remote procedure call (RPC) mecha-
        nism and uses messages encoded in the Extensible Markup Language (XML), which is
        commonly used for Web pages. UPnP is used for a wide variety of consumer elec-
        tronic devices, including audio and video playback and storage devices. NAT/fire-
        wall devices are controlled using the Internet Gateway Device (IGD) protocol [IGD].
        IGD supports a variety of capabilities, including the ability to learn NAT mappings
        and configure port forwarding. The interested reader may obtain a simple IGD
                             Section 7.6 NAT for IPv4/IPv6 Coexistence and Transition   339

        client useful for experimentation from the MiniUPnP Project HomePage [UPNPC].
        A second version of UPnP IGD [IGD2] adds general IPv6 support to UPnP.
             While UPnP is a broad framework that includes NAT control and several other
        unrelated specifications, NAT-PMP provides an alternative specifically targeted at
        programmatic communications with NAT devices. NAT-PMP is part of Apple’s set
        of Bonjour specifications for zero configuration networking. NAT-PMP does not
        use a discovery process, as the device being managed is usually a system’s default
        gateway as learned by DHCP. NAT-PMP uses UDP port 5351. NAT-PMP supports
        a simple request/response protocol for learning a NAT’s outside address and con-
        figuring port mappings. It also supports a basic eventing mechanism that notifies
        listeners when a NAT outside address changes. This is accomplished using a UDP
        multicast message sent to address 224.0.0.1 (the All Hosts address) when the out-
        side address changes. NAT-PMP uses UDP port 5350 for client/server interactions
        and 5351 for multicast event notification. The idea of NAT-PMP can be extended
        for use with SPNAT, as proposed by the Port Control Protocol (PCP) [IDPCP].

7.6     NAT for IPv4/IPv6 Coexistence and Transition
        With the depletion of the last top-level unicast IPv4 address prefixes in early in
        2011, the embracing of IPv6 is beginning to accelerate. It was thought that hosts
        could be equipped with dual-stack functionality (i.e., each implements a complete
        IPv4 and IPv6 stack) [RFC4213] and network services would transition over to
        IPv6-only operation. It is now understood that IPv4 and IPv6 are likely to coex-
        ist for an extended period of time, perhaps indefinitely, and that for various eco-
        nomic reasons network infrastructure may operate using either IPv4 or IPv6 or
        both. Assuming that this is true, there will be an ongoing need to support com-
        munications between IPv4 and IPv6 systems, whether they are dual-stack or not.
        The two major approaches that have been used to support combinations of IPv4
        and IPv6 are tunneling and translation. The tunneling approaches include Teredo
        (see Chapter 10), Dual-Stack Lite (DS-Lite), and IPv6 Rapid Deployment (6rd).
        Although DS-Lite involves SPNAT as part of its architecture, a purer translation
        approach is given by the framework described in [RFC6144], which uses the IPv4-
        embedded IPv6 addresses we saw in Chapter 2. We will discuss both DS-Lite and
        the translation framework in more detail in this section.

7.6.1   Dual-Stack Lite (DS-Lite)
        DS-Lite [RFC6333] is an approach to make transition to IPv6 (and support for
        legacy IPv4 users) easier for service providers that wish to run IPv6 internally. In
        essence, it allows providers to focus on deploying an operational IPv6 core net-
        work yet provide IPv4 and IPv6 connectivity to their customers using a small num-
        ber of IPv4 addresses. The approach combines IPv4-in-IPv6 “softwire” tunneling
        [RFC5571] with SPNAT. Figure 7-16 shows the type of deployment envisioned.

                      &XVWRPHU¶V
                       ,3 Y??,3 Y?
                                                                           2WKHU?3 DUWV?RI?WKH?
                        1HWZRUN
                                                                               ,QWHUQHW
                                         %?     ,3 Y??LQ?,3 Y?             $)75 ,3 Y?
                                                   7XQQHOV

                                                     ,3 Y??7UDIILF
                      &XVWRPHU¶V
                       ,3 Y??,3 Y?                                   2WKHU?3 DUWV?RI?WKH?
                                       %?     6 HUYLFH
                        1HWZRUN                                          ,QWHUQHW
                                            3 URYLGHU¶V?                   ,3 Y?
                                          ,3 Y??1HWZRUN

Figure 7-16   DS-Lite allows service providers to support IPv4 and IPv6 customer networks using
                      an IPv6-only infrastructure. IPv4 address usage is minimized by using SPNAT at the
                      provider’s edge.

            In Figure 7-16, each customer network operates with any combination of IPv4
        and IPv6. The service provider’s network is assumed to be managed using only
        IPv6. Customer access to the IPv6 Internet is provided using conventional IPv6
        routing. For IPv4 access, each customer uses a special “before” gateway (labeled
        “B4” in Figure 7-16). A B4 element provides basic IPv4 services (e.g., DHCP service,
        a DNS proxy, etc.) but also encapsulates the customer’s IPv4 traffic in multi-point-
        to-point tunnels terminated at the “after” element (labeled “AFTR” in Figure 7-16).
        The AFTR element performs decapsulation of traffic headed to the IPv4 Internet
        and encapsulation in the reverse direction. AFTR also performs NAT and acts as a
        form of SPNAT. More specifically, the AFTR may use the identity of the customer’s
        tunnel endpoint for disambiguating traffic returning to the AFTR from the IPv4
        Internet. This allows multiple customers to use the same IPv4 address space. A B4
        element can learn the name of its corresponding AFTR element using a DHCPv6
        option called AFTR-Name [RFC6334].
            It is instructive to recall the discussion of IPv6 rapid deployment (6rd) from
        Chapter 6. Whereas DS-Lite provides IPv4 access to customers over a service pro-
        vider’s IPv6 network, 6rd aims to provide IPv6 access to customers over a service
        provider’s IPv4 network. In essence, they take opposite approaches with similar
        architectural components. However, with 6rd, mapping from an IPv6 address to
        the address of the corresponding IPv4 tunnel endpoint (and vice versa) is com-
        puted in a stateless fashion using an address-mapping algorithm. Stateless address
        translation is also used in the framework for full protocol translation between
        IPv4 and IPv6, which we discuss next.

7.6.2   IPv4/IPv6 Translation Using NATs and ALGs
        The biggest disadvantage of using tunneling techniques for supporting IPv4/IPv6
        coexistence is that network services running on hosts using one address family
                     Section 7.6 NAT for IPv4/IPv6 Coexistence and Transition    341

cannot be reached directly by the hosts using the other. Thus, an IPv6-only host
can communicate only with other IPv6-capable systems. This is an undesirable sit-
uation because many valuable services offered on the legacy IPv4 Internet would
remain unavailable to new systems that may support only IPv6. To address this
concern, a significant effort was undertaken between 2008 and 2010 to develop a
framework to provide direct translation between IPv4 and IPv6. This effort was
informed by poor experiences with NAT-PT [RFC2766], which was ultimately
determined to be too brittle and unscalable for ongoing use and was deprecated
[RFC4966].
     The IPv4/IPv6 translation framework is given in [RFC6144]. The basic transla-
tion architecture involves both stateful and stateless methods to convert between
IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, translations for DNS (see Chapter 11), and the definition
of any additional behaviors or ALGs in cases where they are necessary (including
for ICMP and FTP). In this section, we will discuss the basics of the stateless and
stateful address translation for IP based on [RFC6145], [RFC6146], and the address-
ing from [RFC6052] we discussed in Chapter 2. Other protocol-specific translation
issues will be covered in subsequent chapters.

7.6.2.1 IPv4-Converted and IPv4-Translatable Addresses
In Chapter 2, we discussed the structure of IPv4-embedded IPv6 addresses. Such
addresses are IPv6 addresses that can be used as input to a function that produces
a corresponding IPv4 address. The function is also easily inverted. There are two
important types of IPv4-embedded IPv6 addresses, called IPv4-converted addresses
and IPv4-translatable addresses. Each type of address mentioned is a subset of
the other types. That is, if we treat each address category as a set, then (IPv4-
translatable) ⊂ (IPv4-converted) ⊂ (IPv4-embedded) ⊂ (IPv6). IPv4-translatable
addresses are IPv6 addresses for which an IPv4 address can be determined in a
stateless fashion (see Section 7.6.2.2).
     Algorithmic translation between IPv4 and IPv6 addresses involves the use of
a prefix, as described in Chapter 2. The prefix may be either the Well-Known Pre-
fix (WKP) 64:ff9b::/96 or another Network-Specific Prefix that is ordinarily owned
by a service provider and used specifically with its translators. The WKP is used
only in representing ordinary globally routable IPv4 addresses; private addresses
[RFC1918] are not to be used with the WKP. In addition, the WKP is not to be
used for creating IPv4-translatable addresses. Such addresses are intended to be
defined within the scope of a provider’s network, so it is not appropriate to use
them at a global scope.
     The WKP is interesting because it is checksum-neutral with respect to the Inter-
net checksum. Recall the Internet checksum calculation from Chapter 5. If we treat
the prefix 64:ff9b::/96 as being composed of the hexadecimal values 0064, ff9b,
0000, 0000, 0000, 0000, 0000, 0000, the sum of these values is ffff, which is equal
to 0 in one’s complement. Consequently, when an IPv4 address has the WKP pre-
pended, the associated Internet checksums in packets created as a result of trans-
lation (e.g., in the IPv4 header, TCP, or UDP checksum) are unaffected. Naturally,
an appropriately chosen Network-Specific Prefix can also be checksum-neutral.

           In the following two subsections, we will use the notation To4(A6, P) to rep-
      resent the IPv4 address derived from IPv6 address A6 in conjunction with prefix
      P. P is either the WKP or some Network-Specific Prefix. We will use the notation
      To6(A4, P) to represent the IPv6 address derived from IPv4 address A4 in conjunc-
      tion with prefix P. Note that, with a few special exceptions, A6 = To6(To4(A6,P),P)
      and A4 = To4(To6(A4,P),P).

      7.6.2.2 Stateless Translation
      Stateless IP/ICMP Translation (SIIT) refers to a method of translating between IPv4
      and IPv6 packets without using state tables [RFC6145]. The translation is per-
      formed without table lookups and uses IPv4-translatable addresses along with
      a defined scheme to translate IP headers. For the most part, IPv4 options are not
      translated (they are ignored), nor are IPv6 extension headers (except the Frag-
      ment header). The exception is an unexpired IPv4 Source Route option. If such an
      option is present, the packet is dropped and a corresponding ICMP error message
      (Destination Unreachable, Source Route Failed; see Chapter 8) is generated. Table
      7-5 describes how the IPv6 header fields are assigned when translating an IPv4
      datagram to IPv6.

Table 7-5   Methods for creating an IPv6 header when translating IPv4 to IPv6

      IPv6 Field             Assignment Method
      Version                Set to 6.
      DS Field/ECN           Copied from same values in IPv4 header
      Flow Label             Set to 0.
      Payload Length         Set to IPv4 Total Length minus length of the IPv4 header (including
                             options).
      Next Header            Set to IPv4 Protocol field (or 58 if the Protocol field had value 1).
                             Set to value 44 to indicate a Fragment header if the IPv6 datagram
                             being created is a fragment or DF bit not set.
      Hop Limit              Set to the IPv4 TTL field minus 1 (if this value is 0, the packet is
                             discarded and an ICMP Time Exceeded message is generated; see
                             Chapter 8).
      Source IP Address      Set to To6(IPv4 Source IP Address, P).
      Destination IP         Set to To6(IPv4 Destination IP Address, P).
      Address

          During the translation process, the IPv4 header is stripped and replaced with
      an IPv6 header. If the arriving IPv4 datagram is too large to fit in the MTU for the
      next link and the DF bit field in its header is not set, multiple IPv6 fragment packets
      may be produced, each containing a Fragment header. This also occurs when the
      arriving IPv4 datagram is a fragment. [RFC6145] recommends a Fragment header
                         Section 7.6 NAT for IPv4/IPv6 Coexistence and Transition            343

be included in the resulting IPv6 datagram whenever the arriving IPv4 datagram’s
DF bit field has value zero, whether or not the translator needs to perform frag-
mentation or the arriving datagram is a fragment. This allows the IPv6 receiver to
know that the IPv4 sender was likely not using PMTUD. When a Fragment header
is included, its fields are set according to the methods listed in Table 7-6.

Table 7-6   Methods for assigning fields of the Fragment header, if used, during IPv4-to-IPv6
            translation

Fragment Header Field         Assignment Method
Next Header                   Set to the IPv4 Protocol field.
Fragment Offset               Copied from the IPv4 Fragment Offset field.
More Fragments Bit            Copied from the IPv4 More Fragments (M) bit field.
Identification                The low-order 16 bits are set from the IPv4 Identification field.
                              The high-order 16 bits are set to 0.

    The reverse direction (IPv6-to-IPv4 translation) involves creating an IPv4
datagram with header field values based on fields in the arriving IPv6 header.
Obviously the much larger IPv6 address space does not allow an IPv4-only host to
access every host on the IPv6 Internet. Table 7-7 gives the methods used to assign
the fields in the outgoing IPv4 datagram’s header when an unfragmented IPv6
datagram arrives.

Table 7-7   Methods for creating an IPv4 header when translating unfragmented IPv6 to IPv4

IPv4 Header Field           Assignment Method
Version                     Set to 4.
IHL                         Set to 5 (no IPv4 options).
DS Field/ECN                Copied from same values in IPv6 header.
Total Length                The value of the IPv6 Payload Length field plus 20.
Identification              Set to 0 (with option to set to some other predetermined value).
Flags                       More Fragments (M) is set to 0. Don’t Fragment (DF) is set to 1.
Fragment Offset             Set to 0.
TTL                         The value of the IPv6 Hop Limit field minus 1 (must be at least 1).
Protocol                    Copied from the first IPv6 Next Header field that does not refer
                            to a Fragment header, HOPOPT, IPv6-Route, or IPv6-Opts.
                            Value 58 is changed to 1 to support ICMP (see Chapter 8).
Header Checksum             Computed for the newly created IPv4 header.
Source IP Address           To4(IPv6 Source IP Address, P).
Destination IP Address      To4(IPv6 Destination IP Address, P).

          If the arriving IPv6 datagram includes a Fragment header, the outgoing IPv4
      datagram uses field values based on assignment methods modified from those in
Table 7-7. Table 7-8 gives this case.

Table 7-8   Methods for creating an IPv4 header when translating fragmented IPv6 to IPv4

      IPv4 Header Field        Assignment Method
      Total Length             The value of the IPv6 Payload Length field minus 8 plus 20.
      Identification           Copied from the low-order 16 bits in the Identification field of the
                               IPv6 Fragment header.
      Flags                    More Fragments (M) copied from the M bit field in the IPv6
                               Fragment header. Don’t Fragment (DF) is set to 0 to allow
                               fragmentation in the IPv4 network.
      Fragment Offset          Copied from the Fragment Offset field of the IPv6 Fragment header.

           In the case of fragmented IPv6 datagrams, the translator produces fragmented
      IPv4 datagrams. Note that in IPv6 the Identification field is larger, so there is a pos-
      sibility that certain fragments could fail to be reassembled properly if multiple
      distinct IPv6 datagrams from the same host are fragmented in such a way that the
      Identification field values they use share a common lower-order 16 bits. However,
      this situation is no more risky than having the conventional IPv4 Identification
      field wrap. Furthermore, integrity checks at higher layers make this issue nothing
      much to worry about.

      7.6.2.3 Stateful Translation
      In stateful translation, NAT64 [RFC6146] is used to support IPv6-only clients com-
      municating with IPv4 servers. This is expected to be important during the period
      when many important services continue to be offered using only IPv4. The trans-
      lation method for headers is nearly identical to the methods described for stateless
      translation in Section 7.6.2.2. As a NAT, NAT64 complies with BEHAVE specifica-
      tions and supports only endpoint-independent mappings, along with both end-
      point-independent and address-dependent filtering. Thus, it is compatible with
      the NAT traversal techniques (e.g., ICE, STUN, TURN) we discussed previously.
      Lacking these additional protocols, NAT64 supports dynamic translation only for
      IPv6 hosts initiating communications with IPv4 hosts.
           NAT64 works much like conventional NAT (NAPT) across address families,
      except translations in the IPv4-to-IPv6 direction are simpler than in the reverse
      direction. A NAT64 device is assigned an IPv6 prefix, which can be used to form a
      valid IPv6 address directly from an IPv4 address using the mechanism described
      in Chapter 2 and [RFC6052]. Because of the comparative scarcity of the IPv4
      address space, translations in the IPv6-to-IPv4 direction make use of a pool of
      IPv4 addresses that are ordinarily managed dynamically. This requires NAT64 to
      support NAPT functionality, whereby multiple distinct IPv6 addresses may map
                                  Section 7.7 Attacks Involving Firewalls and NATs    345

      to the same IPv4 address. NAT64 currently defines methods for translation of TCP,
      UDP, and ICMP messages initiated by IPv6 nodes. (In the case of ICMP queries
      and responses, the ICMP Identifier field is used instead of the transport-layer port
      number; see Chapter 8.)
           NAT64 handles fragments differently from its stateful counterpart. For arriv-
      ing TCP or UDP fragments where the transport checksum is nonzero (see Chapter
      10), the NAT64 may either queue the fragments and translate them together or
      translate them individually. A NAT64 must handle fragments, even those arriving
      out of order. A NAT64 may be configured with a time limit (at least 2s) bounding
      the time during which fragments will be cached. Otherwise, the NAT could be
      subject to a DoS attack resulting from the exhaustion of packet buffers holding
      fragments.

7.7   Attacks Involving Firewalls and NATs
      Given that the primary purpose of deploying firewalls is to reduce the exposure
      to attacks, it is not surprising that firewalls have fewer obvious shortcomings than
      end hosts or routers. That said, they are not without their faults. The most com-
      mon types of firewall problems result from incomplete or incorrect configuration.
      Configuring firewalls is not a trivial task, especially for large enterprises where
      many services may be employed on a daily basis. Other forms of attacks exploit
      the weaknesses of some firewalls, including the inability of many of them (espe-
      cially older ones) to deal with IP fragments.
           One type of problem arises when a NAT/firewall can be hijacked from outside
      to provide a masquerading capability for an attacker. If the firewall is configured
      with NAT enabled, traffic arriving at its external interface may be rewritten so as
      to appear to have come from the NAT device, thereby hiding an attacker’s actual
      address. What is worse, this is “normal” behavior from the NAT’s point of view;
      it just happens to be getting its input packets from outside rather than inside.
      This has been a particular problem with ipchains-based NAT/firewall rules on
      Linux. The simplest configuration for setting up masquerading:

      Linux# ipchains -P FORWARD MASQUERADE

      allows this attack to take place and is therefore not recommended. As we can see,
      it sets the default forwarding policy to masquerade, which potentially applies to
      any IP forwarding.
           Another type of problem that can arise with firewall and NAT rules is that
      they may be stale. In particular, they may contain port forwarding entries or other
      so-called holes that allow traffic through for services that are no longer used. A
      related problem is that some routers keep more than one copy of the firewall rules
      in memory, and the router must be specifically instructed when to enable which
      rules. Finally, another common configuration problem is that many routers merge

      new firewall rules with the existing set when new ones are added. This can poten-
      tially lead to undesired results if the operator is unaware of this behavior.
            The problem with fragments is related to how IP fragments are constructed.
      When an IP datagram is fragmented (see Chapter 10), the transport header, which
      contains the port numbers, appears only in the first fragment and in none of the
      others. This is a direct result of the layering and encapsulation of the TCP/IP pro-
      tocol architecture. Unfortunately for a firewall, receiving a fragment other than
      the first provides little information about the transport layer or service to which
      the packet relates. The only obvious way to make this association is to find the
      first fragment (if there ever was one), and this obviously requires a stateful fire-
      wall capability, which might be subject to resources exhaustion attacks. Even
      stateful firewalls could fall short: if the first fragment arrives after subsequent
      fragments, the firewall may not be smart enough to perform reassembly prior to
      its filtering operation. In some cases, the firewall simply drops fragments it cannot
      fully identify, which could pose problems for legitimate traffic that happens to use
      large datagrams.

7.8   Summary
      Firewalls provide a mechanism for network administrators to restrict the flow
      of information that may be harmful to end systems. The two major types of fire-
      walls are packet-filtering firewalls and proxy firewalls. Packet-filtering firewalls
      may be further separated into the stateful and stateless varieties, and they usually
      act as IP routers. The stateful variety is more sophisticated and supports success-
      ful operation of a wider variety of application-layer protocols (and might do more
      sophisticated logging or filtering across multiple packets in a packet stream). Proxy
      firewalls usually act as a form of application-layer gateway. For these firewalls,
      each application-layer service must have its own proxy handler on the firewall,
      but this does allow handlers to make modifications even to the data portion of the
      transiting traffic. Protocols such as SOCKS support proxy firewalls in a standard-
      ized way.
           Network Address Translation (NAT) is a mechanism whereby a relatively
      large number of end hosts can share one or more globally routable IP address(es).
      NAT is used extensively for this purpose but can also be used in conjunction with
      firewall rules to form a NAT/firewall combination. In this popular configuration,
      computers “behind” the NAT are allowed to send traffic out to the global Internet,
      but only traffic returning in response to the outgoing traffic is ordinarily admit-
      ted back. This presents a small problem for implementing services behind a NAT
      that is handled by port forwarding, which allows the NAT to pass on incoming
      traffic for a service to end hosts inside the NAT. NAT is also being proposed for
      helping the transition from IPv4 to IPv6 by translating addresses between the two
      realms. In addition, NAT is being considered for use within ISPs to further allay
      IPv4 address depletion concerns. If this happens on a large scale, it may become
                                                             Section 7.9 References    347

      (even more) difficult for ordinary users to offer Internet services from their home
      networks.
            Some applications use a set of heuristics in order to determine what addresses
      are used on the outside of the NATs they are behind. Many of these operate uni-
      laterally, without direct help from the NAT. Such applications are said to use
      UNSAF (pronounced “unsafe”) methods and may not be completely reliable. A
      set of documents (developed by the IETF BEHAVE working group) specifies the
      proper behavior of NATs for different protocols, but not all NATs implement these
      specifications. Consequently, NAT traversal techniques may need to be employed
      to ensure that connectivity can take place.
            NAT traversal involves determining a set of addresses and port numbers that
      can be used to support communications even when one or more NATs must be
      used. STUN is the primary workhorse protocol for determining addresses. TURN
      is a particular STUN usage that relays traffic through a specially configured
      TURN server, usually located in the Internet. Deciding which addresses or relays
      to use can be accomplished using a complete NAT traversal protocol such as ICE.
      ICE determines all possible addresses that can be used between a pair of com-
      municating endpoints using local information, plus addresses determined using
      STUN and TURN. It then selects the “best” addresses for subsequent communi-
      cation. Mechanisms such as ICE have received the most attention for supporting
      VoIP services that use the SIP protocol for signaling.
            Firewalls and NATs may require configuration. The basic settings are ade-
      quate for many home users, but firewalls may require modifications to allow
      certain services to work. In addition, if a user behind a NAT wishes to offer an
      Internet service, port forwarding will likely have to be configured on the NAT
      device. Some applications support configuration by performing direct communi-
      cation with a NAT using protocols such as UPnP and NAT-PMP. When supported
      and enabled, these allow a NAT to have its port forwarding and binding data
      accessed and modified by the application automatically, without user interven-
      tion. For a home user to run a Web server behind a dynamically provisioned NAT
      (i.e., one with an Internet-facing IP address that changes), additional services such
      as dynamic DNS (see Chapter 11) may also be important.

7.9   References
      [ANM09] S. Alcock, R. Nelson, and D. Miles, “Investigating the Impact of Service
      Provider NAT on Residential Broadband Users,” University of Waikato, unpub-
      lished technical report, 2009.
      [DLNA] http://www.dlna.org
      [HBA09] D. Hayes, J. But, and G. Armitage, “Issues with Network Address Trans-
      lation for SCTP,” Computer Communications Review, Jan. 2009.

      [IDPCP] D. Wing, ed., S. Cheshire, M. Boucadair, R. Penno, and P. Selkirk, “Port
      Control Protocol (PCP),” Internet draft-ietf-pcp-base, work in progress, July 2011.
      [IDSNAT] R. Stewart, M. Tuexen, and I. Ruengeler, “Stream Control Transmission
      Protocol (SCTP) Network Address Translation,” Internet draft-ietf-behave-
      sctpnat, work in progress, June 2011.
      [IDTI] J. Rosenberg, A. Keranen, B. Lowekamp, and A. Roach, “TCP Candidates
      with Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE),” Internet draft-ietf-mmusic-
      ice-tcp, work in progress, Sep. 2011.
      [IGD] UPnP Forum, “Internet Gateway Devices (IGD) Standardized Device
      Control Protocol V 1.0,” Nov. 2001.
      [IGD2] UPnP Forum, “IDG:2 Improvements over IGD:1,” Mar. 2009.
      [ISP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/stun-parameters
      [MBCB08] O. Maennel, R. Bush, L. Cittadini, and S. Bellovin, “A Better Approach
      to Carrier-Grade-NAT,” Columbia University Technical Report CUCS-041-08,
      Sept. 2008.
      [NFWEB] http://netfilter.org
      [PJSUA] http://www.pjsip.org/pjsua.htm
      [RFC0959] J. Postel and J. Reynolds, “File Transfer Protocol,” Internet RFC 0959/
      STD 0009, Oct. 1985.
      [RFC1918] Y. Rekhter, B. Moskowitz, D. Karrenberg, G. J. de Groot, and E. Lear,
      “Address Allocation for Private Internets,” Internet RFC 1918BCP 0005, Feb. 1996.
      [RFC1928] M. Leech, M. Ganis, Y. Lee, R. Kuris, D. Koblas, and L. Jones, “SOCKS
      Protocol Version 5,” Internet RFC 1928, Mar. 1996.
      [RFC2616] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, and
      T. Berners-Lee, “Hypertext Transfer Protocol—HTTP/1.1,” Internet RFC 2616,
      June 1999.
      [RFC2637] K. Hamzeh, G. Pall, W. Verthein, J. Taarud, W. Little, and G. Zorn,
      “Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP),” Internet RFC 2637 (informational),
      July 1999.
      [RFC2766] G. Tsirtsis and P. Srisuresh, “Network Address Translation—Protocol
      Translation (NAT-PT),” Internet RFC 2766 (obsoleted by [RFC4966]), Feb. 2000.
      [RFC3022] P. Srisuresh and K. Egevang, “Traditional IP Network Address Trans-
      lator (Traditional NAT),” Internet RFC 3022 (informational), Jan. 2001.
                                                     Section 7.9 References      349

[RFC3027] M. Holdrege and P. Srisuresh, “Protocol Complications with the IP
Network Address Translator,” Internet RFC 3027 (informational), Jan. 2001.
[RFC3235] D. Senie, “Network Address Translator (NAT)-Friendly Application
Design Guidelines,” Internet RFC 3235 (informational), Jan. 2002.
[RFC3264] J. Rosenberg and H. Schulzrinne, “An Offer/Answer Model with
Session Description Protocol (SDP),” Internet RFC 3264, June 2002.
[RFC3424] L. Daigle, ed., and IAB, “IAB Considerations for UNilateral Self-
Address Fixing (UNSAF) across Network Address Translation,” Internet RFC
3424 (informational), Nov. 2002.
[RFC3550] H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, and V. Jacobson, “RTP: A
Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications,” Internet RFC 3550/STD 0064,
July 2003.
[RFC3711] M. Baugher, D. McGrew, M. Naslund, E. Carrara, and K. Norrman,
“The Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol (SRTP),” Internet RFC 3711, Mar. 2004.
[RFC4193] R. Hinden and B. Haberman, “Unique Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses,”
Internet RFC 4193, Oct. 2005.
[RFC4213] E. Nordmark and R. Gilligan, “Basic Transition Mechanisms for IPv6
Hosts and Routers,” Internet RFC 4213, Oct. 2005.
[RFC4340] E. Kohler, M. Handley, and S. Floyd, “Datagram Congestion Control
Protocol (DCCP),” Internet RFC 4340, Mar. 2006.
[RFC4605] B. Fenner, H. He, B. Haberman, and H. Sandick, “Internet Group Man-
agement Protocol (IGMP)/Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD)-Based Multicast
Forwarding (IGMP/MLD Proxying),” Internet RFC 4605, Aug. 2006.
[RFC4787] F. Audet, ed., and C. Jennings, “Network Address Translation (NAT)
Behavioral Requirements for Unicast UDP,” Internet RFC 4787/BCP 0127, Jan.
2007.
[RFC4864] G. Van de Velde, T. Hain, R. Droms, B. Carpenter, and E. Klein, “Local
Network Protection for IPv6,” Internet RFC 4864 (informational), May 2007.
[RFC4960] R. Stewart, ed., “Stream Control Transmission Protocol,” Internet RFC
4960, Sept. 2007.
[RFC4966] C. Aoun and E. Davies, “Reasons to Move the Network Address
Translator-Protocol Translator (NAT-PT) to Historic Status,” Internet RFC 4966
(informational), July 2007.
[RFC5128] P. Srisuresh, B. Ford, and D. Kegel, “State of Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Com-
munication across Network Address Translators (NATs),” Internet RFC 5128
(informational), Mar. 2008.

      [RFC5135] D. Wing and T. Eckert, “IP Multicast Requirements for a Network
      Address Translator (NAT) and a Network Address Port Translator (NAPT),”
      Internet RFC 5135/BCP 0135, Feb. 2008.
      [RFC5245] J. Rosenberg, “Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE): A
      Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT) Traversal for Offer/Answer
      Protocols,” Internet RFC 5245, Apr. 2010.
      [RFC5382] S. Guha, ed., K. Biswas, B. Ford, S. Sivakumar, and P. Srisuresh, “NAT
      Behavioral Requirements for TCP,” Internet RFC 5382/BCP 0142, Oct. 2008.
      [RFC5389] J. Rosenberg, R. Mahy, P. Matthews, and D. Wing, “Session Traversal
      Utilities for NAT (STUN),” Internet RFC 5389, Oct. 2008.
      [RFC5411] J. Rosenberg, “A Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Session Initiation Protocol
      (SIP),” Internet RFC 5411 (informational), Feb. 2009.
      [RFC5508] P. Srisuresh, B. Ford, S. Sivakumar, and S. Guha, “NAT Behavioral
      Requirements for ICMP,” Internet RFC 5508/BCP 0148, Apr. 2009.
      [RFC5571] B. Storer, C. Pignataro, ed., M. Dos Santos, B. Stevant, ed., L. Toutain,
      and J. Tremblay, “Softwire Hub and Spoke Deployment Framework with Layer
      Two Tunneling Protocol Version 2 (L2TPv2),” Internet RFC 5571, June 2009.
      [RFC5596] G. Fairhurst, “Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) Simul-
      taneous-Open Technique to Facilitate NAT/Middlebox Traversal,” Internet RFC
      5596, Sept. 2009.
      [RFC5597] R. Denis-Courmont, “Network Address Translation (NAT) Behavioral
      Requirements for the Datagram Congestion Control Protocol,” Internet RFC
      5597/BCP 0150, Sept. 2009.
      [RFC5626] C. Jennings, R. Mahy, and F. Audet, eds., “Managing Client-Initiated
      Connections in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP),” Internet RFC 5626, Oct.
      2009.
      [RFC5761] C. Perkins and M. Westerlund, “Multiplexing RTP Data and Control
      Packets on a Single Port,” Internet RFC 5761, Apr. 2010.
      [RFC5766] R. Mahy, P. Matthews, and J. Rosenberg, “Traversal Using Relays
      around NAT (TURN): Relay Extensions to Session Traversal Utilities for NAT
      (STUN),” Internet RFC 5766, Apr. 2010.
      [RFC5780] D. MacDonald and B. Lowekamp, “NAT Behavior Discovery Using
      Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN),” Internet RFC 5780 (experimental),
      May 2010.
      [RFC5902] D. Thaler, L. Zhang, and G. Lebovitz, “IAB Thoughts on IPv6 Network
      Address Translation,” Internet RFC 5902 (informational), July 2010.
                                                     Section 7.9 References     351

[RFC5928] M. Petit-Huguenin, “Traversal Using Relays around NAT (TURN)
Resolution Mechanism,” Internet RFC 5928, Aug. 2010.
[RFC6052] C. Bao, C. Huitema, M. Bagnulo, M. Boucadair, and X. Li, “IPv6
Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators,” Internet RFC 6052, Oct. 2010.
[RFC6062] S. Perreault, ed., and J. Rosenberg, “Traversal Using Relays around
NAT (TURN) Extensions for TCP Allocations,” Internet RFC 6062, Nov. 2010.
[RFC6120] P. Saint-Andre, “Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP):
Core,” Internet RFC 6120, Mar. 2011.
[RFC6144] F. Baker, X. Li, C. Bao, and K. Yin, “Framework for IPv4/IPv6 Transla-
tion,” Internet RFC 6144 (informational), Apr. 2011.
[RFC6145] X. Li, C. Bao, and F. Baker, “IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm,” Internet
RFC 6145, Apr. 2011.
[RFC6146] M. Bagnulo, P. Matthews, and I. van Beijnum, “Stateful NAT64:
Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4 Servers,”
Internet RFC 6146, Apr. 2011.
[RFC6156] G. Camarillo, O. Novo, and S. Perreault, ed., “Traversal Using Relays
around NAT (TURN) Extension for IPv6,” Internet RFC 6156, Apr. 2011.
[RFC6296] M. Wasserman and F. Baker, “IPv6-to-IPv6 Network Prefix Transla-
tion,” Internet RFC 6296 (experimental), June 2011.
[RFC6333] A. Durand, R. Droms, J. Woodyatt, and Y. Lee, “Dual-Stack Lite Broad-
band Deployments Following IPv4 Exhaustion,” Internet RFC 6333, Aug. 2011.
[RFC6334] D. Hankins and T. Mrugalski, “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
for IPv6 (DHCPv6) Option for Dual-Stack Lite,” Internet RFC 6334, Aug. 2011.
[UPNP] http://www.upnp.org
[UPNPC] http://miniupnp.free.fr
[XEP-0176] J. Beda, S. Ludwig, P. Saint-Andre, J. Hildebrand, S. Egan, and R.
McQueen, “XEP-0176: Jingle ICE-UDP Transport Method,” XMPP Standards
Foundation, June 2009, http://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0176.html
[XIDAD] P. Gauthier, J. Cohen, M. Dunsmuir, and C. Perkins, “Web Proxy
Auto-Discovery Protocol,” Internet draft-ietf-wrec-wpad-01, work in progress
(expired), June 1999.
[XIDMU] Y. Goland, “Multicast and Unicast UDP HTTP Messages,” Internet
draft-goland-http-udp-01.txt, work in progress (expired), Nov. 1999.
[XIDPMP] S. Cheshire, M. Krochmal, and K. Sekar, “NAT Port Mapping Protocol
(NAT-PMP),” Internet draft-cheshire-nat-pmp-03.txt, work in progress (expired),
Apr. 2008.

      [XIDS] Y. Goland, T. Cai, P. Leach, Y. Gu, and S. Albright, “Simple Service Discov-
      ery Protocol/1.0 Operating without an Arbiter,” Internet draft-cai-ssdp-v1-03.txt,
      work in progress (expired), Oct. 1999.
