       11

       Name Resolution and the
       Domain Name System (DNS)

11.1   Introduction
       The protocols we have studied so far operate using IP addresses to identify the
       hosts that participate in a distributed application. These addresses (especially IPv6
       addresses) are cumbersome for humans to use and remember, so the Internet sup-
       ports the use of host names to identify hosts, both clients and servers. In order to be
       used by protocols such as TCP and IP, host names are converted into IP addresses
       using a process known as name resolution. There are different forms of name reso-
       lution in the Internet, but the most prevalent and important one uses a distributed
       database system known as the Domain Name System (DNS) [MD88]. DNS runs as
       an application on the Internet, using IPv4 or IPv6 (or both). For scalability, DNS
       names are hierarchical, as are the servers that support name resolution.
            DNS is a distributed client/server networked database that is used by TCP/IP
       applications to map between host names and IP addresses (and vice versa), to pro-
       vide electronic mail routing information, service naming, and other capabilities.
       We use the term distributed because no single site on the Internet knows all of the
       information. Each site (university department, campus, company, or department
       within a company, for example) maintains its own database of information and
       runs a server program that other systems across the Internet (clients) can query.
       The DNS provides the protocol that allows clients and servers to communicate
       with each other and also a protocol for allowing servers to exchange information.
            From an application’s point of view, access to the DNS is through an applica-
       tion library called a resolver. In general, an application must convert a host name
       to an IPv4 and/or IPv6 address before it can ask TCP to open a connection or send
       a unicast datagram using UDP. The TCP and IP protocol implementations know
       nothing about the DNS; they operate only with the addresses.

          In this chapter we will take a look at how the names in DNS are set up, how
      resolvers and servers communicate using the Internet protocols (mainly UDP), and
      some of the other resolution mechanisms that are used in Internet environments.
      We do not cover all of the administrative details of running a name server or all of
      the options available with resolvers and servers. Such information is available from
      various other sources, including Albitz and Liu’s DNS and BIND text [AL06] and in
      [RFC6168]. We discuss the details of DNS security (DNSSEC) in Chapter 18.

11.2 The DNS Name Space
      The set of all names used with DNS constitutes the DNS name space. This space is
      partitioned hierarchically and is case insensitive, similar to computer file system
      folders (directories) and files. The current DNS name space is a tree of domains
      with an unnamed root at the top. The top echelons of the tree are the so-called
      top-level domains (TLDs), which include generic TLDs (gTLDs), country-code TLDs
      (ccTLDs), and internationalized country-code TLDs (IDN ccTLDs), plus a special
      infrastructure TLD called, for historical reasons, ARPA [RFC3172]. These form the
      top levels of a naming tree with the form shown in Figure 11-1.
           There are five commonly used groups of TLDs, and one group of specialized
      domains being used for internationalized domain names (IDNs).1 The history of IDNs,
      one piece of the “internationalization” or “i18n” of the Internet, is long and some-
      what complicated. Across the world, there are multiple languages, and each uses
      one or more written scripts. While the Unicode standard [U11] aims to capture
      the entire set of characters, many characters look the same but have different Uni-
      code values. Furthermore, characters written as text may flow from right to left, left
      to right, or (when combining certain texts with others) in both directions. Couple
      these (and other) somewhat technical concerns with concerns regarding equity
      and international law and politics, and a considerable hurdle results. The interested
      reader may wish to consult the IAB’s review of IDNs [RFC4690], published in 2006,
      for more information. Current information is available from [IIDN].
           The gTLDs are grouped into categories: generic, generic-restricted, and sponsored.
      The generic gTLDs (generic appears twice) are open for unrestricted use. The others
      (generic-restricted and sponsored) are limited to various sorts of uses or are con-
      strained as to what entity may assign names from the domain. For example, EDU is
      used for educational institutions, MIL and GOV are used for military and govern-
      ment institutions of the United States, and INT is used for international organiza-
      tions (such as NATO). Table 11-1 provides a summary of the 22 gTLDs from [GTLD]
      as of mid-2011. There is a “new gTLD” program in the works that may significantly
      expand the current set, possibly to several hundred or even thousand. This pro-
      gram and policies relating to TLD management in general are maintained by the
      Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) [ICANN].

      1. Figure 11-1 also shows 11 test IDN domains, which are still available.
                                                                                                  18//
                                           ,QIUDVWUXFWXUH?                                        5RRW
                                               J7/'
                                                                 $53$

                                                                                                                                     $&         $'        $(         ?????        =:

                                                                                                                                                                      FF7/'V? ,62???????

           $(52      $6,$     &$7         &223         ('8          *29              ,17                             &20        25*         1(7        ,1)2

                                                                                                                                                     *HQHULF?J7/'V
           -2%6      0,/      02%,        086(80        7(/         75$9(/           ;;;

                                                                                                               %,=     1$0(        352

                                                                    6SRQVRUHG?J7/'V

                                                                                                                     *HQHULF?5HVWULFWHG?J7/'V

                      㿚幤       पर    ा     ɢɫɩɵɬɚɧɢɟ    ?묁걙뱭            ʨʱʲʨ

                                                                                                          ₼⦌         ?₼⦚        έ?        ?????         .இல   ைக

                      䂻峵       ̵ε̵΍ϡ ί΁    ப    ைச
                                                        įȠțȚȝȒ          έ΍ΏΕΥ·       ኣኖእ
                                                                                                                                                       ,'1?FF7/'V

                                                                               ,'1?7HVW?'RPDLQV

Figure 11-1   The DNS name space forms a hierarchy with an unnamed root at the top. The top-level domains (TLDs) include generic TLDs (gTLDs), country-
                    code TLDs (ccTLDs), internationalized TLDs (IDN ccTLDs), and a special infrastructure TLD called ARPA.

Table 11-1 The generic top-level domains (gTLDs), circa 2011

TLD            First Use (est.)       Use                                   Example
AERO           December 21, 2001      Air-transport industry                www.sita.aero
ARPA           January 1, 1985        Infrastructure                        18.in-addr.arpa
ASIA           May 2, 2007            Pan-Asia and Asia Pacific             www.seo.asia
BIZ            June 26, 2001          Business uses                         neustar.biz
CAT            December 19, 2005      Catalan linguistic/cultural           www.domini.cat
                                      community
COM            January 1, 1985        Generic                               icanhascheezburger.com
COOP           December 15, 2001      Cooperative associations              www.ems.coop
EDU            January 1, 1985        Post-secondary educational            hpu.edu
                                      institutions recognized by U.S.A.
GOV            January 1, 1985        U.S. government                       whitehouse.gov
INFO           June 25, 2001          Generic                               germany.info
INT            November 3, 1988       International treaty organizations    nato.int
JOBS           September 8, 2005      Human resource managers               intel.jobs
MIL            January 1, 1985        U.S. military                         dtic.mil
MOBI           October 30, 2005       Customers/providers of mobile         flowers.mobi
                                      products/services
MUSEUM         October 30, 2001       Museums                               icom.museum
NAME           August 16, 2001        Individuals                           www.name
NET            January 1, 1985        Generic                               ja.net
ORG            December 9, 2002       Generic                               slashdot.org
PRO            May 6, 2002            Credentialed professionals/entities   nic.pro
TEL            March 1, 2007          Contact data for businesses/          telnic.tel
                                      individuals
TRAVEL         July 27, 2005          Travel industry                       cancun.travel
XXX            April 15, 2011         Adult entertainment industry          whois.nic.xxx

              The ccTLDs include the two-letter country codes specified by the ISO 3166
         standard [ISO3166], plus five that are not: uk, su, ac, eu, and tp (the last one is
         being phased out). Because some of these two-letter codes are suggestive of other
         uses and meanings, various countries have been able to find commercial wind-
         falls from selling names within their ccTLDs. For example, the domain name cnn.
         tv is really a registration in the Pacific island of Tuvalu, which has been selling
         domain names associated with the television entertainment industry. Creating a
         name in such an unconventional way is sometimes called a domain hack.

11.2.1 DNS Naming Syntax
         The names below a TLD in the DNS name tree are further partitioned into groups
         known as subdomains. This is very common practice, especially for the ccTLDs. For
                                           Section 11.2 The DNS Name Space      515

example, most educational sites in England use the suffix .ac.uk, whereas names
for most for-profit companies there end in the suffix .co.uk. In the United States,
city government Web sites tend to use the subdomain ci.city.state.us where state
is the two-letter abbreviation for the name of the state and city is the name of the
city. For example, the site www.ci.manhattan-beach.ca.us is the site of Man-
hattan Beach, California’s, city government in the United States.
     The example names we have seen so far are known as fully qualified domain
names (FQDNs). They are sometimes written more formally with a trailing period
(e.g., mit.edu.). This trailing period indicates that the name is complete; no
additional information should be added to the name when performing a name
resolution. In contrast to the FQDN, an unqualified domain name, which is used
in combination with a default domain or domain search list set during system
configuration, has one or more strings appended to the end. When a system is
configured (see Chapter 6), it is typically assigned a default domain extension and
search list using DHCP (or, less commonly, the RDNSS and DNSSL RA options).
For example, the default domain cs.berkeley.edu might be configured in sys-
tems at the computer science department at UC Berkeley. If a user on one of these
machines types in the name vangogh, the local resolver software converts this
name to the FQDN vangogh.cs.berkeley.edu. before invoking a resolver to
determine vangogh’s IP address.
     A domain name consists of a sequence of labels separated by periods. The
name represents a location in the name hierarchy, where the period is the hierar-
chy delimiter and descending down the tree takes place from right to left in the
name. For example, the FQDN

www.net.in.tum.de.

contains a host name label (www) in a four-level-deep domain (net.in.tum.de).
Starting from the root, and working from right to left in the name, the TLD is de
(the ccTLD for Germany), tum is shorthand for Technische Universität München,
in is shorthand for informatik (German for “computer science”), and finally net is
shorthand for the networks group within the computer science department. Labels
are case-insensitive for matching purposes, so the name ACME.COM is equivalent
to acme.com or AcMe.cOm [RFC4343]. Each label can be up to 63 characters long,
and an entire FQDN is limited to at most 255 (1-byte) characters. For example, this
domain name:

thelongestdomainnameintheworldandthensomeandthensomemoreandmore.com

was allegedly submitted as a potential world record for the longest name, with
a label of length 63, but was judged to have been of insufficient merit to justify a
place in the Guinness World Records.
     The hierarchical structure of the DNS name space allows different administra-
tive authorities to manage different parts of the name space. For example, creating

      a new DNS name of the form elevator.cs.berkeley.edu would likely require
      dealing with the owner of the cs.berkeley.edu subdomain only. The berkeley
      .edu and edu portions of the name space would not require alteration, so the
      owners of those would not need to be bothered. This feature of DNS is one key
      aspect of its scalability. That is, no single entity is required to administer all the
      changes for the entire DNS name space. Indeed, creating a hierarchical structure
      for names was one of the first responses in the Internet community to the pres-
      sures of scaling and a major motivator for the structure used today. The origi-
      nal Internet naming scheme was flat (i.e., no hierarchy), and a single entity was
      responsible for assigning, maintaining, and distributing the list of nonconflicting
      names. Over time, as more names were required and more changes were being
      made, this approach became unworkable [MD88].

11.3 Name Servers and Zones
      Management responsibility for portions of the DNS name space is assigned to
      individuals or organizations. A person given responsibility for managing part of
      the active DNS name space (one or more domains) is supposed to arrange for at
      least two name servers or DNS servers to hold information about the name space
      so that users of the Internet can perform queries on the names. The collection of
      servers forms the DNS (service) itself, a distributed system whose primary job is
      to provide name-to-address mappings. However, it can also provide a wide array
      of additional information.
           The unit of administrative delegation, in the language of DNS servers, is
      called a zone. A zone is a subtree of the DNS name space that can be administered
      separately from other zones. Every domain name exists within some zone, even
      the TLDs that exist in the root zone. Whenever a new record is added to a zone, the
      DNS administrator for the zone allocates a name and additional information (usu-
      ally an IP address) for the new entry and enters these into the name server’s data-
      base. At a small campus, for example, one person could do this each time a new
      server is added to the network, but in a large enterprise the responsibility would
      have to be delegated (probably by departments or other organizational units), as
      one person likely could not keep up with the work.
           A DNS server can contain information for more than one zone. At any hierar-
      chical change point in a domain name (i.e., wherever a period appears), a different
      zone and containing server may be accessed to provide information for the name.
      This is called a delegation. A common delegation approach uses a zone for imple-
      menting a second-level domain name, such as berkeley.edu. In this domain,
      there may be individual hosts (e.g., www.berkeley.edu) or other domains (e.g.,
      cs.berkeley.edu). Each zone has a designated owner or responsible party who
      is given authority to manage the names, addresses, and subordinate zones within
      the zone. Often this person manages not only the contents of the zone but also the
      name servers that contain the zone’s database(s).
                                                             Section 11.4 Caching      517

          Zone information is supposed to exist in at least two places, implying that
    there should be at least two servers containing information for each zone. This is
    for redundancy; if one server is not functioning properly, at least one other server
    is available. All of these servers contain identical information about a zone. Typi-
    cally, among the servers, a primary server contains the zone database in a disk
    file, and one or more secondary servers obtain copies of the database in its entirety
    from the primary using a process called a zone transfer. DNS has a special protocol
    for performing zone transfers, but copies of a zone’s contents can also be obtained
    using other means (e.g., the rsync utility [RSYNC]).

11.4 Caching
    Name servers contain information such as name-to-IP-address mappings that
    may be obtained from three sources. The name server obtains the information
    directly from the zone database, as the result of a zone transfer (e.g., for a slave
    server), or from another server in the course of processing a resolution. In the first
    case, the server is said to contain authoritative information about the zone and may
    be called an authoritative server for the zone. Such servers are identified by name
    within the zone information.
         Most name servers (except some of the root and TLD servers) also cache zone
    information they learn, up to a time limit called the time to live (TTL). They use this
    cached information to answer queries. Doing so can greatly decrease the amount
    of DNS message traffic that would otherwise be carried on the Internet [J02].
    When answering a query, a server indicates whether the information it is return-
    ing has been derived from its cache or from its authoritative copy of the zone.
    When cached information is returned, it is common for a server to also include the
    domain names of the name servers that can be contacted to retrieve authoritative
    information about the corresponding zone.
         As we shall see, each DNS record (e.g., name-to-IP-address mapping) has its
    own TTL that controls how long it can be cached. These values are set and altered
    by the zone administrator when necessary. The TTL dictates how long a mapping
    can be cached anywhere within DNS, so if a zone changes, there still may exist
    cached data within the network, potentially leading to incorrect DNS resolution
    behavior until expiry of the TTL. For this reason, some zone administrators, antic-
    ipating a change to the zone contents, first reduce the TTL before implementing
    the change. Doing so reduces the window for incorrect cached data to be present
    in the network.
         It is worth mentioning that caching is applied both for successful resolutions
    and for unsuccessful resolutions (called negative caching). If a request for a particu-
    lar domain name fails to return a record, this fact is also cached. Doing so can help
    to reduce Internet traffic when errant applications repeatedly make requests for
    names that do not exist. Negative caching was changed from optional to manda-
    tory by [RFC2308].

          In some network configurations (e.g., those using older UNIX-compatible sys-
      tems), the cache is maintained in a nearby name server, not in the resolvers resi-
      dent in the clients. Placing the cache in the server allows any hosts on the LAN
      that use the nearby server to benefit from the server’s cache but implies a small
      delay in accessing the cache over the local network. In Windows and more recent
      systems (e.g., Linux), the client can maintain a cache, and it is made available to all
      applications running on the same system. In Windows, this happens by default,
      and in Linux, it is a service that can be enabled or disabled.
          On Windows, the local system’s cache parameters may be modified by editing
      the following registry entry:

      HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\DNSCache\Parameters

           The DWORD value MaxNegativeCacheTtl gives the maximum number of
      seconds that a negative DNS result remains in the resolver cache. The DWORD
      value MaxCacheTtl gives the maximum number of seconds that a DNS record
      may remain in the resolver cache. If this value is less than the TTL of a received
      DNS record, the lesser value controls how long the record remains in cache. These
      two registry keys do not exist by default, so they must be created in order to be
      used.
           In Linux and other systems that support it, the Name Service Caching Daemon
      (NSCD) provides a client-side caching capability. It is controlled by the
      /etc/nscd.conf file that can indicate which types of resolutions (for DNS and
      some other services) are cached, along with some cache parameters such as TTL
      settings. In addition, the file /etc/nsswitch.conf controls how name resolu-
      tion for applications takes place. Among other things, it can control whether local
      files, the DNS protocol (see Section 11.5), and/or NSCD is employed for mappings.

11.5 The DNS Protocol
      The DNS protocol consists of two main parts: a query/response protocol used for
      performing queries against the DNS for particular names, and another protocol
      for name servers to exchange database records (zone transfers). It also has a way
      to notify secondary servers that the zone database has evolved and a zone transfer
      is necessary (DNS Notify), and a way to dynamically update the zone (dynamic
      updates). By far, the most typical usage is a simple query/response to look up the
      IPv4 address that corresponds to a domain name.
          Most often, DNS name resolution is the process of mapping a domain name
      to an IPv4 address, although IPv6 addresses mappings work in essentially the
      same way. DNS query/response operations are supported over the distributed
      DNS infrastructure consisting of servers deployed locally at each site or ISP, and a
      special set of root servers. There is also a special set of generic top-level domain servers

          used for scaling some of the larger gTLDs, including COM and NET. As of mid-
          2011, there are 13 root servers named by the letters A through M (see [ROOTS] for
          more information about them); 9 of them have IPv6 addresses. There are also 13
          gTLD servers, also labeled A through M; 2 of them have IPv6 addresses. By con-
          tacting a root server and possibly a gTLD server, the name server for any TLD in
          the Internet can be discovered. These servers are mutually coordinated to provide
          the same information. Some of them are not a single physical server but instead
          a group of servers (over 50 for the J root server) that use the same IP address (i.e.,
          using IP anycast addressing; see Chapter 2).
               A full resolution that is unable to benefit from preexisting cached entries takes
          place among several entities, as shown in Figure 11-2.

                             ,63?'16?6HUYHU
                         &DFKLQJ?)RUZDUGLQJ?6HUYHU ??
                                 5HFXUVLYH
                                                                                                      (;$03/(?&20
                                                                        5                              &RUUHVSRQGHQW?+RVW
                                                              3

                                                                            6
                                                              4

                                                        ,63???
  $?+20(                                                 ??????????????????,QWHUQHW???
                                                     1HWZRUN??
                                                                                   7
    5HVROYHU                                                                      8
                                              2                                                      $?,$1$?6(59(56?1(7
                                               9                                                        $XWKRULWDWLYH?'16?6HUYHU?IRU?
                         1
                    10                                                                                        H[DPSOH?FRP

               *:?+20(
          &DFKLQJ?)RUZDUGLQJ?6HUYHU ??
                  5HFXUVLYH                                                     J7/'?6HUYHUV
                                      5RRW?1DPH?6HUYHUV                          1RQ?UHFXUVLYH
                                              1RQ?UHFXUVLYH

Figure 11-2    A typical recursive DNS query for EXAMPLE.COM from A.HOME involves up to ten messages. The
               local recursive server (GW.HOME here) uses a DNS server provided by its ISP. That server, in turn,
               uses an Internet root name server and a gTLD server (for COM and NET TLDs) to find the name
               server for the EXAMPLE.COM domain. That name server (A.IANA-SERVERS.NET here) provides
               the required IP address for the host EXAMPLE.COM. All of the recursive servers cache any infor-
               mation learned for later use.

                Here, we have a laptop called A.HOME residing nearby the DNS server
          GW.HOME. The domain HOME is private, so it is not known to the Internet—only
          locally at the user’s residence. When a user on A.HOME wishes to connect to the
          host EXAMPLE.COM (e.g., because a Web browser has been instructed to access
          the page http://EXAMPLE.COM), A.HOME must determine the IP address for the
          server EXAMPLE.COM. Assuming it does not know this address already (it might
          if it has accessed the host recently), the resolver software on A.HOME first makes
          a request to its local name server, GW.HOME. This is a request to convert the name
          EXAMPLE.COM into an address and constitutes message 1 (labeled on an arrow in
          Figure 11-2).

          Note
          If the A.HOME system is configured with a default domain search list, there may
          be additional queries. For example, if .HOME is a default search domain used by
          A.HOME, the first DNS query may be for the name EXAMPLE.COM.HOME, which
          will fail at the GW.HOME name server, which is authoritative for .HOME. A subse-
          quent query will typically remove the default extension, resulting in a query for
          EXAMPLE.COM.

           If GW.HOME does not already know the IP address for EXAMPLE.COM or the
      name servers for either the EXAMPLE.COM domain or the COM TLD, it forwards the
      request to another DNS server (called recursion). In this case, a request (message
      2) goes to an ISP-provided DNS server. Assuming that this server also does not
      know the required address or other information, it contacts one of the root name
      servers (message 3). The root servers are not recursive, so they do not process
      the request further but instead return the information required to contact a name
      server for the COM TLD. For example, it might return the name A.GTLD-SERVERS
      .NET and one or more of its IP addresses (message 4). With this information, the
      ISP-provided server contacts the gTLD server (message 5) and discovers the name
      and IP addresses of the name servers for the domain EXAMPLE.COM (message 6).
      In this case, one of the servers is A.IANA-SERVERS.NET.
           Given the correct server for the domain, the ISP-provided server contacts the
      appropriate server (message 7), which responds with the requested IP address
      (message 8). At this point, the ISP-provided server can respond to GW.HOME with
      the required information (message 9). GW.HOME is now able to complete the initial
      query and responds to the client with the desired IPv4 and/or IPv6 address(es)
      (message 10).
           From the perspective of A.HOME, the local name server was able to per-
      form the request. However, what really happened is a recursive query, where the
      GW.HOME and ISP-provided servers in turn made additional DNS requests to sat-
      isfy A.HOME’s query. In general, most name servers perform recursive queries such
      as this. The notable exceptions are the root servers and other TLD servers that do
      not perform recursive queries. These servers are a relatively precious resource, so
      encumbering them with recursive queries for every machine that performs a DNS
      query would lead to poor global Internet performance.

11.5.1 DNS Message Format
      There is one basic DNS message format [RFC6195]. It is used for all DNS opera-
      tions (queries, responses, zone transfers, notifications, and dynamic updates), as
      illustrated in Figure 11-3.
           The basic DNS message begins with a fixed 12-byte header followed by four
      variable-length sections: questions (or queries), answers, authority records, and
      additional records. All but the first section contain one or more resource records

                                                              

                    7UDQVDFWLRQ?,'? ???ELWV                        )ODJV?
                                                                   45??4XHU\ ? ?5HVSRQVH ?
   4    2S&RGH       $ 7 5 5    $ &                 5&2'(          $$??$XWKRULWDWLYH?$QVZHU
                              =
   5     ??ELWV      $ & ' $    ' '                  ? ??ELWV      7&??7UXQFDWHG?$QVZHU
                    4'&2817?=2&2817                                5'??5HFXUVLRQ?'HVLUHG
                     4XHU\?&RXQW?=RQH?&RXQW                        5$??5HFXUVLRQ?$YDLODEOH
                    $1&2817?35&2817                                =??=HUR
                  $QVZHU?&RXQW?3UHUHTXLVLWH?&RXQW                  $'??$XWKHQWLF?'DWD?>5)&????@
                    16&2817?83&2817                                &'??&KHFNLQJ?'LVDEOHG?>5)&????@
              $XWKRULW\?5HFRUG?&RXQW?8SGDWH?&RXQW
                    $5&2817?$'&2817                                2S&RGHV? FRPPRQ?YDOXHV ?
                    $GGLWLRQDO?,QIRUPDWLRQ?&RXQW                   4XHU\? ? ?±?5HJXODU?4XHU\
                                                                   1RWLI\? ? ?±?'16?127,)<?>5)&????@
               6HFWLRQV??4XHVWLRQ??$QVZHU?                         8SGDWH? ? ?±?'16?83'$7(?>5)&????@
              $XWKRULW\??$GGLWLRQDO?,QIRUPDWLRQ
                                                                   5&2'(V? FRPPRQ?YDOXHV ?
          6HFWLRQV? 8VHG?ZLWK?'16?83'$7( ??                        1R(UURU? ? ?±?1R?(UURU
                  =RQH??3UHUHTXLVLWH??                             )RUP(UU? ? ?±?)RUPDW?(UURU
            8SGDWH??$GGLWLRQDO?,QIRUPDWLRQ                         6HUY)DLO? ? ?±?6HUYHU?)DLOXUH
                          YDULDEOH?OHQJWK
                                                                   1;'RPDLQ? ? ?±?1RQ?H[LVWHQW?'RPDLQ
                                                                   1RW,PS? ? ?±?1RW?,PSOHPHQWHG
                                                                   5HIXVHG? ? ?±?4XHU\?5HIXVHG

Figure 11-3    The DNS message format has a fixed 12-byte header. The entire message is usually
               carried in a UDP/IPv4 datagram and limited to 512 bytes. DNS UPDATE (DNS with
               dynamic updates) uses the field names ZOCOUNT, PRCOUNT, UPCOUNT, and
               ADCOUNT. A special extension format (called EDNS0) allows messages to be larger
               than 512 bytes, which is required for DNSSEC (see Chapter 18).

(RRs), which we discuss in detail in Section 11.5.6. (The question section contains
a data item that is very close in structure to an RR.) RRs can be cached; questions
are not.
     In the fixed-length header, the Transaction ID field is set by the client and
returned by the server. It lets the client match responses to requests. The second
16-bit word includes a number of flags and other subfields. Beginning from the
left-most bit, QR is a 1-bit field: 0 means the message is a query; 1 means it is a
response. The next is the OpCode, a 4-bit field. The normal value is 0 (a standard
query) for requests and responses. Other values are: 4 (notify), and 5 (update).
Other values (1–3) are deprecated or never seen in operational use. Next is the AA
bit field that indicates an “authoritative answer” (as opposed to a cached answer).
TC is a 1-bit field that means “truncated.” With UDP, this flag being set means that
the total size of the reply exceeded 512 bytes, and only the first 512 bytes of the
reply were returned.
     RD is a bit field that means “recursion desired.” It can be set in a query and
is then returned in the response. It tells the server to perform a recursive query.
If the bit is not set, and the requested name server does not have an authoritative
answer, the requested name server returns a list of other name servers to contact

         for the answer. At this point, the overall query may be continued by contacting
         the list of other name servers. This is called an iterative query. RA is a bit field that
         means “recursion available.” This bit is set in the response if the server supports
         recursion. Root servers generally do not support recursion, thereby forcing clients
         to perform iterative queries to complete name resolution. The Z bit field must be 0
         for now but is reserved for future use.
              The AD bit field is set to true if the contained information is authenticated,
         and the CD bit is set to true if security checking is disabled (see Chapter 18). The
         Response Code (or RCODE) field is a 4-bit field with the return code whose possible
         values are given in [DNSPARAM]. The common values include 0 (no error) and
         3 (name error or “nonexistent domain,” written as NXDOMAIN). A list of the
         first 11 error codes is given in Table 11-2 (values 11 through 15 are unassigned).
         Additional types are defined using a special extension (see Section 11.5.2). A
         name error is returned only from an authoritative name server and means that the
         domain name specified in the query does not exist.

Table 11-2   The first ten error types used with the RCODE field

Value        Name            Reference        Description and Purpose
0            NoError         [RFC1035]        No error
1            FormErr         [RFC1035]        Format error; query cannot be interpreted
2            ServFail        [RFC1035]        Server failure; error in processing at server
3            NXDomain        [RFC1035]        Nonexistent domain; unknown domain referenced
4            NotImp          [RFC1035]        Not implemented; request not supported in server
5            Refused         [RFC1035]        Refused; server unwilling to provide answer
6            YXDomain        [RFC2136]        Name exists but should not (used with updates)
7            YXRRSet         [RFC2136]        RRSet exists but should not (used with updates)
8            NXRRSet         [RFC2136]        RRSet does not exist but should (used with updates)
9            NotAuth         [RFC2136]        Server not authorized for zone (used with updates)
10           NotZone         [RFC2136]        Name not contained in zone (used with updates)

             The next four fields are 16 bits in size and specify the number of entries in the
         question, answer, authority, and additional information sections that complete the
         DNS message. For a query, the number of questions is normally 1 and the other
         three counts are 0. For a reply, the number of answers is at least 1. Questions have
         a name, type, and class. (Class supports non-Internet records, but we ignore this
         for our purposes. The type identifies the type of object being looked up.) All of
         the other sections contain zero or more RRs. RRs contain a name, type, and class
         information, but also the TTL value that controls how long the data can be cached.
         We shall discuss the most important RR types in detail once we have a look at how
         DNS encodes names and selects which transport protocol to use when carrying
         DNS messages.

11.5.1.1 Names and Labels
The variable-length sections at the end of a DNS message contain a collection of
questions, answers, authority information (names of name servers that contain
authoritative information for certain data), and additional information that may
be useful to reduce the number of necessary queries. Each question and each RR
begins with a name (called the domain name or owning name) to which it refers.
Each name consists of a sequence of labels. There are two categories of label types:
data labels and compression labels. Data labels contain characters that constitute a
label; compression labels act as pointers to other labels. Compression labels help to
save space in a DNS message when multiple copies of the same string of characters
are present across multiple labels.

11.5.1.2 Data Labels
Each data label begins with a 1-byte count that specifies the number of bytes that
immediately follow. The name is terminated with a byte containing the value 0,
which is a label with a length of 0 (the label of the root). For example, the encoding
of the name www.pearson.com would be as shown in Figure 11-4.

                     Z Z Z ? S H D                U   V   R Q    ? F     R P ?
                                          PD[????FKDUDFWHUV
                         /DEHO
                        /HQJWKV                                  /DEHO?/HQJWK??
                                                                  LQGLFDWHV?HQG

Figure 11-4   DNS names are encoded as a sequence of labels. This example encodes the name www.
              pearson.com, which (technically) has four labels. The end of the name is identified by
              a 0-length label of the nameless root.

     For data labels, each label Length byte must be in the range of 0 to 63, as labels
are limited to 63 bytes. No padding is used for labels, so the total name length
could be odd. Although these labels are sometimes called “text” labels, they are
capable of containing non-ASCII values. This use, however, is uncommon and
not recommended. Indeed, even the internationalized domain names, which can
encode Unicode characters [RFC5890][RFC5891], use a curious encoding syntax
called “punycode” [RFC3492] that expresses Unicode characters using the ASCII
character set. To be completely safe, it is recommended to follow the requirements
in [RFC1035], which suggest that labels “start with a letter, end with a letter or
digit, and have as interior characters only letters, digits and hyphen.”

11.5.1.3 Compression Labels
In many cases, a DNS response carries information in the answer, authority, and
additional information sections relating to the same domain name. If data labels
were used, the same characters would be repeated in the DNS message when refer-
ring to the same name. To avoid this redundancy and save space, a compression

      scheme is used. Anywhere the label portion of a domain name can occur, the
      single preceding count byte (which is normally between 0 and 63) instead has its
      2 high-order bits turned on, and the remaining bits are combined with the bits in
      the subsequent byte to form a 14-bit pointer (offset) in the DNS message. The offset
      gives the number of bytes from the beginning of the DNS message where a data
      label (called the compression target) is to be found that should be substituted for the
      compression label. Compression labels are thus able to point to a location up to
      16,383 bytes from the beginning. Figure 11-5 illustrates how we might encode the
      domain names usc.edu and ucla.edu using compression labels.

                         2IIVHW??
                                               &RPSUHVVLRQ?7DUJHW                 ???%LW?2IIVHW

                          X         V F   ? H G X ? ? X F             O   D ??? ? ?

                               /DEHO
                                                                  /DEHO?7\SH
                              /HQJWKV
                                                            ,QGLFDWHV?&RPSUHVVLRQ?/DEHO

Figure 11-5   A compression label can reference other labels to save space. This is accomplished by
                    setting the 2 high-order bits of the byte preceding the label contents. This signals that
                    the following 14 bits are used in providing an offset for the replacement label. In this
                    example, usc.edu and ucla.edu share the edu label.

           In Figure 11-5 we see how the common label edu can be shared by the two
      domain names. Assuming the names start at offset 0, data labels are used to
      encode usc.edu as described previously. The next name is ucla.edu, and the
      label ucla is encoded using a data label. However, the label edu may be reused
      from the encoding of usc.edu. This is accomplished by setting the 2 high-order
      bits of the label Type byte to 1 and encoding the offset of edu in the remaining 14
      bits. Because the first occurrence of edu is at offset 4, we only need to set the first
      byte to 192 (6 bits of 0) and the next byte to 4. The example in Figure 11-5 shows a
      savings of only 4 bytes, but it is clear how compression of larger common labels
      can result in more substantial savings.

11.5.2 The DNS Extension Format (EDNS0)
      The basic DNS message format described so far can be restrictive in a number of
      ways. It has fixed-length fields, a total length limitation of 512 bytes when used
      with UDP (not including UDP or IP headers), and limited space (the 4-bit RCODE
      field) for indicating error types. An extension mechanism called EDNS0 (because
      there could be future extensions beyond the index 0) is specified in [RFC2671].
      While its use is not ubiquitous at present, it is necessary for supporting DNS secu-
      rity (DNSSEC; see Chapter 18), so it is likely to receive more widespread deploy-
      ment over time.

          EDNS0 specifies a particular type of RR (called an OPT pseudo-RR or meta-RR)
      that is added to the additional data section of a request or response to indicate
      the use of EDNS0. At most one such record may be present in any DNS message.
      We will discuss the particular format of an OPT pseudo-RR when we discuss the
      other RR types in Section 11.5.6. For now, the important thing to note is that if a
      UDP DNS message includes an OPT RR, it is permitted to exceed the 512-byte
      length limitation and may contain an expanded set of error codes.
          EDNS0 also defines an extended label type (extending beyond the data labels
      and compression labels mentioned earlier). Extended labels have their first 2 bits
      in the label Type/Length byte set to 01, corresponding to values between 64 and
      127 (inclusive). An experimental binary labeling scheme (type 65) was used at one
      time but is now not recommended. The value 127 is reserved for future use, and
      values above 127 are unallocated.

11.5.3 UDP or TCP
      The well-known port number for DNS is 53, for both UDP and TCP. The most com-
      mon format uses the UDP/IPv4 datagram structure shown in Figure 11-6.

                                                      8'3?'DWDJUDP
                                                      '16?0HVVDJH? XS?WR?????E\WHV

                                           '16                                               $GGLWLRQDO
                                 +HDGHU

                      ,3Y??                        4XHVWLRQ        $QVZHU        $XWKRULW\
                                  8'3

                                           )L[HG                                               ,QIR
                     +HDGHU                        6HFWLRQ         6HFWLRQ       6HFWLRQ
                                          +HDGHU                                              6HFWLRQ

                        E\WHV?      ?        ??                      YDULDEOH?VL]HV
                    QR?RSWLRQV   E\WHV     E\WHV
                                                   ,3Y??'DWDJUDP

Figure 11-6    DNS messages are typically encapsulated in a UDP/IPv4 datagram and are limited to
                     512 bytes in size unless TCP and/or EDNS0 is used. Each section (except the question
                     section) contains a set of resource records.

           When a resolver issues a query and the response comes back with the TC bit
      field set (“truncated”), the size of the true response exceeded 512 bytes, so only
      the first 512 bytes are returned by the server. The resolver may issue the request
      again, using TCP, which now must be a supported configuration [RFC5966]. This
      allows more than 512 bytes to be returned because TCP breaks up large messages
      into multiple segments.
           When a secondary name server for a zone starts up, it normally performs
      a zone transfer from the primary name server for the zone. Zone transfers can
      also be initiated by a timer or as a result of a DNS NOTIFY message (see Sec-
      tion 11.5.8.3). Full zone transfers use TCP as they can be large. Incremental zone
      transfers, where only the updated entries are transferred, may use UDP at first but
      switch to TCP if the response is too large, just like a conventional query.

            When UDP is used, both the resolver and the server application software must
       perform their own timeout and retransmission. A recommendation for how to do
       this is given in [RFC1536]. It suggests starting with a timeout of at least 4s, and that
       subsequent timeouts result in an exponential increase of the timeout (a bit like
       TCP’s algorithms; see Chapter 14). Linux and UNIX-like systems allow a change to
       be made to the retransmission timeout parameters by altering the contents of the
       /etc/resolv.conf file (by setting the timeout and attempts options).

11.5.4 Question (Query) and Zone Section Format
       The question or query section of a DNS message lists the question(s) being refer-
       enced. The format of each question in the question section is shown in Figure 11-7.
       There is normally just one, although the protocol can support more. The same struc-
       ture is also used for the zone section in dynamic updates (see Section 11.5.7), but
       with different names.

                                                                                 

                                            4XHU\?1DPH? YDULDEOH
                                             =RQH?1$0(?IRU?'16?83'$7(

                                               4XHU\?7\SH? ???ELWV
                                               =RQH?7\SH?IRU?'16?83'$7(

                                              4XHU\?&ODVV? ???ELWV
                                               =RQH?&ODVV?IRU?'16?83'$7(

Figure 11-7   The query (or question) section of a DNS message does not contain a TTL because it is
                     not cached.

            The Query Name is the domain name being looked up, using the encoding for
       labels we described before. Each question has a Query Type and Query Class. The
       class value is 1, 254, or 255, indicating the Internet class, no class, or all classes,
       respectively, for all cases in which we are interested (other values are not typically
       used for TCP/IP networks). The Query Type field holds a value indicating the type
       of query being performed using the values from Table 11-2. The most common
       query type is A (or AAAA if IPv6 DNS resolution is enabled), which means that
       an IP address is desired for the query name. It is also possible to create a query
       of type ANY, which returns all RRs of any type in the same class that match the
       query name.

11.5.5 Answer, Authority, and Additional Information Section Formats
       The final three sections in the DNS message, the answer, authority, and additional
       information sections, contain sets of RRs. RRs in these sections can, for the most
       part, have wildcard domain names as owning names. These are domain names
       in which the asterisk label—a data label containing only the asterisk character

      [RFC4592]—appears first (i.e., leftmost). Each resource record has the form shown
      in Figure 11-8.

                                                                                

                                              1DPH? YDULDEOH

                                                7\SH? ???ELWV

                                                &ODVV? ???ELWV

                                                 77/? ???ELWV

                                             5'/(1*7+? ???ELWV

                                              5'$7$? YDULDEOH

Figure 11-8   The format of a DNS resource record. For DNS in the Internet, the Class field always
                    contains the value 1. The TTL field gives the maximum amount of time the RR can be
                    cached (in seconds).

           The Name field (sometimes called the “owning name,” “owner,” or “record
      owner’s name”) is the domain name to which the following resource data cor-
      responds. It is in the same format we described earlier for names and labels. The
      Type field specifies one of the RR type codes (see Section 11.5.6). These are the
      same as the query type values we described earlier. The Class field is 1 for Internet
      data. The TTL field is the number of seconds for which the RR can be cached. The
      Resource Data Length (RDLENGTH) field specifies the number of bytes contained
      in the Resource Data (RDATA) field. The format of this data depends on the type.
      For example, A records (type 1) have a 32-bit IPv4 address in the RDATA area. We
      discuss other RR types later.
           [RFC2181] defines the term Resource Record Set (RRSet) to be a set of resource
      records that share the same name, class, and type but not the same data. This
      occurs, for example, when a host has more than one address record for its name
      (e.g., because it has more than one IP address). TTLs for RRs in the same RRSet
      must be equal.

11.5.6 Resource Record Types
      Although DNS is most commonly used to determine the IP address(es) that cor-
      respond to a particular name, it can also be used for the opposite purpose and for
      a number of other things. It can be used with both IPv4 and IPv6 and can even
      provide a distributed database function for other than Internet data (other classes,

         in DNS terminology [RFC6195]). The wide range of capabilities provided by DNS
         is largely attributable to its ability to have different types of resource records.
              There are many types of resource records (see [DNSPARAMS] for the com-
         plete list), and a single name may have multiple matching RRs. Table 11-3 provides
         a listing of the most common RR types used with conventional DNS (i.e., DNS
         without the DNSSEC security extensions).

Table 11-3 The popular resource record and query types used in DNS protocol messages. Additional records
           (not shown) are used when DNS security (DNSSEC) is employed.

Value     RR Type      Reference      Description and Purpose
1         A            [RFC1035]      Address record for IPv4 (32-bit IPv4 address)
2         NS           [RFC1035]      Name server; provides name of authoritative name server
                                      for zone
5         CNAME        [RFC1035]      Canonical name; maps one name to another (to provide a
                                      form of name aliasing)
6         SOA          [RFC1035]      Start of authority; provides authoritative information for the
                                      zone (name servers, e-mail address of contact, serial number,
                                      zone transfer timers)
12        PTR          [RFC1035]      Pointer; provides address to (canonical) name mapping;
                                      used with in-addr.arpa and ip6.arpa domains for IPv4
                                      and IPv6 reverse queries
15        MX           [RFC1035]      Mail exchanger; provides name of e-mail handling host for
                                      a domain
16        TXT          [RFC1035]      Text; provides a variety of information (e.g., used with SPF
                       [RFC1464]      anti-spam scheme to identify authorized e-mail servers)
28        AAAA         [RFC3596]      Address record for IPv6 (128-bit IPv6 address)
33        SRV          [RFC2782]      Server selection; transport endpoints of a generic service
35        NAPTR        [RFC3403]      Name authority pointer; supports alternative name spaces
41        OPT          [RFC2671]      Pseudo-RR; supports larger datagrams, labels, return codes
                                      in EDNS0
251       IXFR         [RFC1995]      Incremental zone transfer
252       AXFR         [RFC1035]      Full zone transfer; carried over TCP
                       [RFC5936]
255       (ANY)        [RFC1035]      Request for all (any) records

             Resource records are used for many purposes but can be divided into three
         broad categories: data types, query types, and meta types. Data types are used
         to convey information stored in the DNS such as IP addresses and the names of
         authoritative name servers. Query types use the same values as data types, with
         a few additional values (e.g., AXFR, IXFR, and *). They can be used in the ques-
         tion section we described previously. Meta types designate transient data associ-
         ated with a particular single DNS message. The OPT RR is the only meta type we

discuss in this chapter (all others are covered in Chapter 18). The most common
data-type RRs include A, NS, SOA, MX, CNAME, PTR, TXT, AAAA, SRV, and
NAPTR. The NS records are used to relate the DNS name space to the servers that
perform resolution, and they contain the names of authoritative name servers for
a zone. The A and AAAA records are used to provide an IPv4 or IPv6 address,
respectively, given a particular name. The CNAME record provides a way to have
an alias for another domain name. SRV and NAPTR records help applications to
discover the location of servers supporting particular services, and to use alterna-
tive naming schemes (beyond DNS) to access such services. We shall explore each
of these record types in the following sections.

11.5.6.1 Address (A, AAAA) and Name Server (NS) Records
Arguably, the most important records within DNS are the address (A, AAAA) and
name server (NS) records. The A records contain 32-bit IPv4 addresses, and AAAA
(called “quad-A”) records contain IPv6 addresses. An NS record contains the name
of an authoritative DNS server that contains information for a particular zone.
Because the name of a DNS server alone is not sufficient to perform a query, the
IP address(es) of these servers is also typically provided as a so-called glue record
in the additional information section of DNS responses. Indeed, such glue records
are required to avoid loops whenever the names of the authoritative name servers
use the same domain name for which they are authoritative. (Consider how ns1.
example.com would be resolved if the name server for example.com was ns1.
example.com.) We can see the structure of A, AAAA, and NS records using the
dig tool provided on most Linux/UNIX-like systems. Here, we make a request for
records of any type associated with the domain name rfc-editor.org:

Linux% dig +nostats -t ANY rfc-editor.org

; <<>> DiG 9.6.0-P1 <<>> +nostats -t ANY rfc-editor.org
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 53052
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 12, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 2

;; QUESTION SECTION:
;rfc-editor.org.   IN ANY

;; ANSWER SECTION:
...
rfc-editor.org. 1654 IN AAAA 2001:1890:1112:1::2f
rfc-editor.org. 1654 IN A 64.170.98.47
rfc-editor.org. 1654 IN NS ns0.ietf.org.
rfc-editor.org. 1654 IN NS ns1.hkg1.afilias-nst.info.
...
;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
ns0.ietf.org.      756 IN    A     64.170.98.2
ns0.ietf.org.      756 IN    AAAA 2001:1890:1112:1::14

           In the command’s output, the first two lines indicate the version of the dig
      program being used and the options provided to it, plus implied options (+cmd
      means that this information itself should be printed). The next portion indicates
      data in the DNS reply message: the QUERY opcode, NOERROR status indicating no
      errors were encountered, and a transaction ID of 53052. In the OpCode field, QUERY
      is used for both queries and responses. Next, the flags line indicates that the mes-
      sage is a query response (qr flag) and not a query and that recursion was desired in
      the original query (rd flag) and is provided by the responding server (ra flag). The
      message contains a section with one query, and 12 resource records in the answer
      section (only 4 are shown). There are no RRs in the authority section, meaning that
      this response is likely from a caching server (the RRs are not authoritative). Differ-
      ent results might be obtained by interacting with different servers. The additional
      information section contains IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for one of the authoritative
      servers, should we wish to contact it. The question section contains a copy of our
      original query: type ANY for domain name rfc-editor.org.
           Among the four RRs in the answer section shown, we find one A type, one
      AAAA type, and two NS types. From this information we can see that the domain
      name rfc-editor.org is a host with IPv4 address 64.170.98.47 and IPv6
      address 2001:1890:1112:1::2f. It is also a subdomain, as indicated by the pres-
      ence of the NS records. We can quickly guess and verify that there is at least one
      host in this subdomain using the following command:

      Linux% host ftp.rfc-editor.org
      ftp.rfc-editor.org has address 64.170.98.47

          This example indicates a few interesting aspects of A, AAAA, and NS records.
      First, it is possible for a single domain name to have records of each of these types
      (and more). This is fairly common for IPv6-capable servers that are the “well-
      known” servers for a particular organization. We can also see that each record has
      a TTL value, and they differ considerably, except for those in the same RRSet. The
      TTL for the records in the answer section is 1654s (about half an hour), and the
      TTL for records in the additional information section is 756s (about 12 minutes).
      Note that the TTL value of a cached record is never more than the TTL of the same
      record retrieved from the authoritative source. TTLs for cached records “decay”
      until the record is retrieved again from an authoritative server. As a result, retriev-
      ing a cached record multiple times from the same server usually shows a decreas-
      ing TTL value.

      11.5.6.2 Example
      Now that we have seen the DNS message format, transport protocol options, and
      RR types for basic queries and responses, let us see an example. We start with a
      simple case to see the communication between a resolver on a client, a local name
      server, and a remote name server managed by an ISP. This scenario demonstrates
      the importance of caching in DNS. The topology is shown in Figure 11-9.

                                                                                    %(5.(/(<?('8
                                                                                     &RUUHVSRQGHQW?+RVW

                                        ,63
                                                ,QWHUQHW
                                      1HWZRUN
 $?+20(
                                                                               $'16??%(5.(/(<?('8
                                 2
                      1           3          ,63?'16?6HUYHU                        $XWKRULWDWLYH?'16?6HUYHU
                  4

              *:?+20(
          3ULYDWH?'16?6HUYHU

Figure 11-9   A simple DNS query/response example. The local DNS server (GW.HOME) provides recursion to
              the client (A.HOME), and uses the DNS server provided at the ISP when requested data is not pres-
              ent in the cache.

             On our Windows client (A.HOME) we begin with a command that removes
         any DNS data cached by the resolver libraries. We then perform a query for the
         address (A record type) of the domain name berkeley.edu:

         C:\> ipconfig /flushdns
         Windows IP Configuration

         Successfully flushed the DNS Resolver Cache.

         C:\> nslookup
         Default Server: gw
         Address: 10.0.0.1

         > set type=a
         > berkeley.edu.
         Server: gw
         Address: 10.0.0.1

         Non-authoritative answer:
         Name:    berkeley.edu
         Address: 169.229.131.81

             The first command is specific to Windows and removes data cached by the cli-
         ent’s resolver software. The nslookup program, available on both Windows and
         Linux/UNIX-based systems, provides a basic way to query the DNS for specific
         data. Upon execution, it indicates which name server it is using for resolution (here
         the server is gw at the address 10.0.0.1). Using the set command, we arrange to
         query for A records, and then query for the name berkeley.edu.. Once again,
         nslookup indicates which server it uses for the resolution. It then also gives us
         an indication that the answer is nonauthoritative (i.e., it is being provided by a
         caching server) and the requested address is 169.229.131.81.
             To see what happens with the DNS protocol at the packet level, we use Wire-
         shark and have a look at the first packet in detail, as shown in Figure 11-10.

Figure 11-10   A UDP/IPv4 datagram containing a DNS standard query for the IPv4 address associ-
                     ated with berkeley.edu..

           There are two messages in the trace: a standard query and a standard query
      response. In the first message (the query), the source IPv4 address is 10.0.0.120 (a
      DHCP-assigned address at the client; see Chapter 6), and the destination is 10.0.0.1
      (the DNS server). The query is a UDP/IPv4 datagram with source port 56288 (an
      ephemeral port) and destination port 53 (the well-known DNS port). In terms of its
      full encapsulation, the request is an Ethernet frame containing 72 bytes. This size
      can be derived by summing the following parts: Ethernet header (14 bytes), IPv4
      header (20 bytes), UDP header (8 bytes), DNS fixed header (12 bytes), query type (2
      bytes), query class (2 bytes), plus the data labels for berkeley (9 bytes) and edu
      (4 bytes), plus the trailing 0 byte.
           Turning to the details of the DNS header, the transaction ID is 0x0002 and
      forms the first 2 bytes of the DNS header, located at the start of the UDP payload.
      Only a single flag (recursion requested, the default) is set, so this message is a
      query. The message contains a standard query with one question. The other sec-
      tions are empty. The question itself is for the name berkeley.edu and is seeking
      information of type A (address records) in the IN (Internet) class. After receiv-
      ing this message, the name server process running on 10.0.0.1, unable to directly
      respond because it does not know the address, forwards the query to the next
      (upstream) name server it is configured to use. In this particular case, that name
      server is at the address 206.13.28.12 (see Figure 11-11).
           In Figure 11-11 we see a query similar to the one sent by the client, but in this
      case the source IPv4 address is 70.231.136.162 (the ISP-side IPv4 address of GW.HOME).
      The destination address is 206.13.28.12, the IPv4 address of the ISP-provided DNS
      server, and the source port is an ephemeral port on the local DNS server (60961).

Figure 11-11   A DNS request generated at GW.HOME being sent to the ISP name server as a conse-
               quence of recursion.

The transaction ID is generated anew and set to 0xb0b8. Note that Wireshark indi-
cates that the response to the query is contained in packet number 2.
     Packet 2 in Figure 11-12 is the first DNS response we have seen. First, we note
that the UDP source port number is 53, but the destination port is the ephemeral
port number 60961. The transaction ID matches the query (0xb0b8), but the Flags
field now contains the value 0x8180 (response, recursion requested, and recursion
available are all set). The question section contains a copy of the question for which
answers are being provided and typically matches the original query sent by the
client exactly (e.g., case is preserved). There is one RR in the answer section. It is of
type A (address), has a TTL of 10 minutes and a data length of 4 bytes (the size of
an IPv4 address), and the value is 169.229.131.81, the IPv4 address we requested for
berkeley.edu. Note that the authority flag is not set, and the authority section of
the reply is empty. This response is based upon cached data; it is not authoritative
for the domain. At this point, the local name server also caches the value (but only
for up to 10 minutes as specified by the TTL in the RR it received) and responds to
the requesting client (see Figure 11-13).
     The response in Figure 11-13, packet 2, is much like the one from 206.13.28.12,
except it is now sent from 10.0.0.1 to our original client at 10.0.0.120, and the trans-
action ID matches the one in the original DNS request. Note also that from the cli-
ent’s point of view the entire round-trip time of the transaction was about 14.7ms,
but we know that most of that time (14.2ms) was taken up in the transaction
between the local name server (GW.HOME) and the ISP’s name server (206.13.28.12).

Figure 11-12   A standard DNS response sent from the ISP’s DNS server back to GW.HOME.

      11.5.6.3 Canonical Name (CNAME) Records
      The CNAME record stands for canonical name record and is used to introduce an
      alias for a single domain name into the DNS naming system. For example, the
      name www.berkeley.edu may have a CNAME record that maps to some other
      machine (e.g., www.w3.berkeley.edu), so that if the Web server is located at a
      different computer, a relatively simple change to the DNS database may be all that
      is required for the rest of the world to find the new system. It is now common prac-
      tice to use CNAME records to establish aliases for common services. As a result,
      names such as www.berkeley.edu, ftp.sun.com, mail.berkeley.edu, and
      www.ucsd.edu are all CNAME entries in the DNS that refer to other RRs.
           Within a CNAME RR, the RDATA section contains the “canonical name” asso-
      ciated with the domain name (alias). Such names use the same type of encoding as
      other names (e.g., data labels and compression labels). When a CNAME RR is pres-
      ent for a particular name, no other data is permitted [RFC1912] (unless DNSSEC

Figure 11-13   A response generated by GW.HOME and destined for the client. This message completes
               the recursive DNS transaction.

is in use; see Chapter 18). Domain names of CNAME RRs may not be used in all
places that regular domain names can (e.g., as the target of an NS RR). Also, the
canonical name may itself be a CNAME (called CNAME chaining), but this is usu-
ally discouraged, as it can cause DNS resolvers to make more queries than would
otherwise be necessary. Nonetheless, there are certain services that make use of
this feature. For example, the high-volume site www.whitehouse.gov (at the time
of writing) uses a content delivery network (CDN)2 provided by the Akamai Corpora-
tion. When we look up this domain name, we find the following:

Linux% host –t any www.whitehouse.gov
www.whitehouse.gov is an alias for www.whitehouse.gov.edgesuite.net.
Linux% host –t any www.whitehouse.gov.edgesuite.net
www.whitehouse.gov.edgesuite.net is an alias for a1128.h.akamai.net.
Linux% host –t any a1128.h.akamai.net
a1128.h.akamai.net has address 92.123.65.42
a1128.h.akamai.net has address 92.123.65.51

2. A content delivery network typically includes a number of synchronized content caches located in
   particular topological locations in the network. CDNs attempt to minimize latency for consumers
   accessing content in exchange for payment from content providers.

          Thus, CNAME chains can be used with DNS. However, because of their
      potential performance impact, such chains are often limited by resolvers to a few
      “links” (such as five). Long chains are likely the result of an error in execution or
      a misunderstanding, as it is hard to imagine why they should be necessary under
      normal circumstances.

          Note
          There is a standard resource record called DNAME (type 39) [RFC2672][IDDN].
          DNAME records act like CNAME records but for an entire zone. For example,
          all names of the form NAME.example.com could be mapped to NAME.newex-
          ample.com using a single DNAME resource record. However, DNAME records
          do not apply to the top-level record itself (example.com here).

      11.5.6.4 Reverse DNS Queries: PTR (Pointer) Records
      Although the most critical function of DNS is to provide mappings from names
      to IP addresses, there are many circumstances where the reverse mapping is
      required. For example, a server receiving an incoming TCP/IP connection request
      is able to ascertain the source IP address of the connection from the incoming IP
      datagram, but the name(s) corresponding to the address are not carried in the con-
      nection itself; such name(s) must be looked up in some other way. Fortunately, a
      clever use of the DNS can provide this capability.
           The PTR RR type is used in response to reverse DNS queries, which are typi-
      cally necessary when converting an IP address to a name. This uses the special
      in-addr.arpa (ip6.arpa for IPv6) domain, in a special way. Consider an IPv4
      address such as 128.32.112.208. In the classful address structure (see Chapter 2),
      this address is taken from the 128.32 class B address space. To determine the name
      corresponding to this address, the address is first reversed, and then the special
      domain is added. In this example, a query for a PTR record using the name

      208.112.32.128.in-addr.arpa.

      would be used. In effect, this is a query for the “host” 208 in the “domain”
      112.32.128.in-addr.arpa.. We shall see more examples of reverse DNS que-
      ries later in this section.

          Note
          The regular DNS name space, which usually uses NS, A, and AAAA records,
          is not automatically linked with the “reverse” name space supported by PTR
          records. Thus it is possible (and even relatively common) to have an existing
          forward resolution that does not have a corresponding reverse mapping set up
          (or has a different one). Some services check to see that both directions are set
          up with equivalent mappings and may deny service under such circumstances.

    Recall that IPv4 addresses are typically written in the “dotted-decimal” for-
mat and IPv6 addresses are written in the hex format (e.g., 169.229.131.81 and
2001:503:a83e::2:30, respectively). These addresses can be thought of as names
existing in a left-to-right hierarchy. For example, the address 169.229.131.81 has
the top-down hierarchy (reading left to right) 169, 229, 131, 81. By reversing the
dotted-decimal IPv4 address and treating it as a DNS name, we can employ DNS
to perform the mapping from IP address to name(s). So, the name 81.131.229.169
would effectively be the reversal of the IPv4 address 169.229.131.81. For IPv6, the
scheme is similar, but any suppressed zeros are expanded, and each hexadecimal
digit becomes a character. For example, the reversal of 2001:503:a83e::2:30 would
be 0.3.0.0.2.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.e.3.8.a.3.0.5.0.1.0.0.2. Fortunately, users rarely
have to type in these names directly.
    As mentioned previously, the special domains .in-addr.arpa (for IPv4) and
.ip6.arpa (for IPv6) are used in conjunction with the PTR (“pointer”) RR type in
support of these types of names and reverse DNS lookups. For example, consider
the following commands:

C:\> nslookup
Default Server: gw
Address: 10.0.0.1
> server c.in-addr-servers.arpa
Default Server: c.in-addr-servers.arpa
Address: 196.216.169.10
> set type=ptr
> 81.131.229.169.in-addr.arpa.
Server: c.in-addr-servers.arpa
Address: 196.216.169.10

169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = w.arin.net
169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = t.arin.net
169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = dill.arin.net
169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = x.arin.net
169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = z.arin.net
169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = y.arin.net
169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = u.arin.net
169.in-addr.arpa      nameserver = v.arin.net

    This example shows how the .in-addr.arpa domain is set up. According
to [RFC5855], the in-addr-servers.arpa and ip6-servers.arpa domains
are used in forming the domain names associated with the servers that provide
reverse DNS mappings for IPv4 and IPv6, respectively. As of 2011, there are five
such servers for each version of IP: X.in-addr-servers.arpa and X.ip6-
servers.arpa, where X is any letter a through f (inclusive).
    Although the ten servers we have mentioned contain authoritative data for
reverse mappings, they do not contain the information we are looking for. In our
example, the first server contacted instead told us to contact one of the eight name
servers maintained by ARIN, the American Registry for Internet Numbers, which
is authoritative for IPv4 addresses that start with 169. If we in turn contact one

      of these servers, we find that a PTR query for 81.131.229.169.in-addr.arpa.
      gives the following response:

      > server w.arin.net
      Default Server: w.arin.net
      Address: 72.52.71. 2
      Default Server: w.arin.net
      Address: 2001:470:1a::2
      > 81.131.229.169.in-addr.arpa.
      Server: w.arin.net
      Address: 72.52.71.2

      229.169.in-addr.arpa nameserver = adns1.berkeley.edu.
      229.169.in-addr.arpa nameserver = phloem.uoregon.edu.
      229.169.in-addr.arpa nameserver = aodns1.berkeley.edu.
      229.169.in-addr.arpa nameserver = adns2.berkeley.edu.

      Here we can surmise that the network prefix 169.229/16 is owned by an educa-
      tional institution called Berkeley, that the campus maintains three name servers
      covering its in-addr.arpa space, and that the University of Oregon also pro-
      vides a copy. Continuing by contacting one of these servers, we find our answer
      (this time using the Linux version of nslookup with slightly different output):

      Linux% nslookup
      > set type=ptr
      > server adns1.berkeley.edu
      Default Server: adns1.berkeley.edu
      Address: 128.32.136.3#53
      Default Server: adns1.berkeley.edu
      Address: 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::3#53
      > 81.131.229.169.in-addr.arpa.
      Server: adns1.berkeley.edu
      Address: 128.32.136.3#53

      81.131.229.169.in-addr.arpa        name = webfarm.Berkeley.EDU

           Here we obtain the result we were looking for, that the IPv4 address
      169.229.131.81 has the name webfarm.Berkeley.EDU. The DNS server uses
      port 53, as indicated by the #53 following the IP addresses. This output makes
      it obvious that accessing the DNS with UDP/IPv4 (as opposed to UDP/IPv6) can
      still provide mappings for IPv6 addresses using “quad-A” (AAAA) DNS records
      because we can see that the IPv6 address of the server is 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::3.
           If there were not a separate branch of the DNS tree for handling the address-
      to-name translation, there would be essentially no way to do the reverse transla-
      tion other than starting at the root of the tree and trying every top-level domain.
      This is clearly an unreasonable option, given the current size of the Internet. The
      in-addr.arpa solution is effective and fairly efficient, although the reversed
      bytes of the IPv4/IPv6 address and the special domains can be confusing.

Fortunately, as mentioned before, users can typically avoid having to type or refer
to them. Even application writers do not typically have to manipulate addresses
to perform reverse queries, as library functions (such as the C library function
getnameinfo()) perform this task.
    It is worth mentioning here that PTR queries have become a significant con-
cern for the global DNS servers. Consider a home network using one of the pri-
vate address prefixes such as 10.0.0.0/8 (IPv4) or fc00:/7 (IPv6). When a system
receives an incoming connection request from another system on the same pri-
vately addressed subnet, it may wish to resolve the source address to a name and
does so by performing a PTR query. If the query is not answered by the local DNS
server, it will likely propagate to the global Internet. For this reason (and a few
others), [RFC6303] specifies that local name servers—especially those operating
in networks using private IP addressing that are attached to the Internet—provide
PTR mappings for the private address space defined in [RFC1918] for IPv4 and
[RFC4193] for IPv6 (i.e., in IN-ADDR.ARPA and D.F.IP6.ARPA, respectively).

11.5.6.5 Classless in-addr.arpa Delegation
When organizations join the Internet and obtain authority to fill in a portion of
the DNS name space, they often also obtain authority for a portion of the in-
addr.arpa name space corresponding to their IPv4 addresses on the Internet. In
the case of UC Berkeley, authority includes the network prefix 169.229/16, which,
using older terminology, is “class B” network number 169.229. Thus, UC Berkeley
would be expected to populate a portion of the DNS tree with PTR records using
names ending in 229.169.in-addr.arpa. This works fine for cases where the
address prefix assigned to the organization is one of the older class A, B, or C
styles where the number of bits is an integral multiple of 8. However, many orga-
nizations today are given prefix lengths of greater than 24 bits or greater than 16
bits (but less than 24). In these cases, the address range is not easily written as a
simple reversal of the IP address. Instead, some method of conveying the network
prefix length must be included as well.
     The standard method for implementing this, given by [RFC2317], is to append
the length of the prefix to the reversed octets and use it as the first label in the
domain name. For example, assume that a site is assigned the prefix 12.17.136.128/25,
a prefix that includes 128 addresses. According to [RFC2317], two types of records
should be provided. First, for each name of the form X.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa
(where X is at least 128 and not more than 255), a CNAME RR is created, likely
maintained by a site’s ISP, according to the following pattern:

128.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa. canonical name =
                            128.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa.
129.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa. canonical name =
                            129.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa.
...
255.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa. canonical name =
                            255.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa.

           Here we can see how the network prefix is encoded, with the / notation asso-
      ciated with the second label in the domain name (for this example). These entries
      are typically placed by an ISP and allow for delegations on non-byte-aligned
      address ranges. In this example, the customer is now able to provide mappings
      for the zone 128.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa. We can trace the delegation
      as follows:

      C:\> nslookup
      Default Server: gw
      Address: 10.0.0.1
      > server f.in-addr-servers.arpa
      Default Server: f.in-addr-servers.arpa
      Addresses: 193.0.9.1
      > set type=ptr
      > 129.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa.
      Server: f.in-addr-servers.arpa
      Address: 193.0.9.1
      12.in-addr.arpa nameserver = dbru.br.ns.els-gms.att.net
      12.in-addr.arpa nameserver = cbru.br.ns.els-gms.att.net
      12.in-addr.arpa nameserver = cmtu.mt.ns.els-gms.att.net
      12.in-addr.arpa nameserver = dmtu.mt.ns.els-gms.att.net
      > server dbru.br.ns.els-gms.att.net.
      Default Server: dbru.br.ns.els-gms.att.net
      Address: 199.191.128.106

      > 129.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa.
      128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa   nameserver = ns2.intel-research.net
      128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa   nameserver= ns1.intel-research.net

      > server ns1.intel-research.net.
      Server: ns1.intel-research.net
      Address: 12.155.161.131
      > 129.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa.

      129.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa
                           name = dmz.slouter.seattle.intel-research.net
      128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa
                    nameserver = bldmzsvr.berkeley.intel-research.net
      128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa
                    nameserver = sldmzsvr.intel-research.net
      bldmzsvr.berkeley.intel-research.net internet address = 12.155.161.131
      sldmzsvr.intel-research.net internet address = 12.17.136.131

          In this example, we wish to find out the name for the host associated with IPv4
      address 12.17.136.129. We have already seen that it has a CNAME RR pointing
      to the canonical name 129.128/25.136.17.12.in-addr.arpa.. We instruct our
      resolver to use one of the root servers (F) and arrange for the query type to be for
      a PTR RR. At this point we request a resolution for 129.128/25.136.17.12.in-
      addr.arpa.. The root name server does not have this information, and it does not
      perform recursion, so it returns the name of the authoritative servers for the domain

12.in-addr.arpa.. Picking one of them (DBRU), we again try to resolve our ques-
tion. This time we find two name servers (ns1 and ns2). Picking one of these, we
are able to resolve the PTR request. It resolves to the name dmz.slouter.seattle
.intel-research.net.

11.5.6.6 Authority (SOA) Records
In DNS, each zone has an authority record, using an RR type called start of author-
ity (SOA). These records provide authoritative links between portions of the DNS
name space and the servers that provide the zone information allowing various
queries to be performed for addresses and other information. The SOA RR is used
to identify the name of the host providing the official permanent database, the
responsible party’s e-mail address (where “.” is used instead of @), zone update
parameters, and the default TTL. The default TTL is applied to RRs in the zone
that are not otherwise assigned an explicit per-RR TTL.
     The zone update parameters include a serial number, refresh time, retry time,
and expire time. The serial number is increased (by at least 1), usually by the
network administrator, anytime there is a change to the zone contents. It is used
by secondary servers to determine if they should initiate a zone transfer (when
they do not have a copy of the zone contents with largest serial number). The
refresh time tells secondary servers how long to wait before checking the SOA
record from the primary and its version number to determine if a zone transfer is
required. The retry and expire times are used in the case of zone transfer failure.
The retry value gives the time (in seconds) a secondary will wait before retrying.
The expire time is an upper bound (in seconds) that a secondary server will keep
retrying zone transfers before giving up. If it gives up, such a server ceases to
respond to queries for the zone. In general, a zone can contain a mix of IPv4 and
IPv6 data and can be accessed using either version of IP. In this example, we use
IPv6 (using nslookup on an IPv6-only Windows host):

C:\> nslookup
Default Server: gw
Address: fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80

> set type=soa
> berkeley.edu.
Server: gw
Address: fe80::204:5aff:fe9f:9e80

Non-authoritative answer:
berkeley.edu
        primary name server = ns-master1.berkeley.edu
        responsible mail addr = hostmaster.berkeley.edu
        serial = 2009050116
        refresh = 10800 (3 hours)
        retry   = 1800 (30 mins)
        expire = 3600000 (41 days 16 hours)
        default TTL = 300 (5 mins)

      > server adns1.berkeley.edu.
      Default Server: adns1.berkeley.edu
      Addresses: 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::3
                128.32.136.3

      > berkeley.edu.
      Server: adns1.berkeley.edu
      Addresses: 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::3
                128.32.136.3

      berkeley.edu
              primary name server = ns-master1.berkeley.edu
              responsible mail addr = hostmaster.berkeley.edu
              serial = 2009050116
              refresh = 10800 (3 hours)
              retry   = 1800 (30 mins)
              expire = 3600000 (41 days 16 hours)
              default TTL = 300 (5 mins)
      berkeley.edu    nameserver = ns.v6.berkeley.edu
      berkeley.edu    nameserver = aodns1.berkeley.edu
      berkeley.edu    nameserver = adns2.berkeley.edu
      berkeley.edu    nameserver = phloem.uoregon.edu
      berkeley.edu    nameserver = adns1.berkeley.edu
      berkeley.edu    nameserver = ucb-ns.NYU.edu
      ns.v6.berkeley.edu      internet address = 128.32.136.6
      ns.v6.berkeley.edu      AAAA IPv6 address = 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::6
      adns1.berkeley.edu      internet address = 128.32.136.3
      adns1.berkeley.edu      AAAA IPv6 address = 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::3
      adns2.berkeley.edu      internet address = 128.32.136.14
      adns2.berkeley.edu      AAAA IPv6 address = 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::e
      aodns1.berkeley.edu     internet address = 192.35.225.133
      aodns1.berkeley.edu     AAAA IPv6 address =
                                        2607:f010:3f8:8000:214:4fff:fe45:e6a2
      phloem.uoregon.edu      internet address = 128.223.32.35
      phloem.uoregon.edu      AAAA IPv6 address = 2001:468:d01:20::80df:2023

          Here we can see that not only did we receive the SOA record, but we also
      received a list of six authoritative name servers, and the IPv4/IPv6 addresses (glue
      records) for five of them (the address for the NYU server is not given, as glue
      records for NYU.edu would be in a different zone supported by a different server).
      As this is one of the more interesting responses we have seen, let us look at the
      packet contents corresponding to the request sent to the authoritative name server,
      adns1.berkeley.edu (see Figure 11-14).
          This trace contains two packets, and we have chosen to display the reply,
      which is the more interesting of the two. A query for an SOA RR was sent to the
      host 2607:f140:ffff:fffe::3 (adns1.Berkeley.EDU) from the local system’s globally
      scoped IPv6 address 2001:5c0:1101:ed00:5571:5f81:e0a6:4978. The response is car-
      ried in an IPv6 datagram with 491 bytes total length (the Payload Length field is
      451). This particular packet contains the IPv6 header (40 bytes), UDP header (8
      bytes), plus the DNS message (443 bytes). The DNS message includes one ques-
      tion, one answer, six authority RRs, and ten additional RRs.
Figure 11-14   Response to a DNS query for an SOA record using IPv6. The response includes IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for the zone.

          The question section contains the labels berkeley and edu and is 18 bytes
      long. The answer section contains the relevant information for the berkeley.
      edu domain described earlier and is able to take advantage of compression labels
      thanks to the contents of the question section. The total length for this section is 58
      bytes. The authority section contains six NS records identifying name servers. This
      information takes another 135 bytes. The additional information section includes
      five A records and five AAAA records for a total of 220 bytes. The size of the
      RDATA field for each AAAA record is 16 bytes, so although the IPv6 address can
      be written in textual form with the :: convention to save space, it is not encoded
      this way in the packet. Instead, the full 128 bits of the address are used.

      11.5.6.7 Mail Exchanger (MX) Records
      An MX record provides the name of a mail exchanger—a host willing to engage
      in the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) [RFC5321] to receive incoming e-mail
      on behalf of users associated with a domain name. When the Internet was still
      developing, some sites did not have permanent connections but instead would
      dial up and connect to hosts that did have permanent Internet connections. In
      such scenarios, the e-mail destination might be disconnected from the network
      when e-mail was in transit, so another host would hold on to the mail until the
      destination was attached. This was one motivation for the inclusion of MX records
      in the DNS—to allow sending hosts to deliver e-mail to an intermediary (“relay
      server”) even if the true destination was not available. Today, MX records are still
      used, and mail agents prefer to deliver e-mail to the host(s) listed in an MX record
      associated with a particular domain name.
          MX records include a preference value, so that more than one MX record may
      be present for a particular domain name. The preference value allows a sending
      agent to sort the hosts in preference order (smaller is more preferable) in deciding
      which host to use as an e-mail destination. For example, we can use the host com-
      mand again to query the DNS for MX records associated with the domain name
      cs.ucla.edu:

      Linux% host –t MX cs.ucla.edu ns3.dns.ucla.edu
      Using domain server:
      Name: ns3.dns.ucla.edu
      Address: 2607:f600:8001:1::ff:fe01:35#53
      Aliases:

      cs.ucla.edu mail is handled by 13 Pelican.cs.ucla.edu.
      cs.ucla.edu mail is handled by 3 Moa.cs.ucla.edu.
      cs.ucla.edu mail is handled by 13 Mailman.cs.ucla.edu.

          Here we can see that an e-mail addressed to person@cs.ucla.edu is han-
      dled by one of three mail servers configured in the DNS. All of these mail servers
      are part of the cs.ucla.edu domain, but in general mail servers do not have to be
      named with the same domain as the e-mail they are handling. These three servers
      can be grouped into two parts: one with preference 3 and one set with preference

13. The server with the smaller preference number is preferred, so the sender first
tries Moa.cs.ucla.edu. If that fails, it tries either Pelican or Mailman, selected
at random.
     It is possible that none of the MX record target hosts is reachable. This is an
error condition. It is also possible that there are no MX records present, but there
are CNAME, A, or AAAA records for the domain name. If there is a CNAME
record, the target of the CNAME is used in place of the original domain name. If
there are A or AAAA records, the mail agent may connect to these addresses. Each
is considered to have a preference of zero (called implicit MX). MX record targets
must be domain names that resolve to A or AAAA records; they cannot point to
CNAMEs [RFC5321].

11.5.6.8 Fighting Spam: The Sender Policy Framework (SPF) and Text (TXT)
          Records
For outgoing e-mail, MX records allow the DNS to help determine the names of
mail relays and servers for a domain. More recently, the DNS has been leveraged
by receiving mail agents to determine which relaying or sending mail servers are
authorized to send mail from a particular domain name. This is used to help com-
bat spam (unwanted e-mail) that is sent by a rogue mail agent pretending to be an
authorized mail sender.
     E-mail received by a mail server is rejected, stored, or forwarded to another mail
server. Rejection can happen for a number of reasons, such as a protocol error or lack
of available storage space at the receiver. It can also be rejected because the sending
mail client does not appear to be the proper one for sending e-mail. This capability
is supported by the Sender Policy Framework (SPF) and documented in [RFC4408], an
experimental RFC. There is another framework known as Sender ID [RFC4406] that
incorporates SPF’s functions. It is also experimental but less widely deployed.
     Version 1 of SPF uses DNS TXT or SPF (type 99) resource records. Records are
set up and published in the DNS by a domain’s owner to indicate which servers
are authorized to send mail originating from the domain. Although the SPF record
type is a more “proper” place to carry SPF-related information in some sense, some
DNS client implementations do not process SPF records properly, so to avoid this
complication TXT records are used. TXT records hold simple strings associated
with a domain name. Historically they have held strings useful for human con-
sumption, to aid in debugging or identifying the owner or location of a domain.
Today, they are usually processed by programs such as the SPF application.
     SPF supports a rich syntax to express criteria used to match against details
about an incoming mail message and the connection in which it is carried. For
example, UC Berkeley uses the following SPF entry (some lines have been wrapped
for clarity):

Linux% host –t txt berkeley.edu
berkeley.edu descriptive text
       "v=spf1 ip4:169.229.218.128/25 ip6:2607:F140:0:1000::/64
       include:outboundmail.convio.net ~all"

           In this example, the information being provided is for SPF version 1 (indicated
      by the v=spf1 string in the version section) and uses a TXT RR. When a receiv-
      ing mail agent receives e-mail purportedly coming from the domain berkeley.
      edu, it performs a DNS query for records of type TXT against the berkeley.edu
      domain. The value of the text record contains the matching criteria (called mecha-
      nisms) and other information (called modifiers). Preceding each mechanism is a
      qualifier that determines the consequence of a matching mechanism. Processing
      of SPF records takes place using a function called check_host(). The function
      evaluates various mechanisms and completes when the first matching mechanism
      is encountered. Ultimately, check_host() provides a return value that is one of
      the following: None, Neutral, Pass, Fail, SoftFail, TempError, PermError. The None
      and Neutral return values indicate that no information was available or that infor-
      mation was available but that no result is asserted. These are handled identically.
      Pass indicates a match, as described in the next paragraph. Fail indicates that the
      sending host is not authorized to send mail from the domain. SoftFail is some-
      what ambiguous but is to be treated “somewhere between a ‘Fail’ and a ‘Neutral,’”
      according to [RFC4408]. The TempError return indicates some transient failure
      (e.g., communication failure) that is likely to abate. The PermError return indicates
      that there was a problem in the SPF configuration, usually due to a malformed
      TXT or SPF record for the domain.
           Reading from left to right in the example, the string v=spf1 is a modifier indi-
      cating that the SPF version is 1. The ip4 mechanism specifies that the SMTP sender
      has an IPv4 address from the prefix 169.229.218.128/25. The ip6 mechanism
      specifies any sending host with IPv6 address prefix 2607:F140:0:1000::/64.
      Finally, the include mechanism incorporates, by reference, the TXT records with
      outboundmail.convio.net:

      Linux% host –t txt outboundmail.convio.net
      outboundmail.convio.net descriptive text
             "v=spf1 +ip4:66.45.103.0/25 +ip4:69.48.252.128/25
             +ip4:209.163.168.192/26 ~all"
      outboundmail.convio.net descriptive text
             "spf2.0/pra
             +ip4:66.45.103.0/25 +ip4:69.48.252.128/25
             +ip4:209.163.168.192/26 ~all"

          Note that these TXT records are used for both SPF and for Sender ID (which
      uses the value of spf2.0/pra in the version section). The first record is used
      by SPF. The + qualifier indicates that a match results in a Pass indication. Any
      mechanism missing a qualifier is assumed to have the + qualifier. Other possible
      qualifiers include – (Fail), ~ (Soft Fail), and ? (Neutral). If none of the match-
      ing mechanisms produces a Pass result, the final mechanism (all) matches any
      condition. The tilde character (~) before the all criterion indicates that a SoftFail
      return should be generated if all is the only matching mechanism. The exact way
      a soft failure is handled is dependent on the receiving e-mail software. Note that

         even with SPF support, validation is provided only on the sending domain and
         system, and not on the sending user. In Chapter 18 we will look at DKIM, which
         provides SPF-like capabilities but uses cryptography for authentication.

         11.5.6.9 Option (OPT) Pseudo-Records
         In conjunction with EDNS0, described previously, a special OPT pseudo-RR has
         been defined [RFC2671]. It is “pseudo” in the sense that it pertains only to the
         contents of a single DNS message and is not conventional DNS RR data. Conse-
         quently, OPT RRs are not cached, forwarded, or persistently stored, and they may
         appear only once (or not at all) in a DNS message. If one is present in a DNS mes-
         sage, it is found in the additional information section.
              An OPT RR contains a 10-byte fixed portion followed by a variable portion.
         The fixed portion includes 16 bits indicating the RR type (41), 16 bits indicating the
         UDP payload size, 32 bits constituting an extended RCODE field and flags area,
         and 16 bits giving the size of the variable portion in bytes. These fields are located
         in the same relative positions as the Name, Type, Class, TTL, and RDLEN fields,
         respectively, in a conventional RR (see Figure 11-8). OPT RRs use a null domain
         name in the Name field (0 bytes). The extended RCODE and Flags area (32 bits, cor-
         responding to the TTL field in Figure 11-8) is subdivided into an 8-bit area to hold
         an extra 8 high-order bits augmenting the RCODE field in Figure 11-3, and an 8-bit
         Version field (currently set to 0 to indicate EDNS0). The remaining 16 bits are not
         yet defined and must be 0. The additional 8 bits provide an extended set of pos-
         sible DNS error types, and these values are given in Table 11-4. (Note that value 16
         is defined by two distinct RFCs.)

Table 11-4 Extended RCODE values. Most are used to support security extensions.

Value     Name              Reference       Description and Purpose
16        BADVERS           [RFC2671]       Bad EDNS version
16        BADSIG            [RFC2845]       Bad TSIG signature (see Chapter 18)
17        BADKEY            [RFC2845]       Bad TSIG key (see Chapter 18)
18        BADTIME           [RFC2845]       Bad TSIG signature (time problem; see Chapter 18)
19        BADMODE           [RFC2930]       Bad TKEY mode (see Chapter 18)
20        BADNAME           [RFC2930]       Duplicate key name (see Chapter 18)
21        BADALG            [RFC2930]       Algorithm not supported (see Chapter 18)

              As we have mentioned, OPT RRs contain a variable-length RDATA field. This
         field is used to hold an extensible list of attribute-value pairs. The current set of
         attributes, meanings, and defining RFCs is maintained by the IANA [DNSPAR-
         AMS]. One such option, called NSID (EDNS option code 3) [RFC5001], indicates a
         special identifying value for a responding DNS server. The format of this value is
         not defined by standard but is instead configurable by the system administrator

      of the DNS server. This capability may be useful in circumstances where an any-
      cast address is used to identify a group of servers. The NSID is able to identify a
      specific responding server using a value other than the sending IP address. We
      shall see more examples of OPT RRs and EDNS0 usage when we look at DNSSEC
      in Chapter 18.

      11.5.6.10 Service (SRV) Records
      [RFC2782] defines the service (SRV) resource record. SRV RRs generalize the MX
      record format to describe the host, protocols, and port numbers used to contact a
      particular service. An SRV RR is ordinarily structured as follows:

      _Service._Proto.Name TTL IN     SRV     Prio     Weight     Port     Target

           The Service identifier is the official name of a service. The Proto identifier
      is the transport protocol used to access the service, usually TCP or UDP. The TTL
      value is a conventional RR TTL, and IN and SRV indicate the Internet class and
      SRV RR type, respectively. The Prio value is a 16-bit unsigned value and works
      like the priority value in MX records (lower numbers represent higher priorities).
      The Weight value is used to choose an RR among several whose priority values
      are equal. The idea is that the weight is to be used as a weighted probability to
      select the particular entry for load balancing, so larger weights indicate a greater
      probability of selection. The Port is the TCP or UDP (or other transport protocol’s)
      port number. The Target is the domain name of the target host where the ser-
      vice is being provided. The Name identifier is the containing domain in which a
      particular service is to be found. One of the purposes of SRV records is to identify
      when multiple individual servers in a domain support the same service.
           For example, if a client would like to determine the host and port where the
      ldap service is available using the TCP protocol in the domain example.com,
      it would perform a query for SRV records using the domain name _ldap._tcp
      .example.com. Here is a real-world example:

      Linux% host –t srv _ldap._tcp.openldap.org
      _ldap._tcp.openldap.org has SRV record 0 0 389 www.openldap.org.

          In this example, we are looking for a server providing the Lightweight Direc-
      tory Access Protocol (LDAP) [RFC4510] service over TCP within the domain
      openldap.org. We find that it can be accessed at the server www.openldap.org
      using TCP port 389 (the default LDAP port). The Priority and Weight values
      are 0, as there are no alternative servers.
           [RFC2782] did not specify a new IANA registry for SRV Service and Proto
      values. So, by default, the names correspond to the names maintained in IANA’s
      “Service Name and Transport Protocol Port Number” registry [ISPR], and the Proto
      values are either _tcp or _udp. There are a few exceptions, however. [RFC5509]
      establishes conventions for SIP-based presence and instant messaging using the

following SRV Service and Proto names: _im._sip and _pres._sip. [RFC6186]
defines the following SRV Service names for e-mail user agents to easily discover
the contact information for IMAPS, SMTP, IMAP, and POP3 servers (the first two are
ordinarily preferred when setting up an an e-mail client): _submission, _imap,
_imaps, _pop3, _pop3s. Although [RFC6186] doesn’t require these names to use
TCP as the corresponding Proto value, this is currently the only real option. For
example, a user configuring a new mail user agent (MUA, essentially an e-mail pro-
gram) might specify only the domain example.com. The MUA implementation
would then likely perform DNS queries for at least _submission._tcp.example.
com and _imaps._tcp.example.com.

11.5.6.11 Name Authority Pointer (NAPTR) Records
The Name Authority Pointer (NAPTR) RR type is used when DNS supports a
Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) [RFC3401]. A DDDS is a general,
abstract algorithm for applying dynamically retrieved string transformation rules
to strings provided by applications and using the results, most often, for locating
resources. Each DDDS application customizes the operation of the general DDDS
rules for its particular use case. A DDDS includes a rules database and a set of
algorithms for forming strings that are used with the database to produce output
strings. DNS is one such database [RFC3403], and with it the NAPTR resource
record type is used to hold the transformation rules. One such DDDS application
has been defined for use with DNS to handle multinational telephone numbers
and convert them to a standard Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) format [RFC3986]
using ENUM (see Section 11.5.6.12).
     In a DDDS, an algorithm [RFC3402] directs how an application-unique string
(AUS) is processed by rules contained in a database. The result can be either a
terminal string (complete output) or another (nonterminal) string used to retrieve
another rule that is applied to the AUS. In all, the collection forms a powerful
string rewriting system that can be used to encode nearly anything that has a suf-
ficiently regular syntax. The essence of this algorithm is captured in Figure 11-15.
     The process illustrated in Figure 11-15 starts by applying the first Well-Known
Rule to the AUS, which is uniquely identified for each application. The result forms
a key used to retrieve another rule from a database. Rules are string-rewriting pat-
terns and flags that are applied to the AUS, but never to the result of a rewritten
string. The particular way this works is dependent on the application, but usu-
ally the rules are regular expression substitutions, similar to those used with the
UNIX sed program [DR97]. When using the DNS as a database for supporting a
DDDS [RFC3403], the case in which we are interested, the keys are domain names
and the rules are stored in NAPTR resource records. Each NAPTR RR contains
the following fields: Order, Preference, Flags, Services, Regular Expression (sometimes
abbreviated Regexp), and Replacement.
     The Order field is a 16-bit unsigned integer specifying which NAPTR record to
use before others (lower numbers are preferred to higher ones), as the DNS archi-
tecture does not guarantee the ordering of any particular set of resource records.

                                              $86

                                           $SSO\?)LUVW                5XOH
                                           :HOO?.QRZQ?
                                              5XOH
                                                          5HZULWH   'DWDEDVH
                                                           5XOHV
                                           .H\

                                            6HDUFK?LQ    1RQH           'RQH
                                            'DWDEDVH                  1RW?)RXQG

                                                 2UGHUHG?6HW?
                                                  RI?5XOHV

                       .H\                    $SSO\
                                              5XOHV?
                                             WR?$86

                                                 .H\??)ODJV

                                   1R                    <HV
                                            7HUPLQDO?                  'RQH
                                             5XOH"                    &RPSOHWH

Figure 11-15 Abstract operation of the DDDS algorithm. Non-terminal records are permitted to form
                   loops. Each iteration involves a string rewrite operation on the application’s unique
                   string.

      The Preference field is used to influence the order of records containing the same
      order number. The Order field is supposed to place a mandatory ordering on RRs,
      whereas the preference number is advisory. The Flags field contains an unor-
      dered list of single characters from the set A–Z and 0–9 (case-insensitive). The
      particular application using NAPTR records (e.g., ENUM, described in the next
      section) defines the interpretation of the Flags field. The Services field is defined
      by the application to indicate which type of service is being described. The Regu-
      lar Expression field contains a substitution expression that is applied to the AUS
      to form the identity of another server to use for another NAPTR lookup (non-
      terminal case) or the output string (terminal case). The Replacement field (which
      exists only when the Regular Expression does not) indicates the next server to query

for NAPTR records. It is encoded as a separate FQDN (no name compression is
used within the DNS message). The uses for these two final (mutually exclusive)
fields are very similar for historical reasons in the development of the NAPTR RR.
     To get a better sense of how NAPTR processing works with applications, we
will have a brief look at the ENUM and SIP DDDS applications, the URI/URN
DDDS applications, and alternatives for regular NAPTR records called S-NAPTR
and U-NAPTR. Specifying a DDDS entails specifying the application’s AUS, first
Well-Known Rule, expected output, valid databases, flags, and service parameters.

11.5.6.12 ENUM and SIP
In the ENUM DDDS [R06][RFC6116][RFC6117][RFC5483], which is used to map
phone numbers to URI information, the AUS is an E.164-format telephone number
(up to 15 digits starting with the + character). The initial + character differentiates
E.164 numbers acceptable for use with the ENUM DDS from numbers in other
name spaces. The first Well-Known Rule starts by removing any dashes or other
non-digit characters in the AUS. The DDDS database is the DNS, where keys are
domain names created from the AUS (which now consists only of digits) as fol-
lows: dot (.) characters are inserted between each digit and the result is reversed.
Then, the suffix .e164.arpa is added. For example, the E.164 number +1-415-
555-1212 would be tranformed to the key 2.1.2.1.5.5.5.5.1.4.1.e164.arpa.
The resulting domain name is used to query for NAPTR records.
    The final output, possibly after multiple loops of the DDDS algorithm shown
in Figure 11-15, is an absolute (not relative) URI. The only flag defined is the U
flag, indicating a terminal rule that produces a URI. The lack of any flag indicates
a non-terminal rule, sometimes called a non-terminal NAPTR (NTN). The service
parameters, encoded in the Service field of the NAPTR record, are of the form
E2U+Service, which derives from the string E2U (an indicator for E.164 to URI)
plus a Service name subfield providing information about particular services
associated with the number. Together, they form an enumservice identifier, and such
services are registered with the IANA [ENUM][RFC6117]. Many have been created,
including enumservices for fax, instant messaging, and presence indicators.
    To see how this all works, we can construct a query for the number
+420738511111 at the University of Ostrava in the Czech Republic (lines are
wrapped for clarity):

Linux% host -t naptr 1.1.1.1.1.5.8.3.7.0.2.4.e164.arpa
1.1.1.1.1.5.8.3.7.0.2.4.e164.arpa has NAPTR record
       50 50 "u" "E2U+sip" "!^\\+(.*)$!sip:\\1@osu.cz!" .
1.1.1.1.1.5.8.3.7.0.2.4.e164.arpa has NAPTR record
       100 50 "u" "E2U+sip""!^\\+(.*)$!sip:\\1@cesnet.cz!" .
1.1.1.1.1.5.8.3.7.0.2.4.e164.arpa has NAPTR record
       200 50 "u" "E2U+h323" "!^\\+(.*)$!h323:\\1@gk1ext.cesnet.cz!" .

Here we see the contents of three NAPTR records in the ENUM DDDS application,
two for the SIP service and one for the H.323 service, used for Internet telephony.
The order numbers are 50 and 100 for the SIP entries and 200 for the H.323 entry,

      showing how it is possible using ENUM and NAPTR records to have multiple
      services associated with a single telephone number, and how the provider of the
      NAPTR records can indicate a preferred ordering of more than one gateway pro-
      viding the same service.

          Note
          SIP is an IETF-specified protocol used for signaling and is especially popular for
          facilitating the connection of multimedia clients and servers. H.323 is an ITU-
          specified protocol for multimedia conferencing and communication, including a
          signaling sub-protocol. It is widely implemented in teleconferencing equipment.
          In this example and those that follow, the host program produces output that can
          be used as input to a zone file for a DNS server such as BIND. As a consequence,
          the output shows extra escape “\” characters (which appear as “\\”) that are not
          present in the actual DNS responses provided by the server.

           To better understand how a NAPTR record’s rules are applied to the AUS,
      we will look at the second SIP record from the preceding example. After the DNS
      query is performed and the NAPTR RR is received, the string appearing between
      the first and second ! characters is used as a regular expression match and replace-
      ment. Thus, the string +420738511111 is matched against the regular expression
      ^\+(.*)$. According to the matching rules for regular expressions, the match is
      successful, so the string rewrite rule becomes sip:\1@cesnet.cz . The special
      variable \1 is replaced with the substring matching the first regular expression
      contained in parenthesis characters, (), which in this case is everything in the
      AUS except for the initial + character. In summary, the AUS +420738511111 is
      transformed into the URI sip:420738511111@cesnet.cz.
           Once this URI is formed, the natural next step is for the driving application to
      contact a SIP server. However, SIP can itself be carried over different transport pro-
      tocols, so the next step uses another DDDS that is tailored for SIP [RFC3263]. In this
      application, NAPTR records contain targets that identify the domain that should
      be used to perform SRV record queries. Continuing with the preceding example:

      Linux% host -t naptr cesnet.cz
      cesnet.cz has NAPTR record 200 50 "s" "SIP+D2T" "" _sip._tcp.cesnet.cz.
      cesnet.cz has NAPTR record 100 50 "s" "SIP+D2U" "" _sip._udp.cesnet.cz.

           Here we see the use of the s flag in the NAPTR, indicating that an SRV record
      is the result. The Regexp field is not used, so the result is a simple domain name
      substitution, given by the string in the Replacement field. The Service field is of the
      form SIP+D2x or SIPS+D2x where SIP and SIPS indicate the use of the SIP pro-
      tocol and SIP protocol with security (TLS; see Chapter 18), respectively, and x is
      the single-letter identifier of the transport protocol: U for UDP, T for TCP, and S for
      SCTP [RFC4960]. In this example, the application would first attempt to look up
      and use the SRV record corresponding to SIP/UDP and would resort to SIP/TCP
      if that fails because the UDP entry has a lower preference value.

11.5.6.13 URI/URN Resolution
Although ENUM may be the most mature use of NAPTR records in the DNS, there
are also DDDS applications defined for resolving URIs [RFC3404] and for persis-
tent, location-independent URIs called Uniform Resource Names (URNs) [RFC2141].
All URIs (including URNs) consist of a scheme name followed by a substring com-
pliant with semantics that are specific to the scheme. The current list of official
schemes is maintained by the IANA [URI]. The URI and URN applications are so
similar that it is worth considering them together. For the URI/URN DDDS appli-
cation, then, the AUS is the URI or URN for which an authoritative “resolution”
server is being located. The first Well-Known Rule for the URI application is sim-
ply the scheme name. For URNs, it is the name space identifier (the substring that
appears after the urn: scheme identifier and before the next colon character). For
example, http://www.pearson.com is a URI using the scheme (key) http, and
the URN urn:foo:foospace would use foo as the first key. Four possible flags
are currently defined: S, A, U, and P. The first three are terminal and indicate that
the result is the domain name to use for fetching an SRV record, an IP address, or
a URI, respectively. The P flag indicates that processing of the DDDS algorithm is
to be discontinued and some application-specific processing (defined elsewhere)
begins. All such flags are mutually exclusive. As with ENUM, the lack of any flag
indicates an NTN.
    Support for the URI/URN DDDS is still evolving. If we take a current (2011)
look into the DNS, we can see how some of the schemes have been populated into
the uri.arpa TLD:

Linux% host –t naptr http.uri.arpa
http.uri.arpa has NAPTR record 0 0 "" "" "!^http://([^:/?#]*).*$!\\1!i" .
Linux% host –t naptr ftp.uri.arpa
ftp.uri.arpa has NAPTR record 0 0 "" "" "!^ftp://([^:/?#]*).*$!\\1!i" .

Linux% host –t naptr mailto.uri.arpa
mailto.uri.arpa has NAPTR record 0 0 "" "" "!^mailto:(.*)@(.*)$!\\2!i" .
Linux% host –t naptr urn.uri.arpa
urn.uri.arpa has NAPTR record 0 0 "" "" "/urn:([^:]+)/\\1/i" .

    The first three of these NAPTR records contain rewrite rules and no flags.
Thus, they essentially indicate that the application should extract the domain
name from the corresponding URI and continue the DDDS algorithm. The trail-
ing i flag after the last ! character indicates that case checking is to be performed
in an insensitive way. For example, mAiLto:person@example.com is rewritten
to be just example.com. The fourth record is used to extract the URN name space
ID and continue processing. For URNs, there are a small number (two at present)
of NAPTR records in the DNS set up in urn.arpa:

Linux% host –t naptr pin.urn.arpa
pin.urn.arpa has NAPTR record 100 100 "" "" "" pin.verisignlabs.com.
Linux% host –t naptr uci.urn.arpa
uci.urn.arpa has NAPTR record 100 100 "" "" "" uci.or.kr.

            These URN name spaces appear to be receiving little attention at present, and
      it is still unclear to what extent URNs will be widely used, as there are now com-
      peting methods for expressing and locating objects using persistent identifiers
      (e.g., see [P10]). Nevertheless, more than 40 URN name spaces have been defined
      [URN], so there continues to be community interest in establishing name spaces,
      even though few have corresponding global, active NAPTR records.

      11.5.6.14 S-NAPTR and U-NAPTR
      A common issue arises when an application wishes to determine the particular
      host, protocol, and port number to use for reaching a service within a domain.
      For example, a mail-reading application running on a user’s computer in the
      example.com domain may need to find a server offering the IMAP service. A
      convention has arisen to simply prepend the service name to the domain (e.g.,
      imap.example.com). Using CNAME, A, or AAAA records is somewhat inflex-
      ible, because these record types do not convey any indication of which transport
      protocol or port number to use. SRV records go further by providing another layer
      of indirection, but their targets may contain only domain names for which an A or
      AAAA record is subsequently retrieved. Using NAPTR records instead provides
      more flexibility through an additional layer of indirection and allows for other
      target record types (such as SRV records) to be used.
           The NAPTR structure and rewrite capabilities have caused concern for some
      implementers and operators given the complexity of the regular expressions. In
      an effort to simplify the situation yet still provide a method beyond basic SRV
      records for locating services, straightforward NAPTR (S-NAPTR) [RFC3958] speci-
      fies a DDDS application for mapping domain “labels” that contain a service name
      using certain simplifying restrictions on the contents of the NAPTR records.
           For S-NAPTR, the AUS is a domain label for which an authoritative server for
      a particular service is sought. The first Well-Known Rule is the identity function.
      The expected output is the information necessary to contact a particular applica-
      tion service within a domain (e.g., protocol, host, port). Only S and A terminal
      flags are permitted, which indicate an SRV RR or a domain name (which is to
      be used to form a subsequent request for an A or AAAA RR), respectively. The
      service parameters are taken from a set maintained in an IANA registry [SNP],
      and the Regexp field is not used. Only the Replacement field is active. S-NAPTR is
      used in conjunction with the Internet Registry Information Service (IRIS) [RFC3981],
      an XML-based text application protocol for exchanging information pertaining
      to domain name and other registration information whose database is contained
      within the iris.arpa portion of the DNS name space; for example:

      Linux% host –t naptr areg.iris.arpa
      reg.iris.arpa NAPTR
             100 10 "" "AREG1:iris.xpc:iris.lwz" "" areg.nro.net.

      This example uses S-NAPTR (no regular expression) to indicate that in order to
      perform an ISIS query for AREG1-type data (see [RFC4698]), a subsequent NAPTR
      query should be initiated to areg.nro.net.

           Experience and further consideration of S-NAPTR led to the development of
      URI-enabled NAPTR (U-NAPTR) [RFC4848], which relaxes some of the restrictions
      of S-NAPTR but maintains all of its other features and registries. Most important,
      an additional U flag is permitted, which enables the NAPTR record target to be
      a URI and thus allows the use of regular expressions. This is similar to the fully
      generic version of NAPTR, except U-NAPTR regular expressions are restricted to
      the following form: !.*!<URI>!. That is, the entire AUS is replaced with a URI.
      U-NAPTR is being used in conjunction with the Location-to-Service Translation pro-
      tocol (LoST) [RFC5222], which can be used to determine the correct service given a
      point of network attachment and geographical location. Such information is use-
      ful in public safety applications where geography dictates the particular jurisdic-
      tion and responsible parties that should provide emergency services.

11.5.7 Dynamic Updates (DNS UPDATE)
      It is possible to dynamically update a zone, called DNS UPDATE, using a protocol
      defined in [RFC2136]. It supports the ability to specify prerequisites in conjunction
      with an update request. Prerequisites are evaluated at the server; if they are not
      true, the update is not performed and an error message is returned.
            DNS UPDATE is accomplished by sending dynamic update DNS messages to an
      authoritative DNS server for a zone. The structure of such messages is the same as
      for a conventional DNS message, except the header fields and sections have differ-
      ent names (see Figure 11-3). The sections indicate the zone being updated, prereq-
      uisites that require various RRs to be present (or not) for the update to take effect,
      and the update information. In an update, the header mirrors the format for a query,
      but the Opcode field is set to Update (5). The header fields ZOCOUNT, PRCOUNT,
      UPCOUNT, and ADCOUNT contain counts of the following: zones to be updated
      (this will have the value 1), prerequisites to consider, updates to be made, and
      additional information records, respectively. [RFC2136] also defines a collection of
      RCODE values carried in DNS response messages capable of indicating conditions
      relating to problems with the prerequisites or server (values 6–10 in Table 11-2).
            The zone section of an update message (see Figure 11-7) indicates the zone’s
      name, a type, and a class. The type value will be 6 to indicate the presence of an
      SOA record, which identifies the zone. The class value will be 1 (Internet) for any
      update message with which we are concerned. All records being updated must be
      in the same zone.
            The prerequisite section of an update message contains one or more prereq-
      uisites, expressed using the format for RRs we discussed previously in Section
      11.5.5. There are five types of prerequisites: RRSet exists (value-dependent and
      value-independent varieties), RRSet does not exist, name is in use, and name is not in
      use. Recall that an RRSet is a group of RRs from the same zone sharing a common
      name, class, and type. To express the semantics of a prerequisite, a combination of
      an RR’s class, type, and RDATA values are set according to Table 11-5.
            The RRSet exists type means that at least one RRSet exists in the zone specified
      in the zone section that matches the name and type of the corresponding RR in

Table 11-5 RR Class and Type fields used in prerequisite section to indicate prerequisite type

Prerequisite Type (Semantics)           Class Setting            Type Setting              RDATA Setting
RRSet exists (value-independent)        ANY                  Same as zone’s type           Empty
RRSet exists (value-dependent)          Same as zone’s class Type being checked            RRSet being
                                                                                           checked
RRSet does not exist                    NONE                     Type being checked        Empty
Name is in use                          ANY                      ANY                       Empty
Name is not in use                      NONE                     ANY                       Empty

          the prerequisite section. In the value-dependent case, the prerequisite is true only
          if the matching RRs also contain matching RDATA values. The RRSet does not exist
          type means that no RRSet in the zone specified in the zone section matches the
          name and type of the RR in the Prerequisites section. The last two cases (Name is
          in use and Name is not in use) refer only to the domain name; the type value is not
          used. The values for NONE and ANY as DNS classes are 254 and 255, respectively.
               Following the Prerequisite section, the Update section contains RRs to be
          added or deleted from the zone specified in the zone section. There are four types
          of updates, encoded as an RR with various combinations of values in the Class,
          Type, and RDATA fields, as indicated in Table 11-6.

Table 11-6 RR Class and Type fields used in Update section to indicate update type

Use                                  Class Setting       Type Setting             RDATA
Add RR to RRSet                      Same as zone’s      Type of RR being         RDATA of RR being
                                     class               added                    added
Delete RRSet                         ANY                 Type of RRSet to         Empty (TTL and
                                                         delete                   RDLENGTH also zero)
Delete all RRSets from a name        ANY                 ANY                      Empty (TTL and
                                                                                  RDLENGTH also zero)
Delete RR from RRSet                 NONE                Type of RR being         Matching RDATA to
                                                         deleted                  delete

              The update section contains a collection of RRs that are processed provided no
          errors have occurred due to prerequisites or server problems. Each RR encodes an
          addition or deletion operation. Modifications can be performed as a deletion fol-
          lowed by an addition. To see an example of DNS UPDATE, we can induce a Win-
          dows machine to perform a dynamic DNS update using the following command:

          C:\> ipconfig /registerdns

              Windows clients issue updates for their computer name and domain name by
          default, but this behavior can also be enabled for IPv4 on a per-DNS-suffix basis
          by checking the box labeled “Use this connection’s DNS suffix in DNS registration”

under the DNS section of the Advanced TCP/IP Settings, found on the General tab
of the Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) Properties menu associated with each interface
enabled for TCP/IP. For IPv6, the same procedure is used, but on the IPv6 Properties
menu. In the example shown in Figure 11-16, we can see how the machine named
vista updates the local zone dyn.home as it issues the DNS update message shown.

Figure 11-16   A DNS dynamic update contains an SOA record in the zone section and RRs in
               the update section. This case includes new IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for the host
               vista.dyn.home.

     Figure 11-16 shows how a dynamic update is encoded. The DNS server at
10.0.0.1 (running BIND9 [AL06] in this example) is configured to allow dynamic
updates. The zone section contains an SOA record identifying the zone to be
updated (vista.dyn.home). The prerequisite section contains an RR with a zero-
length RDATA section and 0 TTL value. The RR corresponds to the type of pre-
requisite in the third row of Table 11-5 (RRset does not exist) because its type is not
ANY (it is CNAME) and its class is set to NONE (254).
     In this particular case, the addresses 10.0.0.57 and 2001:5c0:1101:ed00:fd26:
de93:5ab7:405a are to be associated with the name vista.dyn.home. This is
accomplished by first deleting the AAAA and A RRSets (corresponding to row 2
in Table 11-6), and then adding the AAAA and A RRSets (corresponding to row 1
in Table 11-6) for the desired addresses.

Figure 11-17   The response to a dynamic update request includes a transaction ID and status flag set.

             Responses to DNS updates are straightforward and compact. The response for
         the update shown in Figure 11-16 is illustrated in Figure 11-17.
             The Flags field indicates a successful update (no error). The transaction ID
         (0x4089) is used to ensure that the update response matches a corresponding
         request. Note that on Linux, the nsupdate program can be used to update a
         cooperative DNS server. DNS servers cooperate with a requested update only if an
         authentication and access control procedure indicates that the request is acceptable.
         This can be as simple as nothing or listing the IP addresses of clients at the server,
         neither of which is very secure, or using somewhat more complex and secure meth-
         ods that provide transaction authentication (see TSIG and SIG(0) in Chapter 18).

11.5.8 Zone Transfers and DNS NOTIFY
         A zone transfer is used to copy a set of RRs for a zone from one server to another
         (generally from the master server to slave servers). The purpose of doing so is to
         keep multiple servers in sync with respect to a zone’s contents. Multiple servers
         provide resiliency to failure, in case a server should go down. Performance can
         also be improved as multiple servers can be used to share the processing load for
         incoming queries. Finally, the latency of a DNS query/response can potentially be
         reduced if servers are placed in locations close to clients (i.e., where the network
         latency between resolver and server is small).

    As originally specified, zone transfers are initiated after polling, where slaves
periodically contact masters to see if a zone transfer is necessary by comparing the
zones’ version numbers. A later method says if a zone transfer needs to be initi-
ated using an asynchronous update mechanism when the zone contents change.
This is called DNS NOTIFY. Once a zone transfer is initiated, either the entire
zone is transferred (using DNS AXFR messages) [RFC5936], or an incremental zone
transfer option may be used (using DNS IXFR messages) [RFC1995]. The general
scheme operates according to the illustration in Figure 11-18.

                                 6ODYH?                        0DVWHU?
                               6HFRQGDU\                       3ULPDU\

                                             127,)<
                                            62$?4XH
                                                       U\

                                                      RQVH
                       &KHFN?6HULDO?       62$?5HVS
                         1XPEHU
                                           $;)5?RU?
                                                   ,;)5
                                                                   3URGXFH?8SGDWH?
                                                                     DQG?5HFRUG?
                                                                   5HVXOWV?IRU?,;)5?
                                                                      5HTXHVWV
                                                      WHQWV
                                           =RQH?&RQ

Figure 11-18   A DNS zone transfer copies the contents of zones between servers. An optional notifi-
               cation can cause a slave to request a full or incremental zone transfer.

   We will now have a closer look at each of the options, including full and incre-
mental zone transfers, plus DNS Notify.

11.5.8.1 Full Zone Transfers (AXFR Messages)
Full zone transfers are controlled by the zone transfer parameters carried in a zone’s
SOA record: primary name server, serial number, and the refresh, retry, and expire
intervals. When configured, a slave server attempts to contact the primary server to
see if a zone transfer is necessary. Contacts are attempted periodically, according to
the refresh interval. They are also attempted when a server first starts. If a contact
is not successful (no response from the server), retries are attempted periodically
according to the retry interval (generally shorter than the refresh interval). The
entire zone contents are flushed if not refreshed within the expire interval, effec-
tively incapacitating the server for the zone.
     An All Zone Transfer (AXFR) DNS message (a standard query containing
type AXFR in the Question section) is used to request a complete zone transfer
using TCP. To see such a message, we may arrange for a request to be initiated
using the host program in our local network:

      Linux% host -l home.
      Using domain server:
      Name: 10.0.0.1
      Address: 10.0.0.1#53
      Aliases:

      home name server gw.home.
      ap.home has address 10.0.0.6
      gw.home has address 10.0.0.1
      ...

      The -l flag asks the host program to perform a full zone transfer from a local
      DNS server. The program initiates a TCP-based query/response dialogue, illus-
      trated in Figure 11-19.

Figure 11-19   A DNS request for a full zone transfer uses the AXFR record type and TCP as a trans-
                     port protocol.

           In Figure 11-19 we can see how the zone transfer takes place using TCP. The
      first three TCP segments are part of the standard TCP connection establishment
      process (see Chapter 13). The fourth (decoded) packet is the request. It is a nor-
      mal DNS standard, with type AXFR and class IN (Internet). The query is for the
      domain name home. The response to this query is contained in message 6, follow-
      ing the TCP ACK (see Figure 11-20).

Figure 11-20   The successful response for a full zone transfer request includes all of the records for
               the zone. The transaction takes place using TCP, as the zone contents may be large and
               a reliable copy is required.

    In Figure 11-20 we can see how the entire zone is carried in the response. After
receiving the response, the client’s TCP ACKs the data and initiates a TCP con-
nection close. The connection is closed gracefully using the FIN-ACK handshake
(packets 8–10). See Chapter 13 for more details on the standard TCP connection
establishment and clearing.
    Although it used to be possible to perform such zone transfers with virtually
any DNS server, they are now typically restricted to the authoritative servers in a
zone (e.g., those listed in NS records for the zone). The reason for this restriction
is privacy and security—knowledge of the hosts within the zone might help an
attacker target particular services or hosts.

11.5.8.2 Incremental Zone Transfers (IXFR Messages)
To improve the efficiency of zone transfers, [RFC1995] defines the use of incremen-
tal zone transfers. Using incremental zone transfers and the IXFR message type,
only the changes in a zone are provided. To execute an incremental zone transfer,
the client (e.g., slave server) must provide its current serial number for the zone. In

      the following example, we can emulate a requesting server by providing the serial
      number and using the dig program:

      Linux% dig +short @10.0.0.1 -t ixfr=1997022700 home.
      gw.home. hostmaster.gw.home. 1997022700 10800 15 604800 10800

          The command line indicates that output from the command should be short,
      10.0.0.1 is the address of the DNS server to use, and an incremental zone transfer
      starting with serial number 1997022700 should be performed. This example cre-
      ates an exchange similar to the one illustrated in Figures 11-19 and 11-20 for AXFR,
      except in this case the serial number of the request matches the current serial
      number (see Figure 11-21).

Figure 11-21   An incremental zone transfer request (IXFR record type) carried on TCP. The serial
                     number is used to determine which records, if any, have changed since an earlier zone
                     transfer took place.

    Figure 11-22 shows how the IXFR request includes a mostly empty SOA RR
in the authority section. The SOA record includes the serial number specified
(1997022700). The response (packet 6) contains no real information because this
serial number matches the current one at the server.

Figure 11-22   The response to an IXFR request when the serial number is current contains only an
               SOA record and no additional information.

    The response in Figure 11-22 contains only the SOA RR in the answer sec-
tion. Unlike the one contained in the query, this one is filled in with the complete
SOA fields (e.g., mailbox, zone transfer parameters). However, there are no addi-
tional answers because the current serial number for the zone matches that of the
request. Thus, the requesting client is assumed to be up-to-date and not in need of
any additional information or a zone transfer.

      11.5.8.3 DNS NOTIFY
      As mentioned previously, polling has traditionally been used to determine the
      need for zone transfers, meaning that the slave servers would check with a master
      periodically (the “refresh” interval) to see if the zone had been updated (indicated
      by a different serial number), in which case a zone transfer would be initiated.
      This is a somewhat wasteful process because many useless polls may occur before
      the zone is updated. To improve the situation, [RFC1996] developed the DNS
      NOTIFY mechanism. DNS NOTIFY allows a server with modified zone contents
      to notify slave servers that an update has been made and a zone transfer should
      be initiated. More specifically, if enabled, a notification message is sent to a set
      of interested servers if the SOA RR for a zone changes (e.g., if the serial number
      increases). This allows zone transfers to be initiated easily when required. Using a
      local (home) name server, we can see how this works (see Figure 11-23).

Figure 11-23   A DNS NOTIFY indicating an update to the zone file. There are two retransmissions
                     spaced 15s apart (contrary to the method suggested in the standard).
                                 Section 11.6 Sort Lists, Round-Robin, and Split DNS         565

          This example illustrates the simple DNS NOTIFY message sent to a host in the
     server’s notify set of servers that should be informed of a zone change. The message
     is a UDP/IPv4 DNS query message with the Flags field indicating a zone change
     notification. The query section contains the type and class for an SOA record, and
     the answer section contains the current SOA RR for the zone (with TTL 0), includ-
     ing the serial number. This provides sufficient information for a notified server
     to determine that a zone transfer may be necessary. Note that a single server may
     receive notifications from multiple other servers as they update their zone infor-
     mation. This does not present a problem for the protocol’s operation.
          The DNS NOTIFY mechanism defaults to using UDP, an unreliable protocol.
     In this particular example, the notify set contains only the address 10.0.0.11, which
     does not run a DNS server. Consequently, the message is resent every 15s hoping
     for a response that never arrives.

         Note
         The time between retransmissions and the total number of retransmissions to
         attempt are suggested by [RFC1996] to be 60s and five retransmissions, respec-
         tively. It also suggests that a timer backoff method (additive or exponential) be
         used. Here we can see that the BIND9 implementation fails to respect these sug-
         gestions, as the two retransmissions are 15s apart.

         Responses are simply DNS response messages with no useful information
     except the transaction ID; they are used only to complete the protocol and cancel
     retransmissions at the sending server.

11.6 Sort Lists, Round-Robin, and Split DNS
     So far we have discussed how domain names are set up, the types of resource
     records DNS supports, and the DNS protocol used to fetch and update a zone. One
     subtle point to consider is what data is returned and in what order in response
     to a DNS query. A DNS server could return all matching data to any client in
     whatever order the server finds most convenient. However, special configuration
     options and behaviors are available in most DNS server software to achieve cer-
     tain operational, privacy, or performance goals. Consider the topology shown in
     Figure 11-24.
         The type of topology shown in Figure 11-24 is typical of a small enterprise.
     There is a private network and a public network including a DNS server. In addi-
     tion, there is a pair of hosts on the DMZ (A and B), one on the internal network (C)
     and one on the Internet (R). A multihomed host (M) spans the DMZ and internal
     networks. M therefore has two IP addresses drawn from two different network
     prefixes.

                                                 '16?6HUYHU
                                $       %

        '0=? 3XEOLF ?
         1HWZRUN                                                          ,QWHUQHW
                                                                                              5
                                                    0XOWLKRPHG?+RVW
                                                           0
       ,QWUDQHW? ,QWHUQDO
            1HWZRUN                             &

Figure 11-24   In a small enterprise topology, DNS may be configured to return different addresses
                     depending on the requesting IP address.

           A host wishing to contact M performs a DNS lookup that returns two
      addresses—one associated with the internal network and one with the DMZ.
      Naturally, it would be more efficient if A, B, and R reached M via the DMZ and
      C reached M via the internal network. This generally happens if the DNS server
      orders its returned address records based on the source IP address of the request.
      (It could also use the destination IP address, especially if M uses multiple IP
      addresses from different subnets on the same network interface.) If the request-
      ing system uses a source IP address with the same network prefix as the source
      of a returning address record, the DNS server places the set of such matching
      records early in the returned message. This behavior encourages the client to find
      the “closest” IP address for a particular server it is attempting to contact, because
      most simple applications attempt to contact the first address found among the
      returned address records. The precise behavior can usually be controlled using
      a so-called sortlist or rrset-order directive (options used in configuration
      files for resolvers and servers). Such sorting behavior may also happen automati-
      cally if performed by the DNS server software by default.
           A somewhat related situation arises when one service is offered using more
      than one server such that the incoming connections are load-balanced (i.e., divided
      among the servers). In the preceding example, imagine that a service is offered on
      both A and B. Such a service may be identified by the URL http://www.example
      .com. Requesting clients (like R) perform a DNS query on the domain name
      www.example.com, and the DNS server eventually returns a set of address
      records. To achieve load balancing, the DNS server may be configured to use
      DNS round-robin, which means that the server permutes the order of the returned
      address records. Doing so encourages each new client to access the service on a
      different server from the previous client. While this helps to balance load, it is far
      from perfect. When records are cached, the desired effect may not occur because
      of reuse of existing cached address records. In addition, this scheme may bal-
      ance the number of connections well across servers, but not the load. Different
                                        Section 11.8 Transparency and Extensibility     567

     connections can have radically different processing requirements, so the true pro-
     cessing load is likely to remain unbalanced unless the particular service always
     has the same processing requirements.
           A final consideration regarding the data returned by a DNS server is sup-
     port for privacy. In this example, we may wish to arrange for hosts within the
     enterprise to be able to retrieve resource records for every computer in the net-
     work, while we limit the set of systems that remain visible to R. A technique for
     implementing this goal is called split DNS. In split DNS, the set of resource records
     returned in response to a query is dependent on the identity of the client and pos-
     sibly query destination address. Most often, the client is identified by IP address
     or address prefix. With split DNS, we could arrange for any host in the enterprise
     (i.e., those sharing a set of prefixes) to be provided with the entire DNS database,
     whereas those outside are given visibility only to A and B, where the main Web
     service is offered.

11.7 Open DNS Servers and DynDNS
     Many home users are assigned a single IPv4 address by their ISP, and this address
     may change over time as the user’s computer or home gateway connects, discon-
     nects, and reconnects to the Internet. Consequently, it is often difficult for the user
     to establish a DNS entry that allows for running services that are visible from
     the Internet. A number of so-called open Dynamic DNS (DDNS) servers are avail-
     able that support a special update protocol called the DNS Update API [DYNDNS],
     whereby a user may update an entry in a provider’s DNS server given a preregis-
     tration or account. This scheme does not use the [RFC2136] DNS UPDATE protocol
     described earlier but is instead a separate application-layer protocol.
          To use the service, a DDNS client program (e.g., inadyn or ddclient on
     Linux and DynDNS Updater for Windows) runs on the client system, which could
     also be a user’s home router. Most often, these programs are configured with login
     information used to access a remote DDNS service. When the service is invoked,
     the client program contacts the server, provides the current global IP address of its
     host (the one assigned by an ISP, often a NAT mapped address), and goes quiescent.
     After that, it periodically renews the information with the server. Doing so allows
     the server to clear the information if an update is not received within a certain
     time interval. Such services include those provided at the following Web sites (as of
     2011): http://www.dyndns.com/services/dns/dyndns, http://freedns
     .afraid.org, and http://www.no-ip.com/services/managed_dns/free_
     dynamic_dns.html.

11.8 Transparency and Extensibility
     The DNS is one of the most ubiquitous services on the Internet and has been
     an attractive service to consider as a basis for adding new capabilities through

      extensions. There are, for example, numerous record types such as TXT, SRV, and
      even A (e.g., see [RFC5782]) that could be used for encoding data useful for vari-
      ous future services. [RFC5507] considers various methods for extending the DNS,
      ultimately concluding that creation and implementation of new RR types is the
      most attractive approach. Thanks to an earlier specification [RFC3597], there is a
      standard method for handling unknown RR types as opaque data. That is, they
      are not interpreted unless recognized; the processing is transparent. This allows
      for new RR types to be carried along without causing negative impact on the pro-
      cessing of existing RR types.
           One complication with preserving transparency is the encoding of embed-
      ded domain names and compression. For known RR types, embedded domain
      names are permitted to have their cases altered in order to achieve compression
      with compression labels. Owner domain names (the “keys” of queries) are always
      subject to compression. For unknown RR types, however, embedded domain
      names are not permitted to use compression labels. In addition, future RR types
      that contain embedded domain names are likewise prohibited (see Section 4 of
      [RFC3597]). Unknown types can still be compared (e.g., for dynamic updates) in
      a bitwise fashion. This implies that any embedded domain names are compared
      in a case-sensitive manner [RFC4343], contrary to most other DNS operations. This
      same situation appears for embedded domain names used with TXT records.
           A different issue arises regarding transparency when new forms of servers
      and proxies are introduced that process DNS traffic. It is now relatively common
      practice to include a DNS proxy colocated inside a home gateway or firewall. A
      typical proxy handles incoming DNS requests from a user’s home network and
      forwards the request to an ISP-provided name server. It also receives returned
      information and may or may not cache the results. Historically, some proxies have
      tried to do more than merely relay requests and replies, and this has caused some
      problems with DNS interoperability. [RFC5625] specifies the proper operation
      of a DNS proxy, essentially requiring DNS RRs to be uninterpreted and merely
      relayed by the proxy. In cases where packet truncation cannot be avoided, any
      such proxy must set the TC bit field to indicate that some DNS data was removed.
      Furthermore, any such proxies should be prepared to handle TCP requests, as this
      is the conventional fallback mechanism when a previous UDP-based request was
      truncated and is required by [RFC5966].

11.9 Translating DNS from IPv4 to IPv6 (DNS64)
      In Chapter 7 we described a framework for translating IP datagrams back and
      forth between IPv4 and IPv6. Translators supporting such capabilities are envi-
      sioned to be deployed with a related capability that translates between DNS A
      and AAAA records [RFC6147], allowing IPv6-only clients to access DNS informa-
      tion that appears in A records (e.g., in the IPv4 Internet). The capability is called
      DNS64, and one of its proposed deployment scenarios (called “DNS64 in DNS
      recursive-resolver mode”) is illustrated in Figure 11-25.
                                                                    Section 11.10 LLMNR and mDNS               569

                                                     ,3Y??,3Y?
                                                     7UDQVODWRU

                                                                                                ,3Y??2QO\?6HUYHUV

                        ,3Y??1HWZRUN        &RPPRQ?,3Y?
                                                                  ,3Y??1HWZRUN
 ,3Y??2QO\?&OLHQW                          3UHIL[?&RQILJXUHG
                                                                                          ,3Y??2QO\?
                                                                                         '16?6HUYHU

                                      '16?6HUYHU
                                      ZLWK?'16??

Figure 11-25        DNS64 translates A records to AAAA records and works together with an IPv4/IPv6 translator
                    to allow IPv6-only clients to access services in IPv4 networks.

                 As shown in Figure 11-25, DNS64 is used in conjunction with an IPv4/IPv6
            translator (see Chapter 7). Each device is configured with one or more common
            IPv6 prefixes used in creating IPv4-embedded addresses. Each prefix may be a
            Network-Specific Prefix (e.g., that is owned by an operator) or the Well-Known
            Prefix (64:ff9b::/96). The DNS64 device acts as a caching DNS server. IPv6-only
            clients use it as the primary DNS server and are able to request AAAA records for
            domain names. DNS64 converts such requests to requests for both A and AAAA
            records on its IPv4 side. If no AAAA records are returned, DNS64 provides syn-
            thetic AAAA records by forming an IPv4-embedded address based on the config-
            ured prefix and the contents of each A record it retrieves. DNS64 also responds to
            PTR queries for any of the IPv6 prefixes it uses for synthesizing AAAA RRs.
                 To implement AAA RR synthesis in a DNS64 device, only the answer sec-
            tion of a DNS message is effectively altered. Other sections remain as they appear
            when retrieved on the IPv4 side. In cases of CNAME or DNAME chains, the chain
            is followed recursively until an A or AAAA record is found and the elements of
            the chain are included in the response. In addition, DNS64 may be configured so
            as to avoid synthesis for particular excluded IPv6 or IPv4 address ranges. This
            prevents certain anomalous behavior (e.g., forming IPv4-embedded addresses
            based on special-use IPv4 addresses). Note that DNS64 has subtle interactions
            with DNSSEC; these issues are covered in Chapter 18.

11.10 LLMNR and mDNS
            The ordinary DNS system requires a set of DNS servers to be configured to provide
            mappings between names and addresses, and possibly other information. Some-
            times this is too much overhead when only a few local hosts wish to communicate.
            In cases where a DNS server is not available (e.g., a quickly formed ad hoc network
            of clients that connect only to each other), a special local version of DNS called
            Link-Local Multicast Name Resolution (LLMRR) [RFC4795] may be available. It is a
            (nonstandard) protocol based on DNS developed by Microsoft and used in local

      environments to help discover devices on a local area network, such as printers
      and file servers. It is supported in Windows Vista, Server 2008, and 7. It uses UDP
      port 5355 with the IPv4 multicast address 224.0.0.252 and IPv6 address ff02::1:3.
      The servers also use TCP on port 5355 from whatever unicast IP address they
      respond from.
          Multicast DNS (mDNS) [IDMDNS] is another form of local DNS-like capabil-
      ity developed by Apple. When it is combined with the DNS Service Discovery
      protocol, Apple calls the resulting framework Bonjour. mDNS uses DNS messages
      carried over local multicast addresses. It uses UDP with port 5353. It specifies
      that the special TLD .local is to be treated with special semantics. The .local
      TLD is link-local in scope. Any DNS queries for domain names in this TLD are
      sent to the mDNS IPv4 address 224.0.0.251 or the IPv6 address ff02::fb. Queries
      for other domains may optionally be sent to these multicast addresses. Allow-
      ing link-local servers to respond to mappings for global names can raise signifi-
      cant security concerns. To combat this problem, DNSSEC can be employed (see
      Chapter 18). mDNS supports autonomous assignment of names in the .local
      pseudo-TLD, although this pseudo-TLD has not been officially reserved for this
      purpose [RFC2606]. Thus, hosts on small networks such as home LANs can be
      assigned convenient names such as printer.local, fileserver.local, cam-
      era1.local, kevinlaptop.local, and the like. A mechanism in mDNS is used
      to detect and resolve conflicts.

11.11 LDAP
      So far we have discussed DNS and local name services that resemble DNS. To
      support richer queries and data manipulations, there is a more general directory
      service we mentioned earlier called LDAP [RFC4510]. LDAP (now LDAPv3) is
      an application protocol for the Internet that provides access to general directo-
      ries (e.g., “white pages”) in accordance with the X.500 (1993) [X500] data and ser-
      vice models. It provides the ability to search, modify, add, compare, and remove
      entries based on user-selected patterns. An LDAP directory is a tree of directory
      entries, where each entry consists of a set of attributes. As TCP/IP has become
      more popular, LDAP has evolved from its roots to work in conjunction with DNS.
      For example, a query about directory entries matching the chancellor’s office at
      MIT could be formed using the LDAP search tool ldapsearch (Microsoft has a
      comparable tool called ldp available as a support tool from its Web site), which
      works as follows:

      Linux% ldapsearch -x -h ldap.mit.edu -b "dc=mit,dc=edu" \
      "(ou=*Chancellor*)"
      # extended LDIF
      #
      # LDAPv3
      # base <dc=mit,dc=edu> with scope sub
                                                  Section 11.12 Attacks on the DNS     571

     # filter: (ou=*Chancellor*)
     # requesting: ALL
     #
     .....

          The command line indicates that the server ldap.mit.edu should be
     contacted without using any special authentication protocol (-x option). While a
     complete discussion of LDAP is well beyond the scope of this chapter (and
     book!), the partial output shows how the dc (domain component) attribute is
     used to link LDAP data with the DNS. Each dc component holds one DNS label,
     and together they can be used to encode an entire domain name, which is used as
     the “base” portion for the LDAP query. Using this convention, it is not especially
     difficult to form valid LDAP queries. In this case, it is for the organizational unit
     (ou) containing the word Chancellor. Note that wildcards can be used.
          LDAP servers are used most often within enterprises to hold directory information
     such as location, telephone number, and organizational unit. Microsoft’s Active
     Directory product includes LDAP capabilities and is used extensively for manag-
     ing user accounts, services, and access rights in large enterprises using Windows.
     Some LDAP servers (such as MIT’s and those of many other universities) are also
     available through the public Internet.

11.12 Attacks on the DNS
     The DNS is a critical component of the Internet and has been the object of sev-
     eral attacks and countermeasures over the years [RFC3833]. Relatively recently,
     a global effort called DNS Security (DNSSEC) has made substantial progress in
     adding strong authentication to DNS operations. We defer the detailed discussion
     of how DNSSEC works to Chapter 18, where we also cover the necessary cryp-
     tography background. We now explore some of the attacks that have been waged
     against the DNS.
          There have been two main forms of attacks against the DNS. The first form
     involves a DoS attack where the DNS is rendered inoperative because of overload-
     ing of important DNS servers, such as the root or TLD servers. The second form
     alters the contents of resource records or masquerades as an official DNS server
     but responds with bogus resource records, thereby causing hosts to contact the
     incorrect IP address when attempting to connect to another machine (e.g., a Web
     site such as a bank).
          The first major DoS attack on DNS took place in early 2001. The attack involved
     generating many requests for the MX records of AOL.COM. The attacker generated
     DNS requests for an MX record using forged source IP addresses. The request
     is a relatively small packet, whereas the response is larger (by about a factor of
     20), so this type of attack is called an amplification attack because the amount of
     bandwidth consumed as the result of the attack is greater than the amount used
     in generating the attack by a significant factor. The responses are directed at the

      IP address contained in the request packets, so the attacker could essentially cause
      the response traffic to be directed wherever (s)he intended. The attack is docu-
      mented in detail in a CERT incident note [CIN].
           A form of attack involving modification of the data within DNS was reported
      in late 2008 [CKB] and is now known as the Kaminsky Attack. It involves cache
      poisoning, where the cached contents of a DNS server are replaced with erroneous
      or forged data and ultimately served to the resolvers on end hosts. In one vari-
      ant, an attacker responds to a caching server’s query for an A record with an NS
      record for the domain using a particular host domain name. The host’s IP address
      (chosen by the attacker) is also provided in the additional information section of
      the DNS response. The host domain name may or may not share the same sub-
      domains as the original DNS request. The main risk associated with this form of
      attack is that clients that depend on proper DNS name-to-address resolution may
      be directed to fake servers. If such servers are intentionally configured to mimic
      the original host (e.g., masquerading as a bank’s Web server), users may unwit-
      tingly trust the masquerading server and divulge sensitive information. Mitiga-
      tion techniques for this and other related attacks are given by [RFC5452]. One
      approach not described in [RFC5452] called DNS-0x20 [D08] involves encoding a
      nonce in the 0x20 bit position of each character in the Query Name part of a ques-
      tion section that is echoed back in the corresponding area of each response. This
      is made possible because, although domain names are compared in a case-insen-
      sitive way, servers tend to return an exact copy of the Query Name when forming
      responses. If the case of the owner’s name is intentionally mixed up in the query,
      an unsolicited response will have difficulty reproducing the nonce, and can more
      readily be identified (and ignored).

11.13 Summary
      The DNS is an essential part of the Internet, and DNS technology is widely used
      in private networks as well. The DNS name space is worldwide in scope and is
      divided into a hierarchy starting with top-level domains (TLDs). Domain names
      can be represented in multiple languages and scripts using internationalized
      domain names (IDNs). Applications use resolvers to contact one or more DNS
      servers to perform lookup tasks against a zone database, such as converting a host
      name to an IP address and vice versa. Resolvers then contact a local name server,
      and this server may act recursively to contact one of the root servers or other serv-
      ers to fulfill the request. Most DNS servers, and some resolvers, cache information
      learned in order to provide it to subsequent clients for some period of time called
      the time to live (TTL). Queries and responses use a special DNS protocol that
      works with either TCP or UDP. The protocol also works with either IPv4 or IPv6,
      or any mixture of the two.
           All DNS queries and responses have the same basic message format that
      includes questions, answers, authority information, and additional information.
                                                         Section 11.14 References      573

     Resource records are used to hold most DNS information, and there are many
     such types: addresses, mail exchange points, pointers to names, among others.
     In the Internet, most DNS messages are carried using UDP/IPv4 and are limited
     to 512 bytes in length, but a special extension option (EDNS0) provides for longer
     messages and is required to support DNS security (DNSSEC), which we discuss
     in detail in Chapter 18.
          DNS supports some special features such as zone transfers and dynamic
     updates. Zone transfers (complete or incremental) are used to allow redundant
     slave servers to synchronize the zone contents with a master server, primarily for
     redundancy. Dynamic updates allow zone contents to be modified by an appli-
     cation using an online protocol. There are really two forms of this capability,
     one standardized by [RFC2136] and used in enterprises and a nonstandard but
     very popular dynamic DNS capability that allows users assigned temporary IP
     addresses (e.g., on cable or DSL) to obtain a DNS entry so that services they pro-
     vide can be found by name throughout the world.
          DNS has been the subject of numerous attacks, ranging from DoS attacks that
     leave the DNS with limited capability, to cache poisoning attacks that can be used
     to make malicious servers appear to be legitimate. Various techniques have arisen
     to combat this problem, including cryptographic techniques (covered in Chap-
     ter 18) and modifications to DNS servers to be less accepting of unsolicited DNS
     responses.

11.14 References
     [AL06] P. Albitz and C. Liu, DNS and BIND, Fifth Edition (O’Reilly Media, Inc.,
     2006).
     [CIN] http://www.cert.org/incident_notes/IN-2000-04.html
     [CKB] http://www.kb.cert.org/vuls/id/800113
     [D08] D. Dagon et al., “Increased DNS Forgery Resistance Through 0x20-bit
     Encoding,” Proc. ACM CCS, Oct. 2008.
     [DNSPARAM] http://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-parameters
     [DR97] D. Dougherty and A. Robbins, sed & awk, Second Edition (O’Reilly Media,
     1997).
     [DYNDNS] http://www.dyndns.com/about/technology
     [ENUM] http://www.iana.org/assignments/enum-services
     [GTLD] http://www.iana.org/domains/root/db
     [ICANN] http://www.icann.org/en/tlds

      [IDDN] S. Rose and W. Wijngaards, “Update to DNAME Redirection in the
      DNS,” Internet draft-ietf-dnsext-rfc2672bis-dname, work in progress, July 2011.
      [IDMDNS] S. Cheshire and M. Krochmal, “Multicast DNS,” Internet draft-
      cheshire-dnsext-multicastdns, work in progress, Feb. 2011.
      [IIDN] http://www.icann.org/en/topics/idn
      [ISO3166] International Organization for Standardization, “International Stan-
      dard for Country Codes,” ISO 3166-1, 2006.
      [ISPR] http://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names-port-numbers
      [J02] J. Jung et al., “DNS Performance and the Effectiveness of Caching,” IEEE/
      ACM Transactions on Networking, 10(5), Oct. 2002.
      [MD88] P. Mockapetris and K. Dunlap, “Development of the Domain Name Sys-
      tem,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 1988.
      [P10] N. Paskin, “Digital Object Identifier (DOI©) System,” Encyclopedia of Library
      and Information Sciences, Third Edition (Taylor and Francis, 2010).
      [R06] H. Rice, “ENUM—The Mapping of Telephone Numbers to the Internet,”
      The Telecommunications Review, 17, Aug. 2006.
      [RFC1035] P. Mockapetris, “Domain Names—Implementation and Specification,”
      Internet RFC 1035/STD 0013, Nov. 1987.
      [RFC1464] R. Rosenbaum, “Using the Domain Name System to Store Arbitrary
      String Attributes,” Internet RFC 1464 (experimental), May 1993.
      [RFC1536] A. Kumar et al., “Common DNS Implementation Errors and Suggested
      Fixes,” Internet RFC 1536 (informational), Oct. 1993.
      [RFC1912] D. Barr, “Common DNS Operational and Configuration Errors,” Inter-
      net RFC 1912 (informational), Feb. 1996.
      [RFC1918] Y. Rekhter, B. Moskowitz, D. Karrenberg, G. J. de Groot, and E. Lear,
      “Address Allocation for Private Internets,” RFC 1918/BCP 0005, Feb. 1996.
      [RFC1995] M. Ohta, “Incremental Zone Transfer in DNS,” Internet RFC 1995,
      Aug. 1996.
      [RFC1996] P. Vixie, “A Mechanism for Prompt Notification of Zone Changes
      (DNS NOTIFY),” Internet RFC 1996, Aug. 1996.
      [RFC2136] P. Vixie, ed., S. Thomson, Y. Rekhter, and J. Bound, “Dynamic Updates
      in the Domain Name System (DNS UPDATE),” Internet RFC 2136, Apr. 1997.
      [RFC2141] R. Moats, “URN Syntax,” Internet RFC 2141, May 1997.
      [RFC2181] R. Elz and R. Bush, “Clarifications to the DNS Specification,” Internet
      RFC 2181, July 1997.
                                                   Section 11.14 References      575

[RFC2308] M. Andrews, “Negative Caching of DNS Queries (DNS NCACHE),”
Internet RFC 2308, Mar. 1998.
[RFC2317] H. Eidnes, G. de Groot, and P. Vixie, “Classless IN-ADDR.ARPA Del-
egation,” Internet RFC 2317/BCP 0020, Mar. 1998.
[RFC2606] D. Eastlake 3rd and A. Panitz, “Reserved Top Level DNS Names,”
Internet RFC 2606/BCP 0032, June 1999.
[RFC2671] P. Vixie, “Extension Mechanisms for DNS (EDNS0),” Internet RFC
2671, Aug. 1999.
[RFC2672] M. Crawford, “Non-Terminal DNS Name Redirection,” Internet RFC
2672, Aug. 1999.
[RFC2782] A. Gulbrandsen, P. Vixie, and L. Esibov, “A DNS RR for Specifying the
Location of Services (DNS SRV),” Internet RFC 2782, Feb. 2000.
[RFC2845] P. Vixie, O. Gudmundsson, D. Eastlake 3rd, and B. Wellington, “Secret
Key Transaction Authentication for DNS (TSIG),” Internet RFC 2845, May 2000.
[RFC2930] D. Eastlake 3rd, “Secret Key Establishment for DNS (TKEY RR),”
Internet RFC 2930, Sept. 2000.
[RFC3172] G. Huston, ed., “Management Guidelines and Operational Require-
ments for the Address and Routing Parameter Area Domain (arpa),” Internet
RFC 3172/BCP 0052, Sept. 2001.
[RFC3263] J. Rosenberg and H. Schulzrinne, “Session Initiation Protocol (SIP):
Locating SIP Servers,” Internet RFC 3263, June 2002.
[RFC3401] M. Mealling, “Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)—Part
One: The Comprehensive DDDS,” Internet RFC 3401 (informational), Oct. 2002.
[RFC3402] M. Mealling, “Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)—Part
Two: The Algorithm,” Internet RFC 3402, Oct. 2002.
[RFC3403] M. Mealling, “Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)—Part
Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database,” Internet RFC 3403, Oct. 2002.
[RFC3404] M. Mealling, “Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)—Part
Four: The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) Resolution Application,” Internet
RFC 3404, Oct. 2002.
[RFC3492] A. Costello, “Punycode: A Bootstring Encoding of Unicode for Inter-
nationalized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA),” Internet RFC 3492, Mar.
2003.
[RFC3596] S. Thomson, C. Huitema, V. Ksinant, and M. Souissi, “DNS Extensions
to Support IP Version 6,” Internet RFC 3596, Oct. 2003.

      [RFC3597] A. Gustafsson, “Handling of Unknown DNS Resource Record (RR)
      Types,” Internet RFC 3597, Sept. 2003.
      [RFC3833] D. Atkins and R. Austein, “Threat Analysis of the Domain Name Sys-
      tem (DNS),” Internet RFC 3833 (informational), Aug. 2004.
      [RFC3958] L. Daigle and A. Newton, “Domain-Based Application Service Loca-
      tion Using SRV RRs and the Dynamic Delegation Discovery Service (DDDS),”
      Internet RFC 3958, Jan. 2005.
      [RFC3981] A. Newton and M. Sanz, “IRIS: The Internet Registry Information
      Service (IRIS) Core Protocol,” Internet RFC 3981, Jan. 2005.
      [RFC3986] T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, and L. Masinter, “Uniform Resource Iden-
      tifier (URI): Generic Syntax,” Internet RFC 3986/STD 0066, Jan. 2005.
      [RFC4193] R. Hinden and B. Haberman, “Unique Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses,”
      Internet RFC 4193, Oct. 2005.
      [RFC4343] D. Eastlake 3rd, “Domain Name System (DNS) Case Insensitivity
      Clarification,” Internet RFC 4343, Jan. 2006.
      [RFC4406] J. Lyon and M. Wong, “Sender ID: Authenticating E-Mail,” Internet
      RFC 4406 (experimental), Apr. 2006.
      [RFC4592] E. Lewis, “The Role of Wildcards in the Domain Name System,” Inter-
      net RFC 4592, July 2006.
      [RFC4408] M. Wong and W. Schlitt, “Sender Policy Framework (SPF) for Autho-
      rizing Use of Domains in E-Mail, Version 1,” Internet RFC 4408 (experimental),
      Apr. 2006.
      [RFC4510] K. Zeilenga, ed., “Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP):
      Technical Specification Road Map,” Internet RFC 4510, June 2006.
      [RFC4690] J. Klensin, P. Falstrom, and C. Karp, “Review and Recommendations
      for Internationalized Domain Names (IDNs),” Internet RFC 4690 (informational),
      Sept. 2006.
      [RFC4698] E. Gunduz, A. Newton, and S. Kerr, “IRIS: An Address Registry (areg)
      Type for the Internet Registry Information Service,” Internet RFC 4698, Oct. 2006.
      [RFC4795] B . Aboba, D. Thaler, and L. Esibov, “Link-Local Multicast Name Reso-
      lution (LLMNR),” Internet RFC 4795 (informational), Jan. 2007.
      [RFC4848] L. Daigle, “Domain-Based Application Service Location Using URIs
      and the Dynamic Delegation Discovery Service (DDDS),” Internet RFC 4848,
      Apr. 2007.
      [RFC4960] R. Stewart, ed., “Stream Control Transmission Protocol,” Internet RFC
      4960, Sept. 2007.
                                                   Section 11.14 References       577

[RFC5001] R. Austein, “DNS Name Server Identifier (NSID) Option,” Internet
RFC 5001, Aug. 2007.
[RFC5222] T. Hardie et al., “LoST: A Location-to-Service Translation Protocol,”
Internet RFC 5222, Aug. 2008.
[RFC5321] J. Klensin, “Simple Mail Transfer Protocol,” Internet RFC 5321, Oct.
2008.
[RFC5452] A. Hubert and R. van Mook, “Measures for Making DNS More Resil-
ient against Forged Answers,” Internet RFC 5452, Jan. 2009.
[RFC5483] L. Conroy and K. Fujiwara, “ENUM Implementation Issues and Expe-
riences,” Internet RFC 5483 (informational), Mar. 2009.
[RFC5507] P. Falstrom, R. Austein, and P. Koch, eds., “Design Choices When
Expanding the DNS,” Internet RFC 5507 (informational), Apr. 2009.
[RFC5509] S. Loreto, “Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) Registra-
tion of Instant Messaging and Presence DNS SRV RRs for the Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP),” Internet RFC 5509, Apr. 2009.
[RFC5625] R. Bellis, “DNS Proxy Implementation Guidelines,” Internet RFC
5625/BCP 0152, Aug. 2009.
[RFC5782] J. Levine, “DNS Blacklists and Whitelists,” Internet RFC 5782 (infor-
mational), Feb. 2010.
[RFC5855] J. Abley and T. Manderson, “Nameservers for IPv4 and IPv6 Reverse
Zones,” Internet RFC 5855/BCP 0155, May 2010.
[RFC5890] J. Klensin, “Internationalized Domain Names for Applications
(IDNA): Definitions and Document Framework,” Internet RFC 5890, Aug. 2010.
[RFC5891] J. Klensin, “Internationalized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA):
Protocol,” Internet RFC 5891, Aug. 2010.
[RFC5936] E. Lewis and A. Hoenes, ed., “DNS Zone Transfer Protocol (AXFR),”
Internet RFC 5936, June 2010.
[RFC5966] R. Bellis, “DNS Transport over TCP—Implementation Requirements,”
Internet RFC 5966, Aug. 2010.
[RFC6116] S. Bradner, L. Conroy, and K. Fujiwara, “The E.164 to Uniform
Resource Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Appli-
cation (ENUM),” Internet RFC 6116, Mar. 2011.
[RFC6117] B. Hoeneisen, A. Mayrhofer, and J. Livingood, “IANA Registration of
Enumservices: Guide, Template, and IANA Considerations,” Internet RFC 6117,
Mar. 2011.

      [RFC6147] M. Bagnulo, A. Sullivan, P. Matthews, and I. van Beijnum, “DNS64:
      DNS Extensions for Network Address Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4 Serv-
      ers,” Internet RFC 6147, Apr. 2011.
      [RFC6168] W. Hardaker, “Requirements for Management of Name Servers for the
      DNS,” Internet RFC 6168 (informational), May 2011.
      [RFC6186] C. Daboo, “Use of SRV Records for Locating Email Submission/Access
      Services,” Internet RFC 6186, Mar. 2011.
      [RFC6195] D. Eastlake 3rd, “Domain Name System (DNS) IANA Considerations,”
      Internet RFC 6195/BCP 0042, Mar. 2011.
      [RFC6303] M. Andrews, “Locally Served DNS Zones,” Internet RFC 6303/BCP
      0163, July 2011.
      [ROOTS] http://www.root-servers.org
      [RSYNC] http://rsync.samba.org
      [SNP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/s-naptr-parameters
      [U11] The Unicode Consortium, The Unicode Standard, Version 6.0.0 (The Unicode
      Consortium, 2011).
      [URI] http://www.iana.org/assignments/uri-schemes
      [URN] http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces
      [X500] International Telecommunication Union—Telecommunication Standard-
      ization Sector, “The Directory—Overview of Concepts, Models and Services,”
      ITU-T X.500, 1993.
