     12

     TCP: The Transmission Control
     Protocol (Preliminaries)

12.1 Introduction
     So far we have been discussing protocols that do not include their own mecha-
     nisms for delivering data reliably. They may detect that erroneous data has been
     received, using a mathematical function such as a checksum or CRC, but they do
     not try very hard to repair errors. With IP and UDP, no error repair is done at all.
     With Ethernet and other protocols based on it, the protocol provides some number
     of retries and then gives up if it cannot succeed.
          The problem of communicating in environments where the communication
     medium may lose or alter the messages being delivered has been studied for
     years. Some of the most important theoretical work on the topic was developed
     by Claude Shannon in 1948 [S48]. This work, which popularized the term bit and
     became the foundation of the field of information theory, helps us understand the
     fundamental limits on the amount of information that can be moved across an
     information channel that is lossy (that may delete or alter bits). Information theory
     is closely related to the field of coding theory, which provides ways of encoding
     information so that it is as resilient as possible to errors in the communications
     channel. Using error-correcting codes (basically, adding redundant bits so that the
     real information can be retrieved even if some bits are damaged) to correct com-
     munications problems is one very important method for handling errors. Another
     is to simply “try sending again” until the information is finally received. This
     approach, called Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ), forms the basis for many com-
     munications protocols, including TCP.

12.1.1   ARQ and Retransmission
         If we consider not only a single communication channel but the multihop cascade
         of several, we realize that not only may we have the types of errors mentioned so
         far (packet bit errors), but there may be others. These problems might arise at an
         intermediate router and are the types of problems we brought up when discussing
         IP: packet reordering, packet duplication, and packet erasures (drops). An error-
         correcting protocol designed for use over a multihop communications channel
         (such as IP) must cope with all of these problems. Let us now explore the protocol
         mechanisms that can be brought to bear on them. After we discuss these in the
         abstract, we shall explore how they are used by TCP in the Internet.
              A straightforward method of dealing with packet drops (and bit errors) is to
         resend the packet until it is received properly. This requires a way to determine (1)
         whether the receiver has received the packet and (2) whether the packet it received
         was the same one the sender sent. The method for a receiver to signal to a sender
         that it has received a packet is called an acknowledgment, or ACK. In its most basic
         form, the sender sends a packet and awaits an ACK. When the receiver receives
         the packet, it sends the ACK. When the sender receives the ACK, it sends another
         packet, and the process continues. Interesting questions to ask here are (1) How
         long should the sender wait for an ACK? (2) What if the ACK is lost? (3) What if
         the packet was received but had errors in it?
              As we shall see, the first question turns out to be deep. Deciding how long to
         wait relates to how long the sender should expect to wait for an ACK. Determin-
         ing this may be difficult; we postpone the discussion of techniques for it until we
         discuss TCP in detail later (see Chapter 14). The answer to question 2 is easier:
         if an ACK is dropped, the sender cannot readily distinguish this case from the
         case in which the original packet is dropped, so it simply sends the packet again.
         Of course, the receiver may receive two or more copies in that case, so it must be
         prepared to handle that situation (see the next paragraph). As for the third ques-
         tion, we can appeal to the codes mentioned in Section 12.1. It is generally much
         easier to use codes to detect errors in a large packet (with high probability) using
         only a few bits than it is to correct them. Simpler codes are typically not capable
         of correcting errors but are capable of detecting them. That is why checksums and
         CRCs are so popular. In order to detect errors in a packet, then, we use a form of
         checksum. When a receiver receives a packet containing an error, it refrains from
         sending an ACK. Eventually, the sender resends the packet, which ideally arrives
         undamaged.
              Even with the simple scenario presented so far, there is the possibility that
         the receiver might receive duplicate copies of the packet being transferred. This
         problem is addressed using a sequence number. Basically, every unique packet gets
         a new sequence number when it is sent at the source, and this sequence number is
         carried along in the packet itself. The receiver can use this number to determine
         whether it has already seen the packet and if so, discard it.
              The protocol described so far is reliable but not very efficient. Consider what
         happens when the time to deliver even a small packet from sender to receiver (the
                                                          Section 12.1 Introduction    581

      delay or latency) is large (e.g., a second or two, which is not unusual for satellite
      links) and there are several packets to send. The sender is able to inject a single
      packet into the communications path but then must stop until it hears the ACK.
      This protocol is therefore called “stop and wait.” Its throughput performance (data
      sent on the network per unit time) is proportional to M/R where M is the packet
      size and R is the round-trip time (RTT), assuming no packets are lost or irrepara-
      bly damaged in transit. For a fixed-size packet, as R goes up, the throughput goes
      down. If packets are lost or damaged, the situation is even worse: the “goodput”
      (useful amount of data transferred per unit time) can be considerably less than the
      throughput.
           For a network that doesn’t damage or drop many packets, the cause for low
      throughput is usually that the network is not being kept busy. The situation is
      similar to using an assembly line where new work cannot enter the line until a
      complete product emerges. Most of the line goes idle. If we take this comparison
      one step further, it seems obvious that we would do better if we could have more
      than one work unit in the line at a time. It is the same for network communica-
      tion—if we could have more than one packet in the network, we would keep it
      “more busy,” leading to higher throughput.
           Allowing more than one packet to be in the network at a time complicates
      matters considerably. Now the sender must decide not only when to inject a packet
      into the network, but also how many. It also must figure out how to keep the
      timers when waiting for ACKs, and it must keep a copy of each packet not yet
      acknowledged in case retransmissions are necessary. The receiver needs to have
      a more sophisticated ACK mechanism: one that can distinguish which packets
      have been received and which have not. The receiver may need a more sophisti-
      cated buffering (packet storage) mechanism—one that allows it to hold “out-of-
      sequence” packets (those packets that have arrived earlier than those expected
      because of loss or reordering), unless it simply wants to throw away such pack-
      ets, which is very inefficient. There are other issues that may not be so obvious.
      What if the receiver is slower than the sender? If the sender simply injects many
      packets at a very high rate, the receiver might just drop them because of process-
      ing or memory limitations. The same question can be asked about the routers in
      the middle. What if the network infrastructure cannot handle the rate of data the
      sender and receiver wish to use?

12.1.2 Windows of Packets and Sliding Windows
      To handle all of these problems, we begin with the assumption that each unique
      packet has a sequence number, as described earlier. We define a window of packets
      as the collection of packets (or their sequence numbers) that have been injected by
      the sender but not yet completely acknowledged (i.e., the sender has not received
      an ACK for them). We refer to the window size as the number of packets in the
      window. The term window comes from the idea that if you lined up all the packets
      sent during a communication session in a long row but had only a small aperture

      through which to view them, you would see only a subset of them—like peering
      through a window. The sender’s window (and the line of other packets) can be
      graphically depicted as shown in Figure 12-1.

                                  /HIW?:LQGRZ                        5LJKW?:LQGRZ?
                                      (GJH                               (GJH

                                                                                                 

                                                &XUUHQW?:LQGRZ??
                         6HQW?DQG?                  6L]H? ??                  &DQQRW?%H?
                       $FNQRZOHGJHG                                            6HQW?<HW

Figure 12-1    The sender’s window, showing which packets are eligible to be sent (or have already
                     been sent), which are not yet eligible, and which have already been sent and acknowl-
                     edged. In this example, the window size is fixed at three packets.

           This figure shows the current window of three packets, for a total window
      size of 3. Packet number 3 has already been sent and acknowledged, so the copy
      of it that the sender was keeping can now be released. Packet 7 is ready at the
      sender but not yet able to be sent because it is not yet “in” the window. If we now
      imagine that data starts to flow from the sender to the receiver and ACKs start to
      flow in the reverse direction, the sender might next receive an ACK for packet 4.
      When this happens, the window “slides” to the right by one packet, meaning that
      the copy of packet 4 can be released and packet 7 can be sent. This movement of
      the window gives rise to another name for this type of protocol, a sliding window
      protocol.
           The sliding window approach can be used to combat many of the problems
      described so far. Typically, this window structure is kept at both the sender and
      the receiver. At the sender, it keeps track of what packets can be released, what
      packets are awaiting ACKs, and what packets cannot yet be sent. At the receiver, it
      keeps track of what packets have already been received and acknowledged, what
      packets are expected (and how much memory has been allocated to hold them),
      and which packets, even if received, will not be kept because of limited memory.
      Although the window structure is convenient for keeping track of data as it flows
      between sender and receiver, it does not provide guidance as to how large the
      window should be, or what happens if the receiver or network cannot handle the
      sender’s data rate. We shall now see how these are related.
                                                            Section 12.1 Introduction     583

12.1.3 Variable Windows: Flow Control and Congestion Control
       To handle the problem that arises when a receiver is too slow relative to a sender,
       we introduce a way to force the sender to slow down when the receiver cannot
       keep up. This is called flow control and is usually handled in one of two ways. One
       way, called rate-based flow control, gives the sender a certain data rate allocation
       and ensures that data is never allowed to be sent at a rate that exceeds the alloca-
       tion. This type of flow control is most appropriate for streaming applications and
       can be used with broadcast and multicast delivery (see Chapter 9).
             The other predominant form of flow control is called window-based flow con-
       trol and is the most popular approach when sliding windows are being used. In
       this approach, the window size is not fixed but is instead allowed to vary over
       time. To achieve flow control using this technique, there must be a method for the
       receiver to signal the sender how large a window to use. This is typically called a
       window advertisement, or simply a window update. This value is used by the sender
       (i.e., the receiver of the window advertisement) to adjust its window size. Logi-
       cally, a window update is separate from the ACKs we discussed previously, but
       in practice the window update and ACK are carried in a single packet, meaning
       that the sender tends to adjust the size of its window at the same time it slides it
       to the right.
             If we consider the effect of changing the window size at the sender, it becomes
       clear how this achieves flow control. The sender is allowed to inject W packets
       into the network before it hears an ACK for any of them. If the sender and receiver
       are sufficiently fast, and the network loses no packets and has an infinite capac-
       ity, this means that the transfer rate is proportional to (SW/R) bits/s, where W is
       the window size, S is the packet size in bits, and R is the RTT. When the window
       advertisement from the receiver clamps the value of W at the sender, the sender’s
       overall rate can be limited so as to not overwhelm the receiver. This approach
       works fine for protecting the receiver, but what about the network in between? We
       may have routers with limited memory between the sender and the receiver that
       have to contend with slow network links. When this happens, it is possible for the
       sender’s rate to exceed a router’s ability to keep up, leading to packet loss. This is
       addressed with a special form of flow control called congestion control.
             Congestion control involves the sender slowing down so as to not overwhelm
       the network between itself and the receiver. Recall that in our discussion of flow
       control, we used a window advertisement to signal the sender to slow down for the
       receiver. This is called explicit signaling, because there is a protocol field specifi-
       cally used to inform the sender about what is happening. Another option might be
       for the sender to guess that it needs to slow down. Such an approach would involve
       implicit signaling—that is, it would involve deciding to slow down based on some
       other evidence.
             The problem of congestion control in datagram-style networks, and more gen-
       erally queuing theory to which it is closely related, has remained a major research
       topic for years, and it is unlikely to ever be solved completely for all circumstances.
       It is also not practical to discuss all the options and methods of performing flow

       control here. The interested reader is referred to [J90], [K97], and [K75]. In Chapter
       16 we will explore the particular congestion control technique used with TCP in
       more detail, along with a number of variants that have arisen over the years.

12.1.4 Setting the Retransmission Timeout
       One of the most important performance issues the designer of a retransmission-
       based reliable protocol faces is how long to wait before concluding that a packet
       has been lost and should be resent. Stated another way, What should the retrans-
       mission timeout be? Intuitively, the amount of time the sender should wait before
       resending a packet is about the sum of the following times: the time to send the
       packet, the time for the receiver to process it and send an ACK, the time for the
       ACK to travel back to the sender, and the time for the sender to process the ACK.
       Unfortunately, in practice, none of these times are known with certainty. To make
       matters worse, any or all of them vary over time as additional load is added to or
       removed from the end hosts or routers.
            Because it is not practical for the user to tell the protocol implementation what
       the values of all the times are (or to keep them up-to-date) for all circumstances, a
       better strategy is to have the protocol implementation try to estimate them. This is
       called round-trip-time estimation and is a statistical process. Basically, the true RTT
       is likely to be close to the sample mean of a collection of samples of RTTs. Note that
       this average naturally changes over time (it is not stationary), as the paths taken
       through the network may change.
            Once some estimate of the RTT is made, the question of setting the actual
       timeout value, used to trigger retransmissions, remains. If we recall the defini-
       tion of a mean, it can never be the extreme value of a set of samples (unless they
       are all the same). So, it would not be sensible to set the retransmission timer to be
       exactly equal to the mean estimator, as it is likely that many actual RTTs will be
       larger, thereby inducing unwanted retransmissions. Clearly, the timeout should
       be set to something larger than the mean, but exactly what this relationship is (or
       even if the mean should be directly used) is not yet clear. Setting the timeout too
       large is also undesirable, as this leads back to letting the network go idle, reducing
       throughput. We shall defer further exploration of this topic to Chapter 14, where
       we explore how TCP, in particular, approaches this problem.

12.2 Introduction to TCP
       Given the background we now have regarding the issues affecting reliable deliv-
       ery in general, let us see how they play out in TCP and what type of service it
       provides to Internet applications. We also look at the fields in the TCP header,
       noticing how many of the concepts we have seen so far (e.g., ACKs, window adver-
       tisements) are captured in the header description. In the chapters that follow, we
       examine all of these header fields in more detail.
                                                    Section 12.2 Introduction to TCP     585

            Our description of TCP starts in this chapter and continues in the next five
       chapters. Chapter 13 describes how a TCP connection is established and termi-
       nated. Chapter 14 details how TCP estimates the per-connection RTT and how
       the retransmission timeout is set based on this estimate. Chapter 15 looks at the
       normal transfer of data, starting with “interactive” applications (such as chat). It
       then covers window management and flow control, which apply to both interac-
       tive and “bulk” data flow applications (such as file transfer), along with TCP’s
       urgent mechanism, which allows a sender to mark certain data in the data stream
       as special. Chapter 16 takes a look at congestion control algorithms in TCP that
       help to reduce packet loss when the network is very busy. It also discusses some
       modifications that have been proposed to increase throughput on fast networks
       or improve resiliency on lossy (e.g., wireless) networks. Finally, Chapter 17 shows
       how TCP keeps connections active even when no data is flowing.
            The original specification for TCP is [RFC0793], although some errors in that RFC
       are corrected in the Host Requirements RFC, [RFC1122]. Since then, specifications
       for TCP have been revised and extended to include clarified and improved conges-
       tion control behavior [RFC5681][RFC3782][RFC3517][RFC3390][RFC3168], retrans-
       mission timeouts [RFC6298][RFC5682][RFC4015], operation with NATs [RFC5382],
       acknowledgment behavior [RFC2883], security [RFC6056][RFC5927][RFC5926], con-
       nection management [RFC5482], and urgent mechanism implementation guidelines
       [RFC6093]. There have also been a rich variety of experimental modifications cov-
       ering retransmission behaviors [RFC5827][RFC3708], congestion detection and con-
       trol [RFC5690][RFC5562][RFC4782][RFC3649][RFC2861], and other features. Finally,
       there is an effort to explore how TCP might take advantage of multiple simultaneous
       network-layer paths [RFC6182].

12.2.1 The TCP Service Model
       Even though TCP and UDP use the same network layer (IPv4 or IPv6), TCP pro-
       vides a totally different service to the application layer from what UDP does. TCP
       provides a connection-oriented, reliable, byte stream service. The term connection-
       oriented means that the two applications using TCP must establish a TCP connec-
       tion by contacting each other before they can exchange data. The typical analogy
       is dialing a telephone number, waiting for the other party to answer the phone
       and saying “Hello,” and then saying “Who’s calling?” There are exactly two end-
       points communicating with each other on a TCP connection; concepts such as
       broadcasting and multicasting (see Chapter 9) are not applicable to TCP.
            TCP provides a byte stream abstraction to applications that use it. The conse-
       quence of this design decision is that no record markers or message boundaries
       are automatically inserted by TCP (see Chapter 1). A record marker corresponds
       to an indication of an application’s write extent. If the application on one end
       writes 10 bytes, followed by a write of 20 bytes, followed by a write of 50 bytes, the
       application at the other end of the connection cannot tell what size the individual
       writes were. For example, the other end may read the 80 bytes in four reads of 20
       bytes at a time or in some other way. One end puts a stream of bytes into TCP, and

       the identical stream of bytes appears at the other end. Each endpoint individually
       chooses its read and write sizes.
            TCP does not interpret the contents of the bytes in the byte stream at all. It has
       no idea if the data bytes being exchanged are binary data, ASCII characters, EBCDIC
       characters, or something else. The interpretation of this byte stream is up to the
       applications on each end of the connection. TCP does, however, support the urgent
       mechanism mentioned before, although it is no longer recommended for use.

12.2.2 Reliability in TCP
       TCP provides reliability using specific variations on the techniques just described.
       Because it provides a byte stream interface, TCP must convert a sending applica-
       tion’s stream of bytes into a set of packets that IP can carry. This is called packetiza-
       tion. These packets contain sequence numbers, which in TCP actually represent
       the byte offsets of the first byte in each packet in the overall data stream rather
       than packet numbers. This allows packets to be of variable size during a transfer
       and may also allow them to be combined, called repacketization. The application
       data is broken into what TCP considers the best-size chunks to send, typically
       fitting each segment into a single IP-layer datagram that will not be fragmented.
       This is different from UDP, where each write by the application usually gener-
       ates a UDP datagram of that size (plus headers). The chunk passed by TCP to IP
       is called a segment (see Figure 12-2). In Chapter 15 we shall see how TCP decides
       what size a segment should be.
            TCP maintains a mandatory checksum on its header, any associated appli-
       cation data, and fields from the IP header. This is an end-to-end pseudo-header
       checksum whose purpose is to detect any bit errors introduced in transit. If a
       segment arrives with an invalid checksum, TCP discards it without sending any
       acknowledgment for the discarded packet. The receiving TCP might acknowledge
       a previous (already acknowledged) segment, however, to help the sender with its
       congestion control computations (see Chapter 16). The TCP checksum uses the
       same mathematical function as is used by other Internet protocols (UDP, ICMP,
       etc.). For large data transfers, there is some concern that this checksum is not
       really strong enough [SP00], so careful applications should apply their own error
       protection methods (e.g., stronger checksums or CRCs) or use a middleware layer
       to achieve the same result (e.g., see [RFC5044]).
            When TCP sends a group of segments, it normally sets a single retransmission
       timer, waiting for the other end to acknowledge reception. TCP does not set a dif-
       ferent retransmission timer for every segment. Rather, it sets a timer when it sends
       a window of data and updates the timeout as ACKs arrive. If an acknowledgment
       is not received in time, a segment is retransmitted. In Chapter 14 we will look at
       TCP’s adaptive timeout and retransmission strategy in more detail.
            When TCP receives data from the other end of the connection, it sends an
       acknowledgment. This acknowledgment may not be sent immediately but is nor-
       mally delayed a fraction of a second. The ACKs used by TCP are cumulative in the
       sense that an ACK indicating byte number N implies that all bytes up to number N
                                                           Section 12.3 TCP Header and Encapsulation    587

     (but not including it) have already been received successfully. This provides some
     robustness against ACK loss—if an ACK is lost, it is very likely that a subsequent
     ACK is sufficient to ACK the previous segments.
         TCP provides a full-duplex service to the application layer. This means that
     data can be flowing in each direction, independent of the other direction. There-
     fore, each end of a connection must maintain a sequence number of the data flow-
     ing in each direction. Once a connection is established, every TCP segment that
     contains data flowing in one direction of the connection also includes an ACK for
     segments flowing in the opposite direction. Each segment also contains a win-
     dow advertisement for implementing flow control in the opposite direction. Thus,
     when a TCP segment arrives on a connection, the window may slide forward,
     the window size may change, and new data may have arrived. As we shall see in
     Chapter 13, a fully active TCP connection is bidirectional and symmetric; data can
     flow equally well in either direction.
         Using sequence numbers, a receiving TCP discards duplicate segments and
     reorders segments that arrive out of order. Recall that any of these anomalies
     can happen because TCP uses IP to deliver its segments, and IP does not provide
     duplicate elimination or guarantee correct ordering. Because it is a byte stream
     protocol, however, TCP never delivers data to the receiving application out of order.
     Thus, the receiving TCP may be forced to hold on to data with larger sequence
     numbers before giving it to an application until a missing lower-sequence-num-
     bered segment (a “hole”) is filled in.
         We will now begin to look at some of the details of TCP. In this chapter we
     will only introduce the encapsulation and header structure for TCP. Other details
     appear in the next five chapters. TCP can be used with IPv4 or IPv6, and the
     pseudo-header checksum it uses (similar to UDP’s) is mandatory for use with
     either IPv4 or IPv6.

12.3 TCP Header and Encapsulation
     TCP is encapsulated in IP datagrams as shown in Figure 12-2.

                                                                    7&3?6HJPHQW

                                                    7&3?
                     ,3?+HDGHU                                                7&3? $SSOLFDWLRQ ?'DWD
                                                   +HDGHU
          3URWR? ,3Y? ?RU?1H[W?+HDGHU? ,3Y? ? ??

               E\WHV²,3Y???QR?RSWLRQV?              ???E\WHV?
                    E\WHV²,3Y?                     QR?RSWLRQV
                                                                ,3?'DWDJUDP

Figure 12-2       The TCP header appears immediately following the IP header or last IPv6 extension
                       header and is often 20 bytes long (with no TCP options). With options, the TCP header
                       can be as large as 60 bytes. Common options include Maximum Segment Size, Time-
                       stamps, Window Scaling, and Selective ACKs.

          The header itself is considerably more complicated than the header we saw
      for UDP in Chapter 10. This is not very surprising, as TCP is a significantly more
      complicated protocol that must keep each end of the connection informed (syn-
      chronized) about the current state. It is shown in Figure 12-3.

                                                                                                  

                                   6RXUFH?3RUW                           'HVWLQDWLRQ?3RUW
                                              ELWV                               ???ELWV

                                                       6HTXHQFH?1XPEHU
                                                                ELWV
         %DVLF
         7&3?                                        $FNQRZOHGJPHQW?1XPEHU
        +HDGHU                                                ???ELWV
                                                                                                      7&3?
           E\WHV       +HDGHU?                 & ( 8 $ 3 5 6 )                                       +HDGHU
                                 5HVY? ?
                                               : & 5 & 6 6 < ,
                                                                             :LQGRZ?6L]H
                       /HQJWK
                                    ELWV                                         ???ELWV
                          ELWV                 5 ( * . + 7 1 1

                                 7&3?&KHFNVXP                                8UJHQW?3RLQWHU
                                              ELWV                               ???ELWV

                                                           2SWLRQV
                                                            YDULDEOH

Figure 12-3       The TCP header. Its normal size is 20 bytes, unless options are present. The Header
                        Length field gives the size of the header in 32-bit words (minimum value is 5). The
                        shaded fields (Acknowledgment Number, Window Size, plus ECE and ACK bits) refer to the
                        data flowing in the opposite direction relative to the sender of this segment.

           Each TCP header contains the source and destination port number. These
      two values, along with the source and destination IP addresses in the IP header,
      uniquely identify each connection. The combination of an IP address and a port
      number is sometimes called an endpoint or socket in the TCP literature. The latter
      term appeared in [RFC0793] and was ultimately adopted as the name of the Berke-
      ley-derived programming interface for network communications (now frequently
      called “Berkeley sockets”). It is a pair of sockets or endpoints (the 4-tuple con-
      sisting of the client IP address, client port number, server IP address, and server
      port number) that uniquely identifies each TCP connection. This fact will become
      important when we look at how a TCP server can communicate with multiple
      clients (see Chapter 13).
           The Sequence Number field identifies the byte in the stream of data from the
      sending TCP to the receiving TCP that the first byte of data in the containing
      segment represents. If we consider the stream of bytes flowing in one direction
      between two applications, TCP numbers each byte with a sequence number. This
      sequence number is a 32-bit unsigned number that wraps back around to 0 after
      reaching (232) − 1. Because every byte exchanged is numbered, the Acknowledgment
      Number field (also called the ACK Number or ACK field for short) contains the next
      sequence number that the sender of the acknowledgment expects to receive. This
      is therefore the sequence number of the last successfully received byte of data plus
      1. This field is valid only if the ACK bit field (described later in this section) is on,
                                         Section 12.3 TCP Header and Encapsulation               589

which it usually is for all but initial and closing segments. Sending an ACK costs
nothing more than sending any other TCP segment because the 32-bit ACK Num-
ber field is always part of the header, as is the ACK bit field.
     When a new connection is being established, the SYN bit field is turned on in
the first segment sent from client to server. Such segments are called SYN segments,
or simply SYNs. The Sequence Number field then contains the first sequence number
to be used on that direction of the connection for subsequent sequence numbers
and in returning ACK numbers (recall that connections are all bidirectional). Note
that this number is not 0 or 1 but instead is another number, often randomly cho-
sen, called the initial sequence number (ISN). The reason for the ISN not being 0 or 1
is a security measure and will be discussed in Chapter 13. The sequence number
of the first byte of data sent on this direction of the connection is the ISN plus 1
because the SYN bit field consumes one sequence number. As we shall see later,
consuming a sequence number also implies reliable delivery using retransmission.
Thus, SYNs and application bytes (and FINs, which we will see later) are reliably
delivered. ACKs, which do not consume sequence numbers, are not.
     TCP can be described as “a sliding window protocol with cumulative positive
acknowledgments.” The ACK Number field is constructed to indicate the largest
byte received in order at the receiver (plus 1). For example, if bytes 1–1024 are
received OK, and the next segment contains bytes 2049–3072, the receiver cannot
use the regular ACK Number field to signal the sender that it received this new
segment. Modern TCPs, however, have a selective acknowledgment (SACK) option
that allows the receiver to indicate to the sender out-of-order data it has received
correctly. When paired with a TCP sender capable of selective repeat, a significant
performance benefit may be realized [FF96]. In Chapter 14 we will see how TCP
uses duplicate acknowledgments (multiple segments with the same ACK field) to
help with its congestion control and error control procedures.
     The Header Length field gives the length of the header in 32-bit words. This is
required because the length of the Options field is variable. With a 4-bit field, TCP
is limited to a 60-byte header. Without options, however, the size is 20 bytes.
     Currently eight bit fields are defined for the TCP header, although some older
implementations understand only the last six of them.1 One or more of them can
be turned on at the same time. We briefly mention their use here and discuss each
of them in more detail in later chapters.

     1. CWR—Congestion Window Reduced (the sender reduced its sending rate);
        see Chapter 16.
     2. ECE—ECN Echo (the sender received an earlier congestion notification);
        see Chapter 16.
     3. URG—Urgent (the Urgent Pointer field is valid—rarely used); see Chapter 15.

1. Note that [RFC3540], an experimental RFC, also defines the least significant of the Resv bits as a
   nonce sum (NS). See Section 16.12.

          4. ACK—Acknowledgment (the Acknowledgment Number field is valid—
             always on after a connection is established); see Chapters 13 and 15.
          5. PSH—Push (the receiver should pass this data to the application as soon as
             possible—not reliably implemented or used); see Chapter 15.
          6. RST—Reset the connection (connection abort, usually because of an error);
             see Chapter 13.
          7. SYN—Synchronize sequence numbers to initiate a connection; see Chapter 13.
          8. FIN—The sender of the segment is finished sending data to its peer; see
             Chapter 13.

           TCP’s flow control is provided by each end advertising a window size using
      the Window Size field. This is the number of bytes, starting with the one specified
      by the ACK number, that the receiver is willing to accept. This is a 16-bit field,
      limiting the window to 65,535 bytes, and thereby limiting TCP’s throughput per-
      formance. In Chapter 15 we will look at the Window Scale option that allows this
      value to be scaled, providing much larger windows and improved performance
      for high-speed and long-delay networks.
           The TCP Checksum field covers the TCP header and data and some fields in
      the IP header, using a pseudo-header computation similar to the one used with
      ICMPv6 and UDP that we discussed in Chapters 8 and 10. It is mandatory for this
      field to be calculated and stored by the sender, and then verified by the receiver.
      The TCP checksum is calculated with the same algorithm as the IP, ICMP, and
      UDP (“Internet”) checksums.
           The Urgent Pointer field is valid only if the URG bit field is set. This “pointer” is
      a positive offset that must be added to the Sequence Number field of the segment to
      yield the sequence number of the last byte of urgent data. TCP’s urgent mechanism
      is a way for the sender to provide specially marked data to the other end.
           The most common Option field is the Maximum Segment Size option, called
      the MSS. Each end of a connection normally specifies this option on the first seg-
      ment it sends (the ones with the SYN bit field set to establish the connection). The
      MSS option specifies the maximum-size segment that the sender of the option is
      willing to receive in the reverse direction. We describe the MSS option in more
      detail in Chapter 13 and some of the other TCP options in Chapters 14 and 15. Other
      common options we investigate include SACK, Timestamp, and Window Scale.
           In Figure 12-2 we note that the data portion of the TCP segment is optional.
      We will see in Chapter 13 that when a connection is established, and when a con-
      nection is terminated, segments are exchanged that contain only the TCP header
      (with or without options) but no data. A header without any data is also used
      to acknowledge received data, if there is no data to be transmitted in that direc-
      tion (called a pure ACK), and to notify the communication peer of a change in the
      window size (called a window update). There are also some cases resulting from
      timeouts when a segment can be sent without any data.
                                                           Section 12.5 References    591

12.4 Summary
     The problem of providing reliable communications over lossy communication
     channels has been studied for years. The two primary methods for dealing with
     errors include error-correcting codes and data retransmission. The protocols using
     retransmissions must also handle data loss, usually by setting a timer, and must
     also arrange some way for the receiver to signal the sender what it has received.
     Deciding how long to wait for an ACK can be tricky, as the appropriate time may
     change as network routing or load on the end systems varies. Modern protocols
     estimate the round-trip time and set the retransmission timer based on some
     function of these measurements.
          Except for setting the retransmission timer, retransmission protocols are sim-
     ple when only one packet may be in the network at one time, but they perform
     poorly for networks where the delay is high. To be more efficient, multiple packets
     must be injected into the network before an ACK is received. This approach is more
     efficient but also more complex. A typical approach to managing the complexity is
     to use sliding windows, whereby packets are marked with sequence numbers, and
     the window size bounds the number of such packets. When the window size var-
     ies based on either feedback from the receiver or other signals (such as dropped
     packets), both flow control and congestion control can be achieved.
          TCP provides a reliable, connection-oriented, byte stream, transport-layer ser-
     vice built using many of these techniques. We looked briefly at all of the fields
     in the TCP header, noting that most of them are directly related to these abstract
     concepts in reliable delivery. We will examine them in detail in the chapters that
     follow. TCP packetizes the application data into segments, sets a timeout anytime
     it sends data, acknowledges data received by the other end, reorders out-of-order
     data, discards duplicate data, provides end-to-end flow control, and calculates and
     verifies a mandatory end-to-end checksum. It is the most widely used protocol on
     the Internet. It is used by most of the popular applications, such as HTTP, SSH/
     TLS, NetBIOS (NBT—NetBIOS over TCP), Telnet, FTP, and electronic mail (SMTP).
     Many distributed file-sharing applications (e.g., BitTorrent, Shareaza) also use TCP.

12.5 References
     [FF96] K. Fall and S. Floyd, “Simulation-Based Comparisons of Tahoe, Reno and
     SACK TCP,” ACM Computer Communications Review, July 1996.
     [J90] R. Jain, “Congestion Control in Computer Networks: Issues and Trends,”
     IEEE Network Magazine, May 1990.
     [K75] L. Kleinrock, Queuing Systems, Volume 1: Theory (Wiley-Interscience, 1975).
     [K97] S. Keshav, An Engineering Approach to Computer Networking (Addison-
     Wesley, 1997). (Note: A second edition is being developed.)

      [RFC0793] J. Postel, “Transmission Control Protocol,” Internet RFC 0793/STD
      0007, Sept. 1981.
      [RFC1122] R. Braden, ed., “Requirements for Internet Hosts—Communication
      Layers,” Internet RFC 1122/STD 0003, Oct. 1989.
      [RFC2861] M. Handley, J. Padhye, and S. Floyd, “TCP Congestion Window Vali-
      dation,” Internet RFC 2861 (experimental), June 2000.
      [RFC2883] S. Floyd, J. Mahdavi, M. Mathis, and M. Podolsky, “An Extension to
      the Selective Acknowledgement (SACK) Option for TCP,” Internet RFC 2883, July
      2000.
      [RFC3168] K. Ramakrishnan, S. Floyd, and D. Black, “The Addition of Explicit
      Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP,” Internet RFC 3168, Sept. 2001.
      [RFC3390] M. Allman, S. Floyd, and C. Partridge, “Increasing TCP’s Initial Win-
      dow,” Internet RFC 3390, Oct. 2002.
      [RFC3517] E. Blanton, M. Allman, K. Fall, and L. Wang, “A Conservative Selec-
      tive Acknowledgment (SACK)-Based Loss Recovery Algorithm for TCP,” Internet
      RFC 3517, Apr. 2003.
      [RFC3540] N. Spring, D. Wetherall, and D. Ely, “Robust Explicit Congestion Noti-
      fication (ECN) Signaling with Nonces,” Internet RFC 3540 (experimental), June
      2003.
      [RFC3649] S. Floyd, “HighSpeed TCP for Large Congestion Windows,” Internet
      RFC 3649 (experimental), Dec. 2003.
      [RFC3708] E. Blanton and M. Allman, “Using TCP Duplicate Selective Acknowl-
      edgement (DSACKs) and Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)
      Duplicate Transmission Sequence Numbers (TSNs) to Detect Spurious Retrans-
      missions,” Internet RFC 3708 (experimental), Feb. 2004.
      [RFC3782] S. Floyd, T. Henderson, and A. Gurtov, “The NewReno Modification to
      TCP’s Fast Recovery Algorithm,” Internet RFC 3782, Apr. 2004.
      [RFC4015] R. Ludwig and A. Gurtov, “The Eifel Response Algorithm for TCP,”
      Internet RFC 4015, Feb. 2005.
      [RFC4782] S. Floyd, M. Allman, A. Jain, and P. Sarolahti, “Quick-Start for TCP
      and IP,” Internet RFC 4782 (experimental), Jan. 2007.
      [RFC5044] P. Culley, U. Elzur, R. Recio, S. Bailey, and J. Carrier, “Marker PDU
      Aligned Framing for TCP Specification,” Internet RFC 5044, Oct. 2007.
      [RFC5382] S. Guha, ed., K. Biswas, B. Ford, S. Sivakumar, and P. Srisuresh, “NAT
      Behavioral Requirements for TCP,” Internet RFC 5382/BCP 0142, Oct. 2008.
      [RFC5482] L. Eggert and F. Gont, “TCP User Timeout Option,” Internet RFC 5482,
      Mar. 2009.
                                                    Section 12.5 References     593

[RFC5562] A. Kuzmanovic, A. Mondal, S. Floyd, and K. Ramakrishnan, “Adding
Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Capability to TCP’s SYN/ACK Packets,”
Internet RFC 5562 (experimental), June 2009.
[RFC5681] M. Allman, V. Paxson, and E. Blanton, “TCP Congestion Control,”
Internet RFC 5681, Sept. 2009.
[RFC5682] P. Sarolahti, M. Kojo, K. Yamamoto, and M. Hata, “Forward RTO-
Recovery (F-RTO): An Algorithm for Detecting Spurious Retransmission Time-
outs with TCP,” Internet RFC 5682, Sept. 2009.
[RFC5690] S. Floyd, A. Arcia, D. Ros, and J. Iyengar, “Adding Acknowledgement
Congestion Control to TCP,” Internet RFC 5690 (informational), Feb. 2010.
[RFC5827] M. Allman, K. Avrachenkov, U. Ayesta, J. Blanton, and P. Hurtig,
“Early Retransmit for TCP and Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP),”
Internet RFC 5827 (experimental), May 2010.
[RFC5926] G. Lebovitz and E. Rescorla, “Cryptographic Algorithms for the TCP
Authentication Option (TCP-AO),” Internet RFC 5926, June 2010.
[RFC5927] F. Gont, “ICMP Attacks against TCP,” Internet RFC 5927 (experimen-
tal), July 2010.
[RFC6056] M. Larsen and F. Gont, “Recommendations for Transport-Protocol
Port Randomization,” Internet RFC 6056/BCP 0156, Jan. 2011.
[RFC6093] F. Gont and A. Yourtchenko, “On the Implementation of the TCP
Urgent Mechanism,” Internet RFC 6093, Jan. 2011.
[RFC6182] A. Ford, C. Raiciu, M. Handley, S. Barre, and J. Iyengar, “Architectural
Guidelines for Multipath TCP Development,” Internet RFC 6182 (informational),
Mar. 2011.
[RFC6298] V. Paxson, M. Allman, J. Chu, and M. Sargent, “Computing TCP’s
Retransmission Timer,” Internet RFC 6298, June 2011.
[S48] C. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” Bell System Tech-
nical Journal, July/Oct. 1948.
[SP00] J. Stone and C. Partridge, “When the CRC and TCP Checksum Disagree,”
Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug./Sept. 2000.
This page intentionally left blank
