     13

     TCP Connection Management

13.1 Introduction
     TCP is a unicast connection-oriented protocol. Before either end can send data to the
     other, a connection must be established between them. In this chapter, we take a
     detailed look at what a TCP connection is, how it is established, and how it is ter-
     minated. Recall that TCP’s service model is a byte stream. TCP detects and repairs
     essentially all the data transfer problems that may be introduced by packet loss,
     duplication, or errors at the IP layer (or below).
          Because of its management of connection state (information about the connec-
     tion kept by both endpoints), TCP is a considerably more complicated protocol
     than UDP (see Chapter 10). UDP is a connectionless protocol that involves no con-
     nection establishment or termination. One of the major differences we shall see
     between the two is the amount of detail required to handle the various TCP states
     properly: when connections are created, terminated normally, and reset without
     warning. In other chapters we will look at what happens once the connection is
     established and data is transferred.
          During connection establishment, several options can be exchanged between
     the two endpoints regarding the parameters of the connection. Some options are
     allowed to be sent only when the connection is established, and others can be sent
     later. Recall from Chapter 12 that the TCP header has a limited space for holding
     options (40 bytes).

13.2 TCP Connection Establishment and Termination
     A TCP connection is defined to be a 4-tuple consisting of two IP addresses and two
     port numbers. More precisely, it is a pair of endpoints or sockets where each end-
     point is identified by an (IP address, port number) pair.

              A connection typically goes through three phases: setup, data transfer (called
         established), and teardown (closing). As we will see, some of the difficulty in creat-
         ing a robust TCP implementation is handling all of the transitions between and
         among these phases correctly. A typical TCP connection establishment and close
         (without any data transfer) is shown in Figure 13-1.

                        $FWLYH?2SHQHU?                                                       3DVVLYH?2SHQHU?
                            &OLHQW                                                               6HUYHU

                                                    6<1??6HT?
                                                                  ,61 F ?? RS
                                                                               WLRQV

                                                                                   RSWLRQV
                                                                      ,61 F ????
    &RQQHFWLRQ?6HW?8S                           ??6HT? ?,61 V ??$&.?
  7KUHH?:D\?+DQGVKDNH                  6<1???$&.
                                         $&.??6HT
                                                      ,61 F ??
                                                                   $&.? ?,
                                                                           61 V ??????
                                                                                           RSWLRQV
               'DWD?7UDQVIHU
                                                >1R?'DWD?7UDQVIHUUHG?LQ?7KLV?([DPSOH@
                (VWDEOLVKHG

                                               ),1?$&.??
                                                         6H   T? ?.??$&.
                                                                             /?? RSWLR
                                                                                        QV

                                                                                RSWLR  QV
                                                           /   ??$&.? ?.??
      &RQQHFWLRQ?&ORVH                          $&.??6HT?
      0RGLILHG?7KUHH?:D\?                                                       ???? RSWLRQV
        +DQGVKDNH                                    ??6HT? ?/    ??$&.? ?.??
                                            ),1???$&.

                                                $&.??6HT
                                                              .??$&.?
                                                                       /??   ???? RSWLRQ
                                                                                         V

Figure 13-1   A normal TCP connection establishment and termination. Usually, the client initiates a three-way
              handshake to exchange initial sequence numbers carried on SYN segments for the client and
              server (ISN(c) and ISN(s), respectively). The connection terminates after each side has sent a FIN
              and received an acknowledgment for it.

            The figure shows a timeline of what happens during connection establish-
         ment. To establish a TCP connection, the following events usually take place:

               1. The active opener (normally called the client) sends a SYN segment (i.e., a
                  TCP/IP packet with the SYN bit field turned on in the TCP header) specify-
                  ing the port number of the peer to which it wants to connect and the client’s

       initial sequence number or ISN(c) (see Section 13.2.3). It typically sends one
       or more options at this point (see Section 13.3). This is segment 1.
    2. The server responds with its own SYN segment containing its initial
       sequence number (ISN(s)). This is segment 2. The server also acknowledges
       the client’s SYN by ACKing ISN(c) plus 1. A SYN consumes one sequence
       number and is retransmitted if lost.
    3. The client must acknowledge this SYN from the server by ACKing ISN(s)
       plus 1. This is segment 3.

     These three segments complete the connection establishment. This is often
called the three-way handshake. Its main purposes are to let each end of the connec-
tion know that a connection is starting and the special details that are carried as
options, and to exchange the ISNs.
     The side that sends the first SYN is said to perform an active open. As men-
tioned, this is typically a client. The other side, which receives this SYN and sends
the next SYN, performs a passive open. It is most commonly called the server. (In
Section 13.2.2 we describe a supported but unusual simultaneous open when both
sides can do an active open at the same time and become both clients and servers.)

    Note
    TCP supports the capability of carrying application data on SYN segments. This
    is rarely used, however, because the Berkeley sockets API does not support it.

     Figure 13-1 also shows how a TCP connection is closed (also called cleared or
terminated). Either end can initiate a close operation, and simultaneous closes are
also supported but are rare. Traditionally, it was most common for the client to
initiate a close (as shown in Figure 13-1). However, other servers (e.g., Web servers)
initiate a close after they have completed a request. Usually a close operation starts
with an application indicating its desire to terminate its connection (e.g., using the
close() system call). The closing TCP initiates the close operation by sending a
FIN segment (i.e., a TCP segment with the FIN bit field set). The complete close
operation occurs after both sides have completed the close:

    1. The active closer sends a FIN segment specifying the current sequence num-
       ber the receiver expects to see (K in Figure 13-1). The FIN also includes an
       ACK for the last data sent in the other direction (labeled L in Figure 13-1).
    2. The passive closer responds by ACKing value K + 1 to indicate its success-
       ful receipt of the active closer’s FIN. At this point, the application is noti-
       fied that the other end of its connection has performed a close. Typically
       this results in the application initiating its own close operation. The passive
       closer then effectively becomes another active closer and sends its own FIN.
       The sequence number is equal to L.

          3. To complete the close, the final segment contains an ACK for the last FIN.
             Note that if a FIN is lost, it is retransmitted until an ACK for it is received.

           While it takes three segments to establish a connection, it takes four to termi-
      nate one. It is also possible for the connection to be in a half-open state (see Section
      13.6.3), although this is not common. This reason is that TCP’s data communica-
      tions model is bidirectional, meaning it is possible to have only one of the two
      directions operating. The half-close operation in TCP closes only a single direction
      of the data flow. Two half-close operations together close the entire connection.
      The rule is that either end can send a FIN when it is done sending data. When a
      TCP receives a FIN, it must notify the application that the other end has termi-
      nated that direction of data flow. The sending of a FIN is normally the result of
      the application issuing a close operation, which typically causes both directions
      to close.
           The seven segments we have seen are baseline overheads for any TCP connec-
      tion that is established and cleared “gracefully.” (There are more abrupt ways to
      tear down a TCP connection using special reset segments, which we cover later.)
      When a small amount of data needs to be exchanged, it is now apparent why some
      applications prefer to use UDP because of its ability to send and receive data with-
      out establishing connections. However, such applications are then faced with han-
      dling their own error repair features, congestion management, and flow control.

13.2.1 TCP Half-Close
      As we have mentioned, TCP supports a half-close operation. Few applications
      require this capability, so it is not common. To use this feature, the API must pro-
      vide a way for the application to say, essentially, “I am done sending data, so send
      a FIN to the other end, but I still want to receive data from the other end, until it
      sends me a FIN.” The Berkeley sockets API supports half-close, if the application
      calls the shutdown() function instead of calling the more typical close() func-
      tion. Most applications, however, terminate both directions of the connection by
      calling close. Figure 13-2 shows an example of a half-close being used. We show
      the client on the left side initiating the half-close, but either end can do this.
           The first two segments are the same as for a regular close: a FIN by the initia-
      tor, followed by an ACK of the FIN by the recipient. The operation then differs
      from Figure 13-1, because the side that receives the half-close can still send data.
      We show only one data segment, followed by an ACK, but any number of data
      segments can be sent. (We talk more about the exchange of data segments and
      acknowledgments in Chapter 15.) When the end that received the half-close is
      done sending data, it closes its end of the connection, causing a FIN to be sent, and
      this delivers an end-of-file indication to the application that initiated the half-close.
      When this second FIN is acknowledged, the connection is completely closed.

                       $FWLYH?2SHQHU?                                                 3DVVLYH?2SHQHU?
                           &OLHQW                                                         6HUYHU

                                                        >'DWD?7UDQVIHU@

                                          ),1???$&.
                                                         6HT? ?.??
                                                                  $&.? ?/??
                                                                              RSWLRQV
   &OLHQW?,QLWLDWHV?&ORVH
                                                                                QV
                                                                           RSWLR
                                                          /??$&.? ?.
                                           $&.??6HT?
                                                                   6HQW@
                                                       >0RUH?'DWD?
       &RQQHFWLRQ?,V
        +DOI?&ORVHG                                >'DWD?$FN
                                                               QRZOHGJHG@

                                                                                QV
                                                                           RSWLR
                                                         /??$&.? ?.
                                           ),1??6HT?
       &RQQHFWLRQ¶V?
    ³2WKHU?+DOI´?&ORVHV                    $&.??6HT
                                                          .??$&.
                                                                    /?????? R
                                                                             SWLRQV

Figure 13-2 With the TCP half-close operation, one direction of the connection can terminate while the other
            continues until it is closed. Few applications use this feature.

13.2.2 Simultaneous Open and Close
          It is possible, although highly improbable unless specifically arranged, for two
          applications to perform an active open to each other at the same time. Each end
          must have transmitted a SYN before receiving a SYN from the other side; the
          SYNs must pass each other on the network. This scenario also requires each end
          to have an IP address and port number that are known to the other end, which is
          rare (except for the firewall “hole-punching” techniques we saw in Chapter 7). If
          this happens, it is called a simultaneous open.
               For example, a simultaneous open occurs when an application on host A using
          local port 7777 performs an active open to port 8888 on host B, while at the same
          time an application on host B using local port 8888 performs an active open to
          port 7777 on host A. This is not the same as connecting a client on host A to a
          server on host B, while at the same time having a client on host B connect to a
          conventional server on host A. In that case, both servers perform passive opens,
          not active opens, and the clients assign themselves different ephemeral port num-
          bers. This results in two distinct TCP connections. Figure 13-3 shows the segments
          exchanged during a simultaneous open.

                $FWLYH?2SHQHU?                                                                         $FWLYH?2SHQHU?
                      F?                                                                                     F?

                                                6<1??6HT
                                                                  ,61 F?
                                                                              RSWLRQV

                                                                                   LRQV                      ??
                                                                      F?    ?? RSW                     F? ??
                                                                  ,61                     .?    ?,61
                                                         6HT?                        ??$&
  &RQQHFWLRQ?6HWXS                               6<1                        1 F?
   6LPXOWDQHRXV?2SHQ                                              6HT  ? ?,6 LRQV
                                                         $   &.??          RSW
                                               6<1
                                6<1???$
                                         &.??6HT
                                                    ,       61 F? ??
                                                                      $&.? ?,6
                                                                                  1 F? ????
                                                                                                   RSWLRQ
                                                                                                         V
                                          >'DWD?7UDQVIHU?0D\?%HJLQ?+HUH@

Figure 13-3   Segments exchanged during simultaneous open. One additional segment is required compared
              to the ordinary connection establishment procedure. The SYN bit field is on in each segment
              until an ACK for it is received.

             A simultaneous open requires the exchange of four segments, one more than
         the normal three-way handshake. Also note that we do not call either end a cli-
         ent or a server, because both ends act as client and server. A simultaneous close is
         not very different. We said earlier that one side (often, but not always, the client)
         performs the active close, causing the first FIN to be sent. In a simultaneous close,
         both do. Figure 13-4 shows the segments exchanged during a simultaneous close.

                       $FWLYH?&ORVHU?                                                                  $FWLYH?&ORVHU??
                            F?                                                                              F?

                                             ),1??$&
                                                        .??6HT?
                                                                       .??$&.
                                                                                   /?? RSWL
                                                                                               RQV
                                                                              &.?         ?.
                                                                     4? ?/??$
              &RQQHFWLRQ?                          ),1??$     &.??6(
                                                                                                  RSWLRQV
              7HUPLQDWLRQ
                                                                           $&.?       ?.??????
                                                                  HT? ?/??
                                                             $&.??6
                                                            
                                                $&.??6HT? ?.??
                                                                   $&.? ?/
                                                                                     RS
                                                                                          WLRQV

Figure 13-4 Segments exchanged during simultaneous close work like a conventional close, but the
                     segment ordering is interleaved.

           With a simultaneous close the same number of segments are exchanged as in
       the normal close. The only real difference is that the segment sequence is inter-
       leaved instead of sequential. Later we will see that simultaneous open and close
       operations use particular states in the TCP implementation that are not commonly
       exercised.

13.2.3 Initial Sequence Number (ISN)
       When a connection is open, any segment with the appropriate two IP addresses
       and port numbers is accepted as valid provided the sequence number is valid
       (i.e., within the window) and the checksum is OK. This brings up the question of
       whether it might be possible to have TCP segments being routed through the net-
       work that could show up later and disrupt a connection. This concern is addressed
       by careful selection of the ISN, which we now investigate.
             Before each end sends its SYN to establish the connection, it chooses an ISN
       for that connection. The ISN should change over time, so that each connection
       has a different one. [RFC0793] specifies that the ISN should be viewed as a 32-bit
       counter that increments by 1 every 4µs. The purpose of doing this is to arrange
       for the sequence numbers for segments on one connection to not overlap with
       sequence numbers on a another (new) identical connection. In particular, new
       sequence numbers must not be allowed to overlap between different instantiations
       (or incarnations) of the same connection.
             The idea of different instantiations of the same connection becomes clear
       when we recall that a TCP connection is identified by a pair of endpoints, creat-
       ing a 4-tuple of two address/port pairs. If a connection had one of its segments
       delayed for a long period of time and closed, but then opened again with the same
       4-tuple, it is conceivable that the delayed segment could reenter the new connec-
       tion’s data stream as valid data. This would be most troublesome. By taking steps
       to avoid overlap in sequence numbers between connection instantiations, we can
       try to minimize this risk. It does suggest, however, that an application with a very
       great need for data integrity should employ its own CRCs or checksums at the
       application layer to ensure that its own data has been transferred without error.
       This is generally good practice in any case, and it is commonly done for large files.
             As we shall see, knowing the connection 4-tuple as well as the currently active
       window of sequence numbers is all that is required to form a TCP segment that is
       considered valid to a communicating TCP endpoint. This represents a form of vul-
       nerability for TCP: anyone can forge a TCP segment and, if the sequence numbers,
       IP addresses, and port numbers are chosen appropriately, can interrupt a TCP
       connection [RFC5961]. One way of repelling this is to make the initial sequence
       number (or ephemeral port number [RFC6056]) relatively hard to guess. Another
       is encryption (see Chapter 18).
             In modern systems, the ISN is typically selected in a semirandom way. An
       interesting discussion of the subtleties of doing this properly is contained in CERT
       Advisory CA-2001-09 [CERTISN]. Linux goes through a fairly elaborate process to

      select its ISNs. It uses a clock-based scheme but starts the clock at a random offset
      for each connection. The random offset is chosen as a cryptographically hashed
      function on the connection identifier (4-tuple). A secret input to the hash func-
      tion changes every 5 minutes. Of the 32 bits in the ISN, the top-most 8 bits are a
      sequence number of the secret, and the remaining bits are generated by the hash.
      This produces an ISN that is difficult to guess, but also one that increases over
      time. Windows reportedly uses a similar scheme based on RC4 [S96].

13.2.4 Example
      Now that we have a basic idea of how a TCP connection is established and cleared,
      let us look at the packet-level details. To do so we make a TCP connection to a
      nearby Web server running on the machine with IPv4 address 10.0.0.2. The cli-
      ent is the Telnet application on Windows:

      C:\> telnet 10.0.0.2 80
      Welcome to Microsoft Telnet Client
      Escape Character is 'CTRL+]'
      ... wait about 4.4 seconds ...
      Microsoft Telnet> quit

           The telnet command establishes a TCP connection with the host having IPv4
      address 10.0.0.2 on the port corresponding to the http or Web service (port 80).
      When the Telnet program connects to a port other than 23 (the well-known port
      for the Telnet protocol [RFC0854]), it does not engage in the application protocol.
      Instead, it merely copies bytes from its input to its TCP connection and vice versa.
      When a Web server receives the incoming connection request, the first thing it does
      is await a request for a Web page. In this case, we do not provide one, so the server
      does not produce any data. This is ideal for us, because for now we are interested
      only in the connection establishment and termination packet exchange. Figure 13-5
      shows the Wireshark output for the segments generated by this command.
           In the figure, we can see that the client begins with a SYN segment contain-
      ing an ISN of 685506836 and window advertisement of 65535. This segment also
      contains several options we discuss in Section 13.3. The second segment is both
      a SYN from the server and an ACK for the client. The sequence number (server’s
      ISN) is 1479690171 and the ACK number is 685506837, 1 more than the client’s ISN.
      This indicates successful receipt of the client’s ISN. This segment also includes a
      window advertisement indicating that the server is willing to accept up to 64,240
      bytes. Completion of the three-way handshake takes place with segment 3, which
      contains ACK number 1479690172. Remember that ACK numbers are cumulative
      and always indicate the sequence number the sender of the ACK expects to see
      next (not the one that it last received).
           After a pause of about 4.4s, the Telnet application is instructed to close the
      connection. This results in the client’s TCP sending the FIN in segment 4. The
      sequence number of the FIN is 685506837, which is ACKed in segment 5 (with

Figure 13-5 A TCP connection between 192.168.35.130 and 10.0.0.2 is established and cleared without sending
            any data. The PSH (Push) bit indicates that segment 6 is sending all data from its buffer (which
            is none).

         ACK number 685506838). Shortly thereafter the server sends its own FIN with
         sequence number 1479690172. This segment also (redundantly) ACKs the client’s
         FIN once again. Note that the PSH bit field is on. This has no real effect on the
         closing of the connection but usually indicates that the server has no additional
         data to send. The final segment ACKs the server’s FIN by including ACK number
         1479690173.

              Note
              [RFC1025] calls a segment with the maximum number of features enabled (e.g.,
              flags and options) a “Kamikaze” packet. Other colorful terms include “nastygram,”
              “Christmas tree packet,” and “lamp test segment.”

         One thing we can see in Figure 13-5 is that the SYN segments contain one or more
         options. These take up additional space in the TCP header. For example, the length
         of the first TCP header is 44 bytes, 24 bytes greater than the minimum size. TCP

      has several supported options, which we detail after we see what happens when a
      connection cannot be established.

13.2.5 Timeout of Connection Establishment
      There are several circumstances in which a connection cannot be established. One
      obvious case is when the server host is down. To simulate this scenario, we issue
      our telnet command to a nonexistent host in the same subnet. If we do this
      without modifying the ARP table, the client exits with a “No route to host” error
      message, generated because no ARP reply is ever returned for the ARP request
      (see Chapter 4). If, however, we place an ARP entry for a nonexistent host in the
      ARP table first, the ARP request is not sent, and the system immediately attempts
      to contact the nonexistent host with TCP/IP. First, the commands:

      Linux# arp -s 192.168.10.180 00:00:1a:1b:1c:1d
      Linux% date; telnet 192.168.10.180 80; date
      Tue June 7 21:16:34 PDT 2009
      Trying 192.168.10.180...
      telnet: connect to address 192.168.10.180: Connection timed out
      Tue June 7 21:19:43 PDT 2009
      Linux%

          Here the MAC address 00:00:1a:1b:1c:1d was chosen simply as a MAC
      address not being used on the LAN; it is of no special consequence. The timeout
      occurs about 3.2 minutes after the initial command. Because there is no host to
      respond, all of the segments generated are from the client. Listing 13-1 shows the
      output using Wireshark in packet summary (text) mode.

Listing 13-1   Wireshark output for connection establishment that times out

      No. Time     Source                     Destination           Protocol Info
       1 0.000000 192.168.10.144              192.168.10.180        TCP      32787 > http
       2 2.997928 192.168.10.144              192.168.10.180        TCP      32787 > http
       3 8.997962 192.168.10.144              192.168.10.180        TCP      32787 > http
       4 20.997942 192.168.10.144             192.168.10.180        TCP      32787 > http
       5 44.997936 192.168.10.144             192.168.10.180        TCP      32787 > http
       6 92.997937 192.168.10.144             192.168.10.180        TCP      32787 > http

          The interesting point in this output is how frequently the client’s TCP sends a
      SYN to try to establish the connection. The second segment is sent 3s after the first,
      the third is sent 6s after the second, the fourth is sent 12s after the third, and so
      on. This behavior is called exponential backoff, and we saw something like it before
      when we discussed the behavior of Ethernet’s CSMA/CD media access control
      protocol (see Chapter 3). In that case, it was a little different, however, because
      here each backoff is deterministically (i.e., always) twice the previous backoff,
      whereas in Ethernet, the maximum backoff is doubled and the actual backoff is
      chosen randomly.

            The number of times to retry an initial SYN can be configured on some sys-
       tems and usually has a fairly small value such as 5. In Linux, the system configura-
       tion variable net.ipv4.tcp_syn_retries gives the maximum number of times
       to attempt to resend a SYN segment during an active open. A corresponding value
       called net.ipv4.tcp_synack_retries gives the maximum number of times
       to attempt to resend a SYN + ACK segment when responding to a peer’s active
       open request. It can also be used on an individual connection basis by setting the
       Linux-specific TCP_SYNCNT socket option. Its default value is five retries, as we
       see here. The exponential backoff timing between these retransmissions is part of
       TCP’s congestion management response. We shall examine it in detail when we
       discuss Karn’s algorithm (see Chapter 16).

13.2.6 Connections and Translators
       In Chapter 7 we discussed how conventional NAT translates the addresses and
       port numbers used by protocols such as TCP and UDP. We also examined how IP
       packets can be translated between IPv6 and IPv4. When NAT is used with TCP,
       the pseudo-header checksum usually requires adjustment (except in cases where
       a checksum-neutral address modifier is used). This is also true for other protocols
       that use pseudo-header checksums, because the computation involves informa-
       tion at the transport layer as well as the network layer.
            When a TCP connection is first established, a NAT (or NAT64) can ascertain
       this fact because of the presence of the SYN bit field in a segment. It can also deter-
       mine when a connection has become fully established by looking for subsequent
       SYN + ACK and ACK segments containing the appropriate sequence numbers.
       The same applies for the termination of a connection. By implementing a portion
       of the TCP state machine in a NAT (see, for example, Sections 3.5.2.1 and 3.5.2.2 of
       [RFC6146]), the connection can be tracked, including the current states, sequence
       numbers in each direction, and corresponding ACK numbers. Such state tracking
       is typical for NAT implementations.
            Further complications arise when a NAT acts as an editor and rewrites con-
       tents in the transport protocol’s data payload. For TCP, this may involve removing
       or adding bytes to the data stream, and consequently affecting the sequence num-
       bers (and segment) lengths. Doing so also necessarily affects the checksum, but it
       also affects the data sequence. If data is inserted or removed from the data stream
       by the NAT, these values can be adjusted appropriately. Doing so is somewhat
       fragile because if the NAT state becomes desynchronized with the state in the end
       hosts, the connection will not operate properly.

13.3 TCP Options
       The TCP header can contain options (see Figure 12-3). The only options defined in the
       original TCP specification are the End of Option List (EOL), the No Operation (NOP),
       and the Maximum Segment Size (MSS) options. Since then, several options have been

Table 13-1 The TCP option values. Up to 40 bytes are available to hold options.

Kind      Length     Name                 Reference     Description and Purpose
0         1          EOL                  [RFC0793]     End of Option List
1         1          NOP                  [RFC0793]     No Operation (used for padding)
2         4          MSS                  [RFC0793]     Maximum Segment Size
3         3          WSOPT                [RFC1323]     Window Scaling Factor (left-shift amount on
                                                        window)
4         2          SACK-Permitted       [RFC2018]     Sender supports SACK options
5         Var.       SACK                 [RFC2018]     SACK block (out-of-order data received)
8         10         TSOPT                [RFC1323]     Timestamps option
28        4          UTO                  [RFC5482]     User Timeout (abort after idle time)
29        Var.       TCP-AO               [RFC5925]     Authentication option (using various
                                                        algorithms)
253       Var.       Experimental         [RFC4727]     Reserved for experimental use
254       Var.       Experimental         [RFC4727]     Reserved for experimental use

         defined. The entire list is maintained by the IANA [TPARAMS]; Table 13-1 gives the
         current options of interest (i.e., those with standards-track RFC descriptions).
             Every option begins with a 1-byte kind that specifies the type of option. Options
         that are not understood are simply ignored, according to [RFC1122]. The options
         with a kind value of 0 and 1 occupy a single byte. The other options have a len byte
         that follows the kind byte. The length is the total length, including the kind and
         len bytes. The reason for the NOP option is to allow the sender to pad fields to a
         multiple of 4 bytes, if it needs to. Remember that the TCP header’s length is always
         required to be a multiple of 32 bits because the TCP Header Length field uses that
         unit. The EOL option indicates the end of the list and that no further processing of
         the options list is to be performed. Now we will have a look at the other options.

13.3.1 Maximum Segment Size (MSS) Option
         The maximum segment size (MSS) is the largest segment that a TCP is willing to
         receive from its peer and, consequently, the largest size its peer should ever use
         when sending. The MSS value counts only TCP data bytes and does not include
         the sizes of any associated TCP or IP header [RFC0879]. When a connection is
         established, each end usually announces its MSS in an MSS option carried with its
         SYN segment. The option allows for 16 bits to be used to specify the MSS value. If
         no MSS option is provided, a default value of 536 bytes is used. Recall the rule that
         requires any host to be capable of processing IPv4 datagrams at least as large as
         576. With minimum-size IPv4 and TCP headers, a TCP using a sending MSS size
         of 536 bytes produces an IPv4 datagram of size 20 + 20 + 536 = 576 bytes.
              The MSS values in Figure 13-5 are all 1460, which is typical for IPv4. The
         resulting IPv4 datagram is normally 40 bytes larger (1500 bytes total, the typical

      MTU size for Ethernet and path MTU for the Internet): 20 bytes for the TCP header
      and 20 bytes for the IPv4 header. When IPv6 is used, the MSS is usually 1440, 20
      bytes less because of the larger IPv6 header. The special MSS value of 65535 can be
      used with IPv6 jumbograms to indicate an effective MSS of infinity [RFC2675]. In
      this case the SMSS will be determined as the PMTU minus 60 bytes (40 bytes for
      the IPv6 header and 20 bytes for the TCP header). Note that the MSS option is not
      a negotiation between one TCP and its peer; it is a limit. When one TCP gives its
      MSS option to the other, it is indicating its unwillingness to accept any segments
      larger than that size for the duration of the connection.

13.3.2 Selective Acknowledgment (SACK) Options
      In Chapter 12 we introduced the concept of a sliding window, and we described
      how TCP handles its sequence numbers and acknowledgments. Because it uses
      cumulative ACKs, TCP is never able to acknowledge data it has received correctly
      but that is not contiguous, in terms of sequence numbers, with data it has received
      previously. In such cases, the TCP receiver is said to have holes in its received data
      queue. A receiving TCP prevents applications from consuming data beyond a hole
      because of the byte stream abstraction it provides.
           If a TCP sender were able to learn of the existence of holes (and out-of-
      sequence data blocks beyond holes in the sequence space) at the receiver, it could
      better select which particular TCP segments to retransmit when segments are lost
      or otherwise missing at the receiver. The TCP selective acknowledgment (SACK)
      options [RFC2018][RFC2883] provide this capability. The scheme works effec-
      tively, however, only if the TCP sender logic is able to make effective use of the
      SACK information it receives from a SACK-capable receiver.
           A TCP learns that its peer is capable of advertising SACK information by
      receiving the SACK-Permitted option in a SYN (or SYN + ACK) segment. Once
      this has taken place, the TCP receiving out-of-sequence data may provide a SACK
      option that describes the out-of-sequence data to help its peer perform retransmis-
      sions more efficiently. SACK information contained in a SACK option consists of a
      range of sequence numbers representing data blocks the receiver has successfully
      received. Each range is called a SACK block and is represented by a pair of 32-bit
      sequence numbers. Thus, a SACK option containing n SACK blocks is (8n + 2)
      bytes long. Two bytes are used to hold the kind and length of the SACK option.
           Because of the limited amount of space available in the option space of a TCP
      header, the maximum number of SACK blocks available to be sent in a single seg-
      ment is three (assuming the Timestamps option is also used, described in Section
      13.3.4, which is typical for modern TCP implementations). Although the SACK-
      Permitted option is only ever sent in a SYN segment, the SACK blocks themselves
      may be sent in any segment once the sender has sent the SACK-Permitted option.
      Because the operation of SACK is most easily (and importantly) related to the error
      and congestion control operations of TCP, we discuss it in further detail when we
      cover these topics in Chapters 14 and 16.

13.3.3 Window Scale (WSCALE or WSOPT) Option
      The Window Scale option (denoted WSCALE or WSOPT) [RFC1323] effectively
      increases the capacity of the TCP Window Advertisement field from 16 to about 30
      bits. Instead of changing the field size, however, the header still holds a 16-bit
      value, and an option is defined that applies a scaling factor to the 16-bit value. This
      factor effectively left-shifts the window field value by the scale factor. This, in
      effect, multiplies the window value by the value 2s, where s is the scale factor.
      The 1-byte shift count is between 0 and 14 (inclusive). A shift count of 0 indicates
      no scaling. The maximum scale value of 14 provides for a maximum window of
      1,073,725,440 bytes (65,535 × 214), close to 1,073,741,823 (230 −1), effectively 1GB. TCP
      then maintains the “real” window size internally as a 32-bit value.
           This option can appear only in a SYN segment, so the scale factor is fixed
      in each direction when the connection is established. To enable window scaling,
      both ends must send the option in their SYN segments. The end doing the active
      open sends the option in its SYN, but the end doing the passive open can send the
      option only if the received SYN specifies the option. The scale factor can be differ-
      ent in each direction. If the end doing the active open sends a nonzero scale factor
      but does not receive a Window Scale option from the other end, it sets its send
      and receive scale values to 0. This lets systems that do not understand the option
      interoperate with systems that do.
           Assume we are using the Window Scale option, with a shift count of S for
      sending and a shift count of R for receiving. Then every 16-bit advertised window
      that we receive from the other end is left-shifted by R bits to obtain the real adver-
      tised window size. Every time we send a window advertisement to the other end,
      we take our real 32-bit window size and right-shift it S bits, placing the resulting
      16-bit value in the TCP header.
           The shift count is automatically chosen by TCP, based on the size of the
      receive buffer. The size of this buffer is set by the system, but the capability is
      normally provided for the application to change it. The Window Scale option is
      most relevant when TCP is used to provide bulk data transfer over networks with
      large-bandwidth-delay products (i.e., those with a product of round-trip time and
      bandwidth being relatively large). Thus, we shall discuss the importance and use
      of this option more in Chapter 16.

13.3.4 Timestamps Option and Protection against Wrapped Sequence Numbers
       (PAWS)
      The Timestamps option (sometimes called the Timestamp option and written as
      TSOPT or TSopt) lets the sender place two 4-byte timestamp values in every seg-
      ment. The receiver reflects these values in the acknowledgment, allowing the
      sender to calculate an estimate of the connection’s RTT for each ACK received.
      (We must say “each ACK received” and not “each segment” because TCP often
      acknowledges multiple segments per ACK; we will see this in Chapter 15.) When
      using the Timestamps option, the sender places a 32-bit value in the Timestamp

Value field (called TSV or TSval) in the first part of the TSOPT, and the receiver
echoes this back unchanged in the second Timestamp Echo Retry field (called TSER
or TSecr). TCP headers containing this option increase by 10 bytes (8 bytes for the
two timestamp values and 2 to indicate the option value and length).
    The timestamp is a monotonically increasing value. Because the receiver
simply echoes what it receives, it does not care what the timestamp units or val-
ues actually are. This option does not require any form of clock synchronization
between the two hosts. [RFC1323] recommends that the sender increment the
timestamp value by at least 1 every second. Figure 13-6 shows the Timestamps
option, as displayed by Wireshark.

Figure 13-6   A TCP connection with the Timestamps, Window Scaling, and MSS options being used.
              The TCP header is 44 bytes long. The initial SYN (packet 1) starts with the TSV set to
              81813090. The second packet, highlighted, echoes this value back to the active opener
              and includes its own value of 349742014.

     Here, both ends participate by generating and echoing back the other’s
timestamps. The first segment (client’s SYN) uses an initial timestamp value of
81813090. This value is placed in the TSV. The second portion, TSER, has a value
of 0 on the first segment because the client does not know the server’s timestamp
value yet.

           The main reason for wishing to calculate a good estimate of the connection’s
      RTT is to set the retransmission timeout, which tells TCP when it should try
      resending a segment that is likely lost. In Chapter 12 we discussed the need to set
      this timeout based on some function of the RTT. With the Timestamps option, we
      can get relatively fine-grain measurements of the RTT. Prior to the creation of the
      Timestamps option, most TCPs would perform just one RTT sample per window
      of data. With the Timestamps option, more samples can be taken, leading to the
      potential of a better RTT estimate (see [RFC1323] and [RFC6298]).
           Because the Timestamps option is most relevant to the setting of the retrans-
      mission timer, we discuss its use for that purpose in more detail when we dis-
      cuss retransmission in Chapter 14. We say “for that purpose” because although
      the Timestamps option allows for more frequent RTT samples, it also provides
      a way for the receiver to avoid receiving old segments and considering them as
      valid. This is called Protection Against Wrapped Sequence Numbers (PAWS), and it is
      described in [RFC1323] along with the Timestamps option. We’ll now take a look
      at how it works.
           Consider a TCP connection using the Window Scale option with the larg-
      est possible window, about 1GB (230). Also assume that the Timestamps option is
      being used and that the timestamp value assigned by the sender increments by 1
      for each window that is sent. (This is conservative. Normally the timestamp incre-
      ments faster than this.) Table 13-2 shows the possible data flow between the two
      hosts when transferring 6GB. To avoid lots of ten-digit numbers, we use the nota-
      tion G to mean a multiple of 1,073,741,824. We also use the notation from tcpdump
      that J:K means byte J through and including byte K − 1.

Table 13-2 The TCP Timestamps option can disambiguate segments with the same sequence num-
                 bers by providing an extra 32 bits of effective sequence number space.

                         Send     Send
      Time    Bytes Sent Seq. No. Timestamp Receive
      A       0G:1G        0G:1G     1             OK
      B       1G:2G        1G:2G     2             OK, but one segment lost and retransmitted
      C       2G:3G        2G:3G     3             OK
      D       3G:4G        3G:4G     4             OK
      E       4G:5G        0G:1G     5             OK
      F       5G:6G        1G:2G     6             OK, but retransmitted segment reappears

           The 32-bit Sequence Number field wraps between times D and E. We assume
      that one segment gets lost at time B and is retransmitted. We also assume that this
      lost segment reappears at time F. This assumes that the time difference between
      the segment getting lost and reappearing is less than the maximum time a seg-
      ment can live in the network (called the MSL; see Section 13.5.2); otherwise the

      segment would have been discarded by some router when its TTL expired. As we
      mentioned earlier, it is only with relatively high-speed connections that this prob-
      lem appears, where old segments can reappear and contain sequence numbers
      currently being transmitted.
           We can also see from Table 13-2 that using the Timestamps option prevents
      this problem. The receiver considers the timestamp as a 32-bit extension of the
      sequence number. Because the lost segment that reappears at time F has a time-
      stamp of 2, which is less than the most recent valid timestamp (5 or 6), it is dis-
      carded by the PAWS algorithm. The PAWS algorithm does not require any form of
      time synchronization between the sender and the receiver. All the receiver needs
      is for the timestamp values to be monotonically increasing, and to increase by at
      least 1 per window of data.

13.3.5 User Timeout (UTO) Option
      The User Timeout (UTO) option is a relatively new TCP capability described in
      [RFC5482]. The UTO value (also called USER_TIMEOUT) specifies the amount of
      time a TCP sender is willing to wait for an ACK of outstanding data before con-
      cluding that the remote end has failed. USER_TIMEOUT has traditionally been a
      local configuration parameter for TCP [RFC0793]. The UTO option allows one TCP
      to signal its USER_TIMEOUT value to its connection peer. This allows the receiv-
      ing TCP to adjust its behavior (e.g., to tolerate a longer period of disrupted con-
      nectivity prior to aborting a connection). NAT devices could also interpret such
      information to help set their connection activity timers.
           UTO option values are advisory; just because one end of a connection might
      wish to use a large or small UTO value does not mean that the other end needs to
      comply. [RFC1122] refines the definition of USER_TIMEOUT and suggests that a
      TCP reaching a threshold of three (R1) retransmissions should notify the request-
      ing application, and that after 100s (R2) the connection should be closed. Some
      implementations have an API function to change R1 and R2. Because long UTOs
      might lead to resource exhaustion concerns and short UTOs might result in some
      connections being torn down early (a type of DoS attack), upper and lower limits
      are placed on the possible UTO values. The way to set USER_TIMEOUT, then, is
      as follows:

      USER_TIMEOUT = min(U_LIMIT, max(ADV_UTO, REMOTE_UTO, L_LIMIT))

      where ADV_UTO is the UTO option advertised to the remote TCP, REMOTE_UTO
      is the peer’s advertised UTO option value, U_LIMIT is the local system’s upper
      UTO limit, and L_LIMIT is the local system’s UTO lower limit. Note that this for-
      mula does not guarantee that each end of the same connection will arrive at the
      same USER_TIMEOUT value. In all cases the L_LIMIT value must be greater than
      the associated connection’s retransmission timeout (RTO) value (see Chapter 14),
      and it is recommended to be set to 100s to retain compatibility with [RFC1122].

          UTO options are included on SYN segments when a connection is estab-
      lished, on the first non-SYN segments, and whenever the USER_TIMEOUT value
      is changed. The option value is expressed as a 15-bit value in units of seconds
      or minutes following a bit field (“granularity”) that indicates that the value is in
      minutes (1) or seconds (0). As a relatively new option, it is not yet widely deployed.

13.3.6 Authentication Option (TCP-AO)
      There is an option used to enhance the security of TCP connections. It is designed
      to enhance and replace an earlier mechanism called TCP-MD5 [RFC2385]. Called
      the TCP Authentication Option (TCP-AO) [RFC5925], it uses a cryptographic hash
      algorithm (see Chapter 18), in combination with a secret value known to each
      end of a TCP connection, to authenticate each segment. TCP-AO improves upon
      TCP-MD5 by supporting a variety of cryptographic algorithms and identifying
      changing of keys using in-band signaling. It does not provide a comprehensive
      key management solution, however. That is, each end still has to have a way to
      establish a shared set of keys prior to operation.
            When sending, the TCP derives a traffic key from the shared secret key
      and computes the hash value according to a particular cryptographic algorithm
      [RFC5926]. A receiver, equipped with the same secret key, is likewise able to derive
      the traffic key and use it to ensure that an arriving segment has not been modified
      in transit (with high probability). This option is intended as a strong countermea-
      sure to a variety of TCP spoofing attacks (see Section 13.8). However, because it
      requires creation and distribution of a shared key (and is a relatively new option),
      it is not yet widely deployed.

13.4 Path MTU Discovery with TCP
      In Chapter 3, we described the concept of the path MTU. It is the minimum MTU
      on any network segment that is currently in the path between two hosts. Knowing
      the path MTU can help protocols such as TCP avoid fragmentation. In Chapter 10,
      we looked at how discovery of the path MTU (PMTUD) is accomplished based on
      ICMP messages, but in that case UDP is not usually able to adapt its datagram size
      because the application specifies the size (i.e., not the transport protocol). TCP, in
      providing the byte stream abstraction it implements, determines what segment
      size to use and as a result has a much greater degree of control over the size of IP
      datagrams that are ultimately generated.
           In this section we will examine how PMTUD is used by TCP. Our discus-
      sion will apply to both TCP/IPv4 and TCP/IPv6. More details are provided by
      [RFC1191] and [RFC1981], respectively. A method that avoids the use of ICMP,
      called Packetization Layer Path MTU Discovery (PLPMTUD), can also be used by
      TCP [RFC4821] or by other transport protocols. We shall use the ICMPv6 Packet
      Too Big (PTB) terminology to refer to either ICMPv4 Destination Unreachable
      (Fragmentation Required) or ICMPv6 Packet Too Big messages.
                                         Section 13.4 Path MTU Discovery with TCP        613

           TCP’s regular PMTUD process operates as follows: When a connection is
      established, TCP uses the minimum of the MTU of the outgoing interface, or the
      MSS announced by the other end, as the basis for selecting its send maximum
      segment size (SMSS). PMTUD does not allow TCP to exceed the MSS announced
      by the other end. If the other end does not specify an MSS, the sender assumes a
      default of 536 bytes, but this situation is now rare. It is also possible for an imple-
      mentation to save path MTU information on a per-destination basis to help in
      selecting its segment size. Note that the path MTU in each direction of a connec-
      tion could be different.
           Once the initial SMSS is chosen, all IPv4 datagrams sent by TCP on that con-
      nection have the IPv4 DF bit field set. For TCP/IPv6, this is not necessary because
      there is no DF bit field; all datagrams are assumed to have it set implicitly. If a PTB
      is received, TCP decreases the segment size and retransmits using a different seg-
      ment size. If the PTB contains the suggested next-hop MTU, the segment size can
      be set to the next-hop MTU minus the sizes of the IPv4 (or IPv6) and TCP headers.
      If the next-hop MTU value is not present (e.g., an older ICMP error was returned
      that lacks this information), the sender may try a variety of values (e.g., binary
      search for a usable value). This also affects TCP’s congestion control management
      (see Chapter 16). For PLPMTUD the situation is similar, except PTB messages are
      not used. Instead, the protocol performing PMTUD must be able to detect message
      discards quickly and perform its own datagram size adjustments.
           Because routes can change dynamically, when some time has passed since
      the last decrease of the segment size, a larger value (up to the initial SMSS) can be
      tried. Guidance in [RFC1191] and [RFC1981] recommends that this time interval
      be about 10 minutes.
           There are a number of problems with PMTUD when it operates in an Internet
      environment with firewalls that block PTB messages [RFC2923]. Of the various
      operational problems with PMTUD, black holes have been the most problematic,
      although the situation is improving (in [LS10], 80% of systems studied were able
      to properly process PTB messages). PMTUD black holes arise when a TCP imple-
      mentation that depends on the delivery of ICMP messages to adjust its segment
      size never receives them. This could be for several reasons, including a firewall or
      NAT configuration that prohibits such ICMP messages from being forwarded. The
      consequence is a TCP connection that cannot proceed once it starts to use larger
      packets. It can be difficult to diagnose because only large packets cannot be for-
      warded. The smaller ones (such as SYN and SYN + ACK packets used to establish
      the connection) generally succeed. Some TCP implementations have “black hole
      detection,” which amounts to trying a smaller segment size when a segment is
      retransmitted several times.

13.4.1 Example
      We can see the correct behavior of PMTUD when an intermediate router has an
      MTU less than either of the endpoints’ MSS. To create this situation, we begin with
      a router (a Linux host with local address 10.0.0.1) that has a PPPoE interface to a

      DSL service provider. The PPPoE link uses an MTU of 1492 (1500 bytes for Ether-
      net, minus 6 bytes of PPPoE overhead, minus another 2 bytes of PPP overhead; see
      Chapter 3). Figure 13-7 is an illustration of the topology.

                                 '6/?PRGHP

                                *:
                                             333R(?/LQN
                                             078? ?????
                                               SSS?                     ,QWHUQHW
                                        HWK???????????

            HWK?????????????                              6
                                                                           

                                  &

Figure 13-7   The PPPoE encapsulation drops the path MTU of most TCP connections to 1492 bytes
                    from what might otherwise have been 1500 bytes (the typical MTU for Ethernet). To
                    demonstrate TCP’s use of PMTUD, we set the MTU even smaller (288 bytes).

          In order to induce this behavior specifically, we can reduce the MTU size on
      the PPPoE link from 1492 to, say, 288 bytes. On the GW machine, the following
      command accomplishes this task:

      Linux(GW)# ifconfig ppp0 mtu 288

      In addition, we need to tell the client system (C) that small segments are allowed:

      Linux(C)# sysctl -w net.ipv4.route.min_pmtu=68

           If we did not perform this second operation, Linux would clamp its minimum
      path MTU at the default value of 552 bytes, which helps avoid certain small MTU
      attacks (see Section 13.8). The consequence of doing so in our example here is that
      any packets larger than 288 bytes would be fragmented. To avoid this, and to dem-
      onstrate PMTUD more effectively, we remove this minimum. We then start a file
      transfer from machine C (address 10.0.0.123) to the server S on the Internet (address
      169.229.62.97). Listing 13-2 shows a tcpdump packet trace from this exchange. Sev-
      eral lines have been wrapped and extraneous fields have been removed for clarity.

Listing 13-2 The path MTU discovery mechanism finds an appropriate segment size to use when
                   transiting the network where the middle link has a smaller MTU than the endpoints.

      1 20:20:21.992721 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 45, id 43565, offset 0, flags [DF],
                      proto 6, length: 588)
                      169.229.62.97.22 > 10.0.0.123.1027: P [tcp sum ok]
                      41:577(536) ack 23
                              Section 13.4 Path MTU Discovery with TCP   615

2 20:20:21.993727 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 57659, offset 0, flags [DF],
                proto 6, length: 588)
                10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: P [tcp sum ok]
                23:559(536) ack 577

3 20:20:21.994093 IP (tos 0xc0, ttl 64, id 57547, offset 0, flags
                [none], proto 1, length: 576)
                10.0.0.1 > 10.0.0.123: icmp 556:
                169.229.62.97 unreachable - need to frag (mtu 288) for
                  IP (tos 0x0, ttl 63, id 57659, offset 0, flags [DF],
                  proto 6, length: 588)
                    10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22:
                    P 23:559(536) ack 577

4 20:20:21.994884 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 57660, offset 0, flags [DF],
                proto 6, length: 288)
                10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: . [tcp sum ok]
                23:259(236) ack 577

...

5 20:20:22.488856 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 45, id 6712, offset 0, flags [DF],
                proto 6, length: 836)
                169.229.62.97.22 > 10.0.0.123.1027: P [tcp sum ok]
                857:1641(784)ack 855
...
6 20:20:29.672947 IP (tos 0x8, ttl 64, id 57679, offset 0, flags [DF],
                proto 6, length: 1452)
                10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: . [tcp sum ok]
                1431:2831(1400) ack 2105

7 20:20:29.674123 IP (tos 0xc8, ttl 64, id 57548, offset 0, flags
                [none], proto 1, length: 576)
                10.0.0.1 > 10.0.0.123: icmp 556:
                169.229.62.97 unreachable - need to frag (mtu 288) for
                  IP (tos 0x8, ttl 63, id 57679, offset 0, flags [DF],
                  proto 6, length: 1452)
                    10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: .
                    1431:2831(1400) ack 2105

8 20:20:29.673751 IP (tos 0x8, ttl 64, id 57680, offset 0, flags [DF],
                proto 6, length: 1452)
                10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: . [tcp sum ok]
                2831:4231(1400) ack 2105

9 20:20:29.675180 IP (tos 0xc8, ttl 64, id 57549, offset 0, flags
                [none], proto 1, length: 576)
                10.0.0.1 > 10.0.0.123: icmp 556:
                169.229.62.97 unreachable - need to frag (mtu 288) for
                  IP (tos 0x8, ttl 63, id 57680, offset 0, flags [DF],
                  proto 6, length: 1452)
                  10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: .
                  2831:4231(1400) ack 2105

      10 20:20:29.674932 IP (tos 0x8, ttl 64, id 57681, offset 0, flags
                      [DF], proto 6, length: 288)
                      10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: . [tcp sum ok]
                      1431:1667(236) ack 2105

      11 20:20:29.675143 IP (tos 0x8, ttl 64, id 57682, offset 0, flags
                     [DF], proto 6, length: 288)
                     10.0.0.123.1027 > 169.229.62.97.22: . [tcp sum ok]
                     1667:1903(236) ack 2105

           In the tcpdump output, the connection has already been set up and MSS
      options have been exchanged. All packets on the connection have the DF bit field
      set, so both ends are performing PMTUD. The remote side’s first packet is 588
      bytes long, which transitions the router successfully in one piece, despite our con-
      figuration of the MTU on the PPPoE links being 288 bytes. The reason for this is
      asymmetry in the MTU configuration. Although the local end of the PPPoE link
      is using a maximum transmission unit of 288 bytes, the other end is using a larger
      size SMSS, presumably 1492 bytes. This leaves us in the situation where our out-
      going packets need to be small (288 bytes or less), and packets traveling in the
      reverse direction can be larger.
           When the local end attempts to send a larger packet of size 588 bytes with
      the DF bit field turned on, a PTB message is generated by the router (10.0.0.1),
      indicating that the appropriate MTU for the next-hop link is 288 bytes. The TCP
      responds by sending its next packet with size 288 bytes, as instructed. To then
      send the rest of the sequence numbers it attempted to send in its 588-byte packet,
      it sends two additional packets, of sizes 288 and 116. We see a similar pattern of
      sizes repeats during the course of the file transfer.
           The PMTU discovery process is one of the only ways TCP explicitly attempts to
      adapt its segment size after a connection has started, at least when large amounts
      of data are transferred. The size of a segment can affect the overall throughput
      performance, as can the window size. We discuss how these affect overall perfor-
      mance in Chapter 15.

13.5 TCP State Transitions
      We have described numerous rules regarding the initiation and termination of
      a TCP connection, and we have seen which types of segments are sent during
      different phases of a connection. The rules that determine what TCP does are
      determined by what state TCP is in. The current state is changed based on vari-
      ous stimuli, such as segments that are transmitted or received, timers that expire,
      application reads or writes, or information from other layers. These rules can be
      summarized in TCP’s state transition diagram.

13.5.1 TCP State Transition Diagram
       TCP’s state transition diagram is shown in Figure 13-8. States are indicated by
       ovals and transitions between states by arrows. Each endpoint of a connection
       transitions through the states. Some transitions are triggered by the receipt of a
       segment with certain control bit fields set (e.g., SYN, ACK, FIN). Some transitions

                      6WDUW

        3DVVLYH                                               $FWLYH
         2SHQ                  &/26('                         2SHQ

                                          2 QG?
                                           6H
                                           SH ?6
                           S

                                             Q? <1
                         Q?
                      SH

                                               D
                                                 & LPH
                                                 RU
                     2

                                                  OR R
                                                     7

                                                     VH XW

                                6HQG?'DWD                                                        &ORVH
             /,67(1             6HQG??6<1           6<1B6(17                                   RU?7LPHRXW

                                  5HFY??6<1
                               6HQG??6<1???$&.
                     5HFY??6<1
         5HFY??   6HQG??6<1???$&.
         567

                                            XV
                                          HR                                                 7\SLFDO?&OLHQW?7UDQVLWLRQV
                                       DQ
          6<1B5&9'                P XOW HQ
                                6L 2S
                                                                                             7\SLFDO?6HUYHU?7UDQVLWLRQV
                                                     5HFY??6<1???$&.            2SHQ?&ORVH     $SSOLFDWLRQ?$FWLRQV
                     5HFY??                             6HQG??$&.
                     $&.                                                                     7LPHU?,QLWLDWHG?7UDQVLWLRQV

                           (67$%/,6+('                                                                            3DVVLYH
                                                                                    &ORVH                          &ORVH
               &ORVH                                                               6HQG??),1
                                                 5HFY??),1
              6HQG??),1
                                                 6HQG??$&.
                                                                &/26(B:$,7                         /$67B$&.          5HFY??
                            &ORVH                                                                                    $&.
                           6HQG??),1

                                                                                                                     $FWLYH
                                                                                                                     &ORVH
                                                                                      5HFY??),1
                                                   5HFY??        ),1B:$,7B?           6HQG??$&.
                                                   $&.

                               ),1B:$,7B?
                                                    5HFY??),1???$&.                               7,0(B:$,7
                                                      6HQG??$&.                                        ?06/

                                                 5HFY??),1
                                                 6HQG??$&.            &/26,1*          5HFY??
                                                                                       $&.
                                                                                                              6LPXOWDQHRXV
                                                                                                                 &ORVH

Figure 13-8    The TCP state transition diagram (also called finite state machine). Arrows represent
                      transitions between states due to segment transmission, segment reception, or timers
                      expiring. The bold arrows indicate typical client behavior, and the dashed arrows indi-
                      cate typical server behavior. The boldface directives (e.g., open, close) are actions per-
                      formed by applications.

      also cause a segment with particular control bit fields set to be sent. Other transi-
      tions may be triggered by application actions or by timers expiring. Each of these
      cases is indicated in the diagram as a textual annotation near the associated tran-
      sition arrow. When initialized, TCP starts in the CLOSED state. Usually an imme-
      diate transition takes it to either the SYN_SENT or LISTEN state, depending on
      whether the TCP is asked to perform an active or passive open, respectively.
           Note in this diagram that only a subset of the state transitions is “typical.”
      We have marked the normal client transitions with a darker solid arrow, and the
      normal server transitions with a dashed arrow. The two transitions leading to the
      ESTABLISHED state correspond to opening a connection, and the two transitions
      leading from the ESTABLISHED state are for the termination of a connection. The
      ESTABLISHED state is where data transfer can occur between the two ends in
      both directions. Chapters 14–17 describe what happens in this state.
           We have labeled the FIN_WAIT_1, FIN_WAIT_2, and TIME_WAIT states
      as being (at least partially) in a box called “Active Close.” These are the set of
      states entered when the local application initiates a close request. Two other states
      (CLOSE_WAIT and LAST_ACK) are collected in a dashed box with the label “Pas-
      sive Close.” These states correspond to waiting for a peer to acknowledge a FIN
      segment and perform its close. Simultaneous close, which is a form of double
      active close, uses the CLOSING state.
           The names of the 11 states (CLOSED, LISTEN, SYN_SENT, etc.) in this figure
      are based on the names output by the netstat command in UNIX, Linux, and
      Windows, which are themselves based on the names originally used in [RFC0793].
      The state CLOSED is not really an “official” state but has been added as a useful
      starting point and ending point for the diagram.
           The state transition from LISTEN to SYN_SENT is legal in the TCP protocol
      but is not supported by Berkeley sockets and is rarely seen. The transition from
      SYN_RCVD back to LISTEN is valid only if the SYN_RCVD state was entered
      from the LISTEN state (the normal scenario), not from the SYN_SENT state (a
      simultaneous open). This means that if we perform a passive open (enter LISTEN),
      receive a SYN, send a SYN with an ACK (enter SYN_RCVD), and then receive a
      reset instead of an ACK, the endpoint returns to the LISTEN state and waits for
      another connection request to arrive.
           Figure 13-9 shows the normal TCP connection establishment and termination,
      detailing the different states through which the client and server pass. It is a simpler
      version of Figure 13-1 showing the relevant states but not the options or ISN details.
      We assume in Figure 13-9 that the client on the left side does an active open and
      the server on the right side does a passive open. Although we show the client
      doing the active close, as we mentioned earlier, either side can do the active close.

13.5.2 TIME_WAIT (2MSL Wait) State
      The TIME_WAIT state is also called the 2MSL wait state. It is a state in which TCP
      waits for a time equal to twice the Maximum Segment Lifetime (MSL), sometimes
      called timed wait. Every implementation must choose a value for the MSL. It is

        $FWLYH?2SHQHU?                                                 3DVVLYH?2SHQHU?
            &OLHQW                                                         6HUYHU
                                                                                 /,67(1
       6<1B6(17                                                                3DVVLYH?2SHQ
       $FWLYH?2SHQ                             6<1?.
                                                                               6<1B5&9'

                                                         
                                         6<1?/??$&.?.
     (67$%/,6+('
                                              $&.?/????
                                                                               (67$%/,6+('

                              >'DWD?7UDQVIHU?3URFHHGV?LQ?(67$%/,6+('?6WDWH@

       ),1B:$,7B?
       $FWLYH?&ORVH                             ),1?0
                                                                               &/26(B:$,7
                                                                               3DVVLYH?&ORVH
                                            $&.?0????
       ),1B:$,7B?                                                              /$67B$&.
                                               ),1?1
       7,0(B:$,7
     06/?7LPHU                               $&.?1????
          &/26('                                                               &/26('

Figure 13-9   TCP states corresponding to normal connection establishment and termination

the maximum amount of time any segment can exist in the network before being
discarded. We know that this time limit is bounded, because TCP segments are
transmitted as IP datagrams, and the IP datagram has the TTL field or Hop Limit
field that limits its effective lifetime (see Chapter 5). [RFC0793] specifies the MSL
as 2 minutes. Common implementation values, however, are 30s, 1 minute, or 2
minutes. In most cases, the value can be modified. On Linux, the value net.ipv4.
tcp_fin_timeout holds the 2MSL wait timeout value (in seconds). On Win-
dows, the following registry key:

HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\Tcpip\Parameters\TcpTimedWaitDelay

holds the timeout. It is permitted to be in the range of 30 to 300s. For IPv6, replace
the term Tcpip with Tcpip6.
    Given the MSL value for an implementation, the rule is: When TCP performs
an active close and sends the final ACK, that connection must stay in the TIME_
WAIT state for twice the MSL. This lets TCP resend the final ACK in case it is lost.
The final ACK is resent not because the TCP retransmits ACKs (they do not con-
sume sequence numbers and are not retransmitted by TCP), but because the other
side will retransmit its FIN (which does consume a sequence number). Indeed,
TCP will always retransmit FINs until it receives a final ACK.

           Another effect of this 2MSL wait state is that while the TCP implementation
      waits, the endpoints defining that connection (client IP address, client port num-
      ber, server IP address, and server port number) cannot be reused. That connection
      can be reused only when the 2MSL wait is over, or when a new connection uses
      an ISN that exceeds the highest sequence number used on the previous instantia-
      tion of the connection [RFC1122], or if the use of the Timestamps option allows
      the disambiguation of segments from a previous connection instantiation to not
      otherwise be confused [RFC6191]. Unfortunately, some implementations impose a
      more stringent constraint. In these systems, a local port number cannot be reused
      while that port number is the local port number of any endpoint that is in the
      2MSL wait state on the system. We will see examples of this constraint in Listings
      13-3 and 13-4.
           Most implementations and APIs provide a way to bypass this restriction. With
      the Berkeley sockets API, the SO_REUSEADDR socket option enables the bypass
      operation. It lets the caller assign itself a local port number even if that port num-
      ber is part of some connection in the 2MSL wait state. We will see, however, that
      even with this bypass mechanism for one socket (address, port number pair), the
      rules of TCP still (should) prevent this port number from being reused by another
      instantiation of the same connection that is in the 2MSL wait state. Any delayed
      segments that arrive for a connection while it is in the 2MSL wait state are dis-
      carded. Because the connection defined by the address/port 4-tuple in the 2MSL
      wait state cannot be reused during this time period, when a valid connection is
      finally established, we know that delayed segments from an earlier instantiation
      of this connection cannot be misinterpreted as being part of the new connection.
           For interactive applications, it is normally the client that does the active close
      and enters the TIME_WAIT state. The server usually does the passive close and
      does not go through the TIME_WAIT state. The implication is that if we terminate
      a client, and restart the same client immediately, that new client cannot reuse the
      same local port number. This is not ordinarily a problem, because clients normally
      use ephemeral ports assigned by the operating system and do not care what the
      assigned port number is. (Recall, it is actually a recommended practice for them
      to be randomized for security reasons [RFC6056].) This is important to know
      because a client that makes a large number of connections quickly (especially to
      the same server) could conceivably have to delay while other connections termi-
      nate if ephemeral ports are in short supply.
           With servers, however, the situation is different. They almost always use well-
      known ports. If we terminate a server process that has a connection established
      and immediately try to restart it, the server cannot assign its assigned port num-
      ber to its endpoint (it gets an “Address already in use” binding error), because that
      port number is part of a connection that is in a 2MSL wait state. It may take from
      1 to 4 minutes for the server to be able to restart, depending on the local system’s
      value for the MSL. We can see this scenario using our sock program. In Listing
      13-3 we start the server, connect to it from a client, and then terminate the server.

Listing 13-3    A TCP connection must complete a 2MSL delay in the TIME_WAIT state before a port
                number can be reused by another process.

Linux% sock -v -s 6666
(now a client on another computer connects to this server)
connection on 192.168.10.144.6666 from 192.168.10.140.2623
(server stopped by typing interrupt character)
(now server is restarted)
Linux% sock -v -s 6666
can't bind local address: Address already in use

Linux% netstat -n -t
Active Internet connections (w/o servers)
Proto Recv-Q Send-Q   Local Address       Foreign Address     State
tcp    0      0       192.168.10.144:6666 192.168.10.140:2623 TIME_WAIT

(wait one minute and restart server again)
Linux% sock -v -s 6666

     When we try to restart the server, the program outputs an error message indi-
cating that it cannot bind its port number because the address is already in use.
This really means that the address and port number combination is already in
use; it is in a 2MSL wait state because of the previous connection. This is the more
stringent restriction on port number reuse mentioned before. The output from
the netstat command shows that the connection is in the TIME_WAIT state.
Although clients do not typically experience as many issues with 2MSL wait states
as servers do, we can demonstrate the same issue by having the client specify its
own port number, as shown in Listing 13-4.

Listing 13-4 A client cannot reuse a port number while it is still being used by another connection
             in the 2MSL wait state.

(start server in one window)
Linux% sock -s -v 6666

(connect to it from another window)
Linux% sock -v 127.0.0.1 6666

(server identifies incoming connection)
connection on 127.0.0.1.6666 from 127.0.0.1.2091

(client identifies connection establishment, and is interrupted)
connected on 127.0.0.1.2091 to 127.0.0.1.6666

^C

(server identifies connection has terminated and exits)
connection closed by peer
Linux%

      (client is restarted, specifying same port number as before)
      Linux% sock -b 2091 -v 127.0.0.1 6666
      bind() error: Address already in use

      (wait 30 seconds and try again)
      Linux% sock -b 2091 -v 192.168.10.144 6666
      connect() error: Connection refused

           The first time we execute the client we specify the -v option to see what the
      local (ephemeral) port number assigned to the client is (2091). The second time we
      execute the client we specify the -b option, telling the client to assign itself 2091
      as its local port number instead of being given another ephemeral port number by
      the operating system. As we expect, the client cannot do this, because port 2091
      is part of a connection that is in a 2MSL wait state. Once the wait is over (1 minute
      on this Linux machine), the client attempts to connect again, but the server exited
      when the connection was interrupted the first time, so it is refused. We shall see
      how TCP reset segments are used to signal this connection refused condition in
      Section 13.6.
           We mentioned earlier that most systems provide a way of overriding the
      default behavior, which allows processes to bind to ports even if those ports are
      part of connections in the 2MSL wait state. Now we try the same scenario as
      before, but using the -A option to sock, which enables the bypass mechanism:

      Linux% sock -A -v -s 6666
      Linux% sock -A -v -s 6666

           In this example, we start the server with the -A option, which enables the
      SO_REUSEADDR socket option that we mentioned. By doing this, we allow the
      server to bind to its port even though it is part of a connection in the 2MSL wait
      state. If we try to use the client right away with the same port, however, the fol-
      lowing happens:

      Linux% sock -b 32840 -v 127.0.0.1 6666
      bind() error: Address already in use

          Once again, the endpoint 127.0.0.1.32840 is in use, so the client fails. If, how-
      ever, we also use the -A option for the client, we can force the connection to work:

      Linux% sock -A -b 32840 -v 127.0.0.1 6666
      Connected on 127.0.0.1.32840 to 127.0.0.1.6666
      TCP_MAXSEG = 16383

          Here we see that even though the same connection (4-tuple) is being used
      again before the 2MSL wait state expires, the use of the -A option has forced the
      connection to be allowed. Of course, this is all taking place on the same computer,
      so the operating system is able to ascertain what processes represent what ends

of the connections in the 2MSL wait state and (potentially, at least) keep them
separate. What if we try the same thing again but establish the connection from
another host? Here we test this idea:

(start server on first machine)
Linux% sock -v -s 6666

(connect to it from second - Windows - machine)
C:\> sock -A -v 10.0.0.1 6666

(server identifies incoming connection)
connection on 10.0.0.1.6666 from 10.0.0.3.2172

(client identifies connection establishment, and is interrupted)
connected on 10.0.0.3.2172 to 10.0.0.1.6666
^C
C:\>

(server identifies connection has terminated and exits)

connection closed by peer
Linux%

(client is restarted, specifying same port number as before)

C:\> sock -A -b 2091 -v 10.0.0.1 6666
connect() error: Address already in use
C:\> sock -A -b 2091 -v 10.0.0.1 6666
connect() error: Address already in use

(wait 30 seconds and try again)

C:\> sock -A -b 2091 -v 10.0.0.1 6666
connect() error: Connection refused

    This example is similar to the previous one, except the client and server are on
different machines. We observe that irrespective of the -A flag on the client, the
2MSL wait time is induced. Here the 2MSL wait lasts for 30s. After that, the client
attempts to contact the server, which has already exited.
    One interesting thing happens if we switch the client and server machines.
We will now use Windows as the server and Linux as the client and repeat the
experiment:

(start server on Windows machine)
C:\> sock -v -s 6666

(connect to it from second - Linux - machine)
Linux% sock -A -v 192.168.10.145 6666

(server identifies incoming connection)
connection on 192.168.10.145.6666 from 192.168.10.145.32843

      (client identifies connection establishment, and is interrupted)
      connected on 192.168.10.144.32843 to 192.168.10.145.6666
      ^C
      Linux%

      (server identifies connection has terminated and exits)

      connection closed by peer
      C:\>

      (client is restarted, specifying same port number as before)

      Linux% sock -A -b 32843 -v 192.168.10.144 6666
      bind() error: Connection refused

           At this point we would expect local port 32843 to be unavailable, but because
      of the way -A works on Linux, we are allowed to make use of it. This is a violation
      of the original TCP specification, but it is allowed by [RFC1122] and [RFC6191], as
      mentioned before. These specifications allow a new connection request to arrive
      and be accepted for a connection that is in the TIME_WAIT state, if there is a
      strong reason to believe that segments on the new connection will not be confused
      with segments on the previous instantiation of the connection based on a combi-
      nation of the sequence numbers and timestamps. [RFC1337] and the appendix of
      [RFC1323] show some of the pitfalls related to this rule.

13.5.3 Quiet Time Concept
      The 2MSL wait provides protection against delayed segments from an earlier
      instantiation of a connection being interpreted as part of a new connection that
      uses the same local and foreign IP addresses and port numbers. But this works
      only if a host with connections in the 2MSL wait does not crash.
          What if a host with connections in the TIME_WAIT state crashes, reboots
      within the MSL, and immediately establishes new connections using the same
      local and foreign IP addresses and port numbers corresponding to the local con-
      nections that were in the TIME_WAIT state before the crash? In this scenario,
      delayed segments from the connections that existed before the crash can be mis-
      interpreted as belonging to the new connections created after the reboot. This can
      happen regardless of how the initial sequence number is chosen after the reboot.
          To protect against this scenario, [RFC0793] states that TCP should wait an
      amount of time equal to the MSL before creating any new connections after a
      reboot or crash. This is called the quiet time. Few implementations abide by this
      because most hosts take longer than the MSL to reboot after a crash. Also, if appli-
      cations use their own checksums or encryption, errors such as these are easily
      detected.
                                                          Section 13.6 Reset Segments      625

13.5.4 FIN_WAIT_2 State
       In the FIN_WAIT_2 state, TCP has sent a FIN and the other end has acknowledged
       it. Unless a half-close is being performed, the TCP must wait for the application
       on the other end to recognize that it has received an end-of-file notification and
       close its end of the connection, which causes a FIN to be sent. Only when the
       application performs this close (and its FIN is received) does the active closing
       TCP move from the FIN_WAIT_2 to the TIME_WAIT state. This means that one
       end of the connection can remain in this state forever. The other end is still in the
       CLOSE_WAIT state and can remain there forever, until the application decides to
       issue its close.
            Many implementations prevent this infinite wait in the FIN_WAIT_2 state as
       follows: If the application that does the active close does a complete close, not a
       half-close indicating that it expects to receive data, a timer is set. If the connection
       is idle when the timer expires, TCP moves the connection into the CLOSED state.
       In Linux, the variable net.ipv4.tcp_fin_timeout can be adjusted to control
       the number of seconds to which the timer is set. Its default value is 60s.

13.5.5 Simultaneous Open and Close Transitions
       We have seen the normal uses for the SYN_SENT and SYN_RCVD states that
       correspond to sending and receiving SYN segments, respectively. As illustrated
       in Figure 13-3, TCP was purposely designed to handle simultaneous opens that
       result in a single connection. When a simultaneous open occurs, the state tran-
       sitions differ from those shown in Figure 13-9. Both ends send a SYN at about
       the same time, entering the SYN_SENT state. When each end receives its peer’s
       SYN segments, the state changes to SYN_RCVD, and each end resends a SYN and
       acknowledges the received SYN. When each end receives the SYN plus the ACK,
       the state changes to ESTABLISHED.
            For a simultaneous close, in terms of Figure 13-6, both ends go from ESTAB-
       LISHED to FIN_WAIT_1 when the application issues the close. This causes both
       FINs to be sent, and they probably pass each other somewhere in the network.
       When its peer’s FIN arrives, each end transitions from FIN_WAIT_1 to the CLOS-
       ING state, and each endpoint sends its final ACK. Upon receiving a final ACK,
       each endpoint’s state changes to TIME_WAIT, and the 2MSL wait is initiated.

13.6 Reset Segments
       We mentioned the RST bit field in the TCP header in Chapter 12. A segment hav-
       ing this bit set to “on” is called a “reset segment” or simply a “reset.” In general, a
       reset is sent by TCP whenever a segment arrives that does not appear to be correct
       for the referenced connection. (We use the term referenced connection to mean the

       connection specified by the 4-tuple in the TCP and IP headers of the reset.) Resets
       ordinarily result in a fast teardown of a TCP connection. We can construct sce-
       narios to demonstrate the use of reset segments.

13.6.1 Connection Request to Nonexistent Port
       A common case for generating a reset segment is when a connection request
       arrives and no process is listening on the destination port. We saw this previously
       when we encountered the “connection refused” error messages. These are com-
       mon with TCP. In the case of UDP, we saw in Chapter 10 that an ICMP Destination
       Unreachable (Port Unreachable) message is generated when a datagram arrives
       for a destination port that is not in use. TCP uses a reset segment instead.
            An example of this is trivial to generate—we use the Telnet client and specify
       a port number that is not in use on the destination. This destination can just as
       well be the local computer:

       Linux% telnet localhost 9999
       Trying 127.0.0.1...
       telnet: connect to address 127.0.0.1: Connection refused

          This error message is output by the Telnet client immediately. Listing 13-5
       shows the packet exchange corresponding to this command.

Listing 13-5   Reset generated by attempt to open connection to nonexistent port

       1 22:15:16.348064 127.0.0.1.32803 > 127.0.0.1.9999:
              S [tcp sum ok] 3357881819:3357881819(0) win 32767
              <mss 16396,sackOK,timestamp 16945235 0,nop,wscale 0>
              (DF) [tos 0x10] (ttl 64, id 42376, len 60)
       2 22:15:16.348105 127.0.0.1.9999 > 127.0.0.1.32803:
              R [tcp sum ok] 0:0(0) ack 3357881820 win 0
              (DF) [tos 0x10] (ttl 64, id 0, len 40)

            The values we need to examine in Listing 13-5 are the Sequence Number field
       and ACK Number field in the reset (second) segment. Because the ACK bit field
       was not on in the arriving SYN segment, the sequence number of the reset is set
       to 0 and the ACK number is set to the incoming ISN plus the number of data bytes
       in the segment. Although there is no data in the arriving segment, the SYN bit
       logically occupies 1 byte of sequence number space; therefore, in this example the
       ACK number in the reset segment is set to the ISN, plus the data length (0), plus
       1 for the SYN bit.
            For a reset segment to be accepted by a TCP, the ACK bit field must be set and
       the ACK Number field must be within the valid window (see Chapter 12). This
       helps to prevent a simple attack in which anyone able to generate a reset matching
       the appropriate connection (4-tuple) could disrupt a connection [RFC5961].
                                                              Section 13.6 Reset Segments   627

13.6.2 Aborting a Connection
      We saw in Figure 13-1 that the normal way to terminate a connection is for one
      side to send a FIN. This is sometimes called an orderly release because the FIN is
      sent after all previously queued data has been sent, and there is normally no loss
      of data. But it is also possible to abort a connection by sending a reset instead of a
      FIN at any time. This is sometimes called an abortive release.
          Aborting a connection provides two features to the application: (1) any queued
      data is thrown away and a reset segment is sent immediately, and (2) the receiver
      of the reset can tell that the other end did an abort instead of a normal close.
      The API being used by the application must provide a way to generate the abort
      instead of a normal close.
          The sockets API provides this capability by using the “linger on close” socket
      option (SO_LINGER) with a 0 linger value. Essentially this means “Linger for
      no time in making sure data gets to the other side, then abort.” In the following
      example, we show what happens when a remote command that generates a large
      amount of output is canceled by the user:

      Linux% ssh linux cat /usr/share/dict/words
      Aarhus
      Aaron
      Ababa
      aback
      abaft
      abandon
      abandoned
      abandoning
      abandonment
      abandons
      ... continues ...
      ^C
      Killed by signal 2.

           Here the user has decided to abort the output of this command. The words
      file has 45,427 words in it, so this command was probably some sort of mistake.
      When the user types the interrupt character, the system indicates that the process
      (here, the ssh program) has been killed by signal number 2. This signal is called
      SIGINT and usually terminates a program when it is delivered. Listing 13-6 shows
      the tcpdump output for this example. (We have deleted many of the intermediate
      packets, because they add nothing to the discussion.)

Listing 13-6 Aborting a connection with a reset (RST) instead of a FIN

      Linux# tcpdump -vvv -s 1500 tcp

       1 22:33:06.386747 192.168.10.140.2788 > 192.168.10.144.ssh:
                  S [tcp sum ok] 1520364313:1520364313(0) win 65535
                  <mss 1460,nop,nop,sackOK>
                  (DF) (ttl 128, id 43922, len 48)

       2 22:33:06.386855 192.168.10.144.ssh > 192.168.10.140.2788:
                  S [tcp sum ok] 181637276:181637276(0) ack 1520364314
                  win 5840
                  <mss 1460,nop,nop,sackOK>
                  (DF) (ttl 64, id 0, len 48)

       3 22:33:06.387676 192.168.10.140.2788 > 192.168.10.144.ssh:
                  . [tcp sum ok] 1:1(0) ack 1 win 65535
                  (DF) (ttl 128, id 43923, len 40)

      (... ssh encrypted authentication exchange and bulk data transfer ...)

      4 22:33:13.648247 192.168.10.140.2788 > 192.168.10.144.ssh:
                  R [tcp sum ok] 1343:1343(0) ack 132929 win 0
                  (DF) (ttl 128, id 44004, len 40)

          Segments 1–3 show the normal connection establishment. When the interrupt
      character is hit, the connection is aborted. The reset segment contains a sequence
      number and acknowledgment number. Also notice that the reset segment elicits
      no response from the other end—it is not acknowledged at all. The receiver of the
      reset aborts the connection and advises the application that the connection was
      reset. This often results in the error indication “Connection reset by peer” or a
      similar message.

13.6.3 Half-Open Connections
      A TCP connection is said to be half-open if one end has closed or aborted the con-
      nection without the knowledge of the other end. This can happen anytime one of
      the peers crashes. As long as there is no attempt to transfer data across a half-open
      connection, the end that is still up does not detect that the other end has crashed.
           Another common cause of a half-open connection is when one host is pow-
      ered off instead of shut down properly. This happens, for example, when PCs are
      being used to run remote login clients and are switched off at the end of the day.
      If there was no data transfer going on when the power was cut, the server will
      never know that the client disappeared (it would still think the connection is in
      the ESTABLISHED state). When the user comes in the next morning, powers on
      the PC, and starts a new session, a new occurrence of the server is started on the
      server host. This can lead to many half-open TCP connections on the server host.
      (In Chapter 17 we will see a way for one end of a TCP connection to discover that
      the other end has disappeared using TCP’s keepalive option.)
           We can easily create a half-open connection. In this case, we do so on the
      client rather than the server. We will execute the Telnet client on 10.0.0.1, con-
      necting to the Sun RPC Service (sunrpc, port 111) server at 10.0.0.7 (see Listing
      13-7). We type one line of input and watch it go across with tcpdump, and then
      we disconnect the Ethernet cable on the server’s host and reboot the server host.
      This simulates the server host crashing. (We disconnect the Ethernet cable before
      rebooting the server to prevent it from sending a FIN out of the open connections,
                                                         Section 13.6 Reset Segments           629

which some TCPs do when they are shut down.) After the server has rebooted, we
reconnect the cable and try to send another line from the client to the server. After
rebooting, the server’s TCP has lost all memory of the connections that existed
before, so it knows nothing about the connection that the data segment references.
The rule of TCP is that the receiver responds with a reset.

Listing 13-7 The server host is disconnected and rebooted, leaving a half-open connection at the
             client. When it receives additional data on the connection it now knows nothing about,
             the server responds with a reset segment, closing the connection at both ends.

Linux% telnet 10.0.0.7 sunrpc
Trying 10.0.0.7...
Connected to 10.0.0.7.
Escape character is '^]'.
foo
(Ethernet cable disconnected and server rebooted)
bar
Connection closed by remote host

     Listing 13-8 shows the tcpdump output for this example.

Listing 13-8 Reset in response to data segment on a half-open connection

1 23:15:48.804142 IP (tos 0x10, ttl 64, id 20095, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
      10.0.0.1.1310 > 10.0.0.7.sunrpc:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2365970104:2365970104(0) win 5840
      <mss 1460,sackOK,timestamp 3849492679 0,nop,wscale 2>

2 23:15:48.804742 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 0, offset 0, flags [DF],
      proto 6, length: 60)
      10.0.0.7.sunrpc > 10.0.0.1.1310:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2093796387:2093796387(0) ack 2365970105 win 5792
      <mss 1460,sackOK,timestamp 654784 3849492679,nop,wscale 0>

3 23:15:48.805028 IP (tos 0x10, ttl 64, id 20097, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 52)
      10.0.0.1.1310 > 10.0.0.7.sunrpc:
      . [tcp sum ok] 1:1(0) ack 1 win 1460
      <nop,nop,timestamp 3849492680 654784>

4 23:15:51.999394 IP (tos 0x10, ttl 64, id 20099, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 57)
            10.0.0.1.1310 > 10.0.0.7.sunrpc:
      P [tcp sum ok] 1:6(5) ack 1 win 1460
      <nop,nop,timestamp 3849495875 654784>

5 23:15:51.999874 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 12773, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 52)
            10.0.0.7.sunrpc > 10.0.0.1.1310:
      . [tcp sum ok] 1:1(0) ack 6 win 5792
      <nop,nop,timestamp 656421 3849495875>

      6 23:17:19.419611 arp who-has 10.0.0.7 (Broadcast) tell 0.0.0.0
      7 23:17:20.419142 arp who-has 10.0.0.7 (Broadcast) tell 0.0.0.0
      8 23:17:21.427458 arp reply 10.0.0.7 is-at 00:e0:00:88:ad:d6

      9 23:17:21.921745 arp who-has 10.0.0.1 tell 10.0.0.7
      10 23:17:21.921892 arp reply 10.0.0.1 is-at 00:04:5a:9f:9e:80

      11 23:17:23.437114 arp who-has 10.0.0.7 (Broadcast) tell 10.0.0.7

      12 23:17:34.804196 arp who-has 10.0.0.7 tell 10.0.0.1
      13 23:17:34.804650 arp reply 10.0.0.7 is-at 00:e0:00:88:ad:d6

      14 23:17:43.684786 IP (tos 0x10, ttl 64, id 20101, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 57)
            10.0.0.1.1310 > 10.0.0.7.sunrpc:
            P [tcp sum ok] 6:11(5) ack 1 win 1460
            <nop,nop,timestamp 3849607577 656421>

      15 23:17:43.685277 IP (tos 0x10, ttl 64, id 0, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 40)
            10.0.0.7.sunrpc > 10.0.0.1.1310:
            R [tcp sum ok] 2093796388:2093796388(0) win 0

           Segments 1–3 are the normal connection establishment. Segment 4 sends the
      line “foo” to the sunrpc server (the 5 bytes required include a carriage return and
      newline character), and segment 5 is the acknowledgment.
           At this point we disconnect the Ethernet cable from the server (address
      10.0.0.7), reboot, and reconnect the cable. This takes about 90s. We then type the
      next line of input to the client (“bar”), and when we type the return key the line is
      sent to the server (the first TCP segment after the ARP traffic in Listing 13-9). This
      elicits a reset response from the server, which no longer has any knowledge of the
      existence of the connection.
           Note that when the host reboots, it uses gratuitous ARP (see Chapter 4) in
      order to determine if its IPv4 address is already in use on the segment, and to
      supply it to others. It also requests the MAC address for IPv4 address 10.0.0.1
      because that is its default router to the Internet.

13.6.4 TIME-WAIT Assassination (TWA)
      As mentioned previously, the TIME_WAIT state is intended to allow any data-
      grams lingering from a closed connection to be discarded. During this period, the
      waiting TCP usually has little to do; it merely holds the state until the 2MSL timer
      expires. If, however, it receives certain segments from the connection during this
      period, or more specifically an RST segment, it can become desynchronized. This
      is called TIME-WAIT Assassination (TWA) [RFC1337]. Consider the exchange of
      packets shown in Figure 13-10.

            $FWLYH?2SHQHU?                                                         3DVVLYH?2SHQHU?
                &OLHQW                                                                 6HUYHU

                                                     >'DWD?7UDQVIHU?7DNHV?3ODFH@

                                          ),1???$&.??6HT? ?.??????$&.? ?/????

                                                  $&.??6HT? ?/??????$&.? ?.
                                                                             .
                                               ),1???$&.??6HT? ?/??????$&.?
            7,0(B:$,7
                                                    $&.??6HT? ?.??$&.? ?/
                                                                                           &/26('
                                                                    
                                                             .??
                                                          
                                                      &.
                                                    $
                                               
                                         /??
                                         
                                6   HT
                             .??
                          $&

                                                     $&.??6HT? ?.??$&.? ?/
                                                                                           """? 8QNQRZQ
                                                                              .
             &/26('                             567???$&.??6HT? ?/??$&.?
            3UHPDWXUHO\

Figure 13-10   An RST segment can “assassinate” the TIME_WAIT state and force the connection to
                    close prematurely. Various methods exist to resist this problem, including ignoring
                    RST segments when in the TIME_WAIT state.

          In the example shown in Figure 13-10, the server has completed its role in the
     connection and cleared any state. The client remains in the TIME_WAIT state.
     When the FIN exchange completes, the client’s next sequence number is K and
     the server’s is L. The late-arriving segment is sent from the server to the client
     using sequence number L - 100 and containing ACK number K - 200. When the cli-
     ent receives this segment, it determines that both the sequence number and ACK
     values are “old.” When receiving such old segments, TCP responds by sending an
     ACK with the most current sequence number and ACK values (K and L, respec-
     tively). However, when the server receives this segment, it has no information
     whatsoever about the connection and therefore replies with an RST segment. This
     is no problem for the server, but it causes the client to prematurely transition from
     TIME_WAIT to CLOSED. Most systems avoid this problem by simply not reacting
     to reset segments while in the TIME_WAIT state.

13.7 TCP Server Operation
     We said in Chapter 1 that most TCP servers are concurrent. When a new con-
     nection request arrives at a server, the server accepts the connection and invokes

         a new process or thread to handle the new client. Depending on the operating
         system, various other resources may be allocated to invoke the new server. We are
         interested in the interaction of TCP with concurrent servers. In particular, we wish
         to become familiar with how TCP servers use port numbers and how multiple
         concurrent clients are handled.

13.7.1   TCP Port Numbers
         We can see how TCP handles port numbers by watching any TCP server. We shall
         watch the secure shell server (called sshd) using the netstat command on a
         dual-stack IPv4/IPv6-capable host. The sshd application implements the Secure
         Shell Protocol [RFC4254], which provides an encrypted and authenticated remote
         terminal capability. The following output is on a system with no active secure
         shell connections. (We have deleted all of the output lines except the one associ-
         ated with the server.)

         Linux% netstat -a -n -t
         Active Internet connections (servers and established)
         Proto Recv-Q Send-Q     Local Address   Foreign Address          State
         tcp        0      0             :::22              :::*          LISTEN

              The -a option reports on all network endpoints, including those in either lis-
         tening or non-listening state. The -n flag prints IP addresses as dotted-decimal (or
         hex) numbers, instead of trying to use the DNS to convert the address to a name,
         and prints numeric port numbers (e.g., 22) instead of service names (e.g., ssh).
         The -t option selects only TCP endpoints.
              The local address (which really means local endpoint) is output as :::22,
         which is the IPv6-oriented way of referring to the all-zeros address, also called
         the wildcard address, along with port number 22. This means that an incoming
         connection request (i.e., a SYN) to port 22 will be accepted on any local interface.
         If the host were multihomed (this one is), we could specify a single IP address for
         the local IP address (one of the host’s IP addresses), and only connections received
         on that interface would be accepted. (We will see an example of this later in this
         section.) Port 22 is the well-known port number reserved for the Secure Shell Pro-
         tocol. Other port numbers are maintained by the IANA [ITP].
              The foreign address is output as :::*, which means both a wildcard address
         and port number (i.e., it represents a wildcard endpoint). Here, the foreign IP
         address and foreign port number are not known yet, because the local endpoint is
         in the LISTEN state, waiting for a connection to arrive. We now start a secure shell
         client on the host 10.0.0.3 that connects to this server. Here are the relevant lines
         from the netstat output (the Recv-Q and Send-Q columns, which contain only
         values of zero, have been removed for clarity):

         Linux% netstat -a -n -t
         Active Internet connections (servers and established)

Proto        Local Address       Foreign Address         State
tcp                  :::22                  :::*         LISTEN
tcp     ::ffff:10.0.0.1:22 ::ffff:10.0.0.3:16137         ESTABLISHED

     The second line for port 22 is the ESTABLISHED connection. All four elements
of the local and foreign endpoints are filled in for this connection: the local IP
address and port number, and the foreign IP address and port number. The local IP
address corresponds to the interface on which the connection request arrived (the
Ethernet interface, identified by its IPv4-mapped IPv6 address, ::ffff:10.0.0.1).
     The local endpoint in the LISTEN state is left alone. This is the endpoint that
the concurrent server uses to accept future connection requests. It is the TCP mod-
ule in the operating system that creates the new endpoint in the ESTABLISHED
state, when the incoming connection request arrives and is accepted. Also notice
that the port number for the ESTABLISHED connection does not change: it is 22,
the same as the LISTEN endpoint.
     We now initiate another client request from the same system (10.0.0.3) to this
server. Here is the relevant netstat output:

Linux% netstat -a -n -t
Active Internet connections (servers and established)
Proto        Local Address       Foreign Address   State
tcp                  :::22                  :::*   LISTEN
tcp     ::ffff:10.0.0.1:22 ::ffff:10.0.0.3:16140   ESTABLISHED
tcp     ::ffff:10.0.0.1:22 ::ffff:10.0.0.3:16137   ESTABLISHED

    We now have two ESTABLISHED connections from the same host to the same
server. Both have a local port number on the server of 22. This is not a problem
for TCP because the foreign port numbers are different. They must be different
because each of the secure shell clients uses an ephemeral port, and the definition
of an ephemeral port is one that is not currently in use on that host (10.0.0.3).
    This example reiterates, yet again, that TCP demultiplexes incoming segments
using all four values that constitute the local and foreign endpoints: destination
IP address, destination port number, source IP address, and source port number.
TCP cannot determine which process gets an incoming segment by looking at the
destination port number only. Also, the only one of the three endpoints at port
22 that will receive incoming connection requests is the one in the LISTEN state.
The endpoints in the ESTABLISHED state cannot receive SYN segments, and the
endpoint in the LISTEN state cannot receive data segments. The host operating
system ensures this. (If it did not, TCP could become quite confused and not work
properly.)
    Next we initiate a third client connection, from the IP address 169.229.62.97
that is across the DSL PPPoE link from the server 10.0.0.1, and not on the same
Ethernet. (The output below has the Proto column removed, which contains only
tcp, for clarity.)

       Linux% netstat -a -n -t
       Active Internet connections (servers and established)
       Send-Q           Local Address            Foreign Address         State
            0                    :::22                       :::*        LISTEN
            0       ::ffff:10.0.0.1:22     ::ffff:10.0.0.3:16140         ESTABLISHED
            0       ::ffff:10.0.0.1:22     ::ffff:10.0.0.3:16137         ESTABLISHED
          928 ::ffff:67.125.227.195:22 ::ffff:169.229.62.97:1473         ESTABLISHED

            The local IP address of the third ESTABLISHED connection now corresponds to
       the interface address of the PPPoE link on the multihomed host (67.125.227.195).
       Note that the Send-Q status is not 0 but is instead 928 bytes. This means that the
       server host has sent 928 bytes on the connection for which it has not yet heard an
       acknowledgment.

13.7.2 Restricting Local IP Addresses
       We can see what happens when the server does not wildcard the local IP address
       but instead sets it to one particular local address. If we run our sock program as a
       server and provide it with a particuclar IP address, that address becomes the local
       address of the listening endpoint. For example:

       Linux% sock -s 10.0.0.1 8888

       This restricts this server to using connections that arrive only on the local IPv4
       address 10.0.0.1. The netstat output reflects this:

       Linux% netstat -a -n -t
       Active Internet connections (servers and established)
       Proto Recv-Q Send-Q   Local Address    Foreign Address             State
       tcp        0      0   10.0.0.1:8888          0.0.0.0:*             LISTEN

           One thing that is especially interesting about this example is that our sock
       program is binding only to the local IPv4 address 10.0.0.1, so our netstat out-
       put looks significantly different. In our previous example, the wildcard address
       and port number indications were across both versions of IP. In this case, how-
       ever, we are bound to a particular address, port, and address family (IPv4 only).
       If we now connect to this server from the local network, from the host 10.0.0.3,
       it works fine:

       Linux% netstat -a -n -t
       Active Internet connections (servers and established)
       Proto Recv-Q Send-Q   Local Address    Foreign Address             State
       tcp        0      0   10.0.0.1:8888          0.0.0.0:*             LISTEN
       tcp        0      0   10.0.0.1:8888     10.0.0.3:16153             ESTABLISHED

          If we instead try to connect to this server from a host using a destination
       address other than 10.0.0.1 (even including the local address 127.0.0.1), the

         connection request is not accepted by the TCP module. If we watch with tcp-
         dump, the SYN elicits an RST segment, as we show in Listing 13-9.

Listing 13-9   Rejection of a connection request based on local IP address of server

         1 22:29:19.905593 IP 127.0.0.1.1292 > 127.0.0.1.8888:
               S 591843787:591843787(0) win 32767
               <mss 16396,sackOK,timestamp 3587463952 0,nop,wscale 2>
         2 22:29:19.906095 IP 127.0.0.1.8888 > 127.0.0.1.1292:
               R 0:0(0) ack 591843788 win 0

             The server application never sees the connection request—the rejection is
         done by the operating system’s TCP module, based on the local address specified
         by the application and the destination address contained in the arriving SYN seg-
         ment. We see that the capability of restricting local IP addresses is quite strict.

13.7.3 Restricting Foreign Endpoints
         In Chapter 10, we saw that a UDP server can normally specify the foreign IP address
         and foreign port number, in addition to specifying the local IP address and local
         port number. The abstract interface functions for TCP given in [RFC0793] allow a
         server doing a passive open to have either a fully specified foreign endpoint (to
         wait for a particular client to issue an active open) or an unspecified foreign end-
         point (to wait for any client).
             Unfortunately, the ordinary Berkeley sockets API does not provide a way to
         do this. The server must leave the client’s endpoint unspecified, wait for the con-
         nection to arrive, and then examine the IP address and port number of the client.
         Table 13-3 summarizes the three types of address bindings that a TCP server can
         establish.

Table 13-3   Address and port number binding options available to a TCP server

Local Address           Foreign Address                 Restricted to       Comment
local_IP.lport          foraddr.foreign_port            One client          Not usually supported
local_IP.lport          *.*                             One local           Unusual (used by DNS
                                                        endpoint            servers)
*.local_port            *.*                             One local port      Most common; multiple
                                                                            address families (IPv4/IPv6)
                                                                            may be supported

             In all cases, local_port is the server’s assigned port and local_IP must
         be a unicast IP address used by the local system. The ordering of the three rows
         in the table is the order that the TCP module applies when trying to determine
         which local endpoint receives an incoming connection request. The most specific
         binding (the first row, if supported) is tried first, and the least specific (the last row

      with both IP addresses wildcarded) is tried last. For systems supporting IPv4 and
      IPv6 (“dual-stack”), the port space may be combined. In essence, this means that
      writing a server that binds to a port using IPv6 addressing is also bound to the
      same port in IPv4.

13.7.4 Incoming Connection Queue
      A concurrent server invokes a new process or thread to handle each client, so
      the listening server should always be ready to handle the next incoming connec-
      tion request. That is the underlying reason for using concurrent servers. But there
      is still a chance that multiple connection requests will arrive while the listening
      server is creating a new process, or while the operating system is busy running
      other higher-priority processes, or worse yet, that the server is being attacked with
      bogus connection requests that are never allowed to be established. How does
      TCP handle these scenarios?
           To fully explore this question, we must first understand that new connections
      may be in one of two distinct states before they are made available to an applica-
      tion. The first case is connections that have not yet completed but for which a
      SYN has been received (these are in the SYN_RCVD state). The second case is
      connections that have already completed the three-way handshake and are in the
      ESTABLISHED state but have not yet been accepted by the application. Internally,
      the operating system ordinarily has two distinct connection queues, one for each
      of these cases.
           An application has limited control over the sizing of these queues. Tradition-
      ally, using the Berkeley sockets API, an application had only indirect control of the
      sum of the sizes of these two queues. In modern Linux kernels this behavior has
      been changed to be the number of connections in the second case (ESTABLISHED
      connections). The application can therefore limit the number of fully formed con-
      nections waiting for it to handle. In Linux, then, the following rules apply:

          1. When a connection request arrives (i.e., the SYN segment), the system-wide
             parameter net.ipv4.tcp_max_syn_backlog is checked (default 1000).
             If the number of connections in the SYN_RCVD state would exceed this
             threshold, the incoming connection is rejected.
          2. Each listening endpoint has a fixed-length queue of connections that have
             been completely accepted by TCP (i.e., the three-way handshake is com-
             plete) but not yet accepted by the application. The application specifies
             a limit to this queue, commonly called the backlog. This backlog must be
             between 0 and a system-specific maximum called net.core.somaxconn,
             inclusive (default 128).
             Keep in mind that this backlog value specifies only the maximum number
             of queued connections for one listening endpoint, all of which have already
             been accepted by TCP and are waiting to be accepted by the application.

      This backlog has no effect whatsoever on the maximum number of estab-
      lished connections allowed by the system, or on the number of clients that
      a concurrent server can handle concurrently.
    3. If there is room on this listening endpoint’s queue for this new connection,
       the TCP module ACKs the SYN and completes the connection. The server
       application with the listening endpoint does not see this new connection
       until the third segment of the three-way handshake is received. Also, the
       client may think the server is ready to receive data when the client’s active
       open completes successfully, before the server application has been noti-
       fied of the new connection. If this happens, the server’s TCP just queues the
       incoming data.
    4. If there is not enough room on the queue for the new connection, the TCP
       delays responding to the SYN, to give the application a chance to catch
       up. Linux is somewhat unique in this behavior—it persists in not ignoring
       incoming connections if it possibly can. If the net.ipv4.tcp_abort_on_
       overflow system control variable is set, new incoming connections are
       reset with a reset segment.

     Sending reset segments on overflow is not generally advisable and is not
turned on by default. The client has attempted to contact the server, and if it
receives a reset during the SYN exchange, it may falsely conclude that no server is
present (instead of concluding that there is a server present but it is busy). Being
too busy is really a form of “soft” or temporary error rather than a hard error.
Normally, when the queue is full, the application or the operating system is busy,
preventing the application from servicing incoming connections. This condition
could change in a short while. But if the server’s TCP responded with a reset,
the client’s active open would abort (which is what we saw happen if the server
was not started). Without the reset, if the listening server does not get around to
accepting some of the already-accepted connections that have filled its queue to
the limit, the client’s active open eventually times out, according to normal TCP
mechanisms. In the case of Linux, the connecting clients are just slowed for a sig-
nificant period of time—they will neither time out nor be reset.
     We can see what happens when the incoming connection queue becomes full
using our sock program. We invoke it with a new option (-O) that tells it to pause
after creating the listening endpoint, before accepting any connection requests.
If we then invoke multiple clients during this pause period, the server’s queue of
accepted connections should fill, and we can see what happens with tcpdump.

Linux% sock -s -v -q1 -O30000 6666

    The -q1 option sets the backlog of the listening endpoint to 1. The -O30000
option causes the program to sleep for 30,000s (basically a long time, about 8
hours) before accepting any client connections. If we now try to connect to this

      server continually, the first four connections are completed immediately. After
      that, two connections are completed every 9s. Other operating systems vary con-
      siderably in how this is handled. In Solaris 8 and FreeBSD 4.7, for example, two
      connections are handled immediately and the third times out; subsequent con-
      nections time out as well.
          Listing 13-10 shows the tcpdump output of a Linux client connecting to a
      FreeBSD server running the sock program with the arguments just given. (We
      have marked the client port numbers in bold when the TCP connection is estab-
      lished—when the three-way handshake completes.)

Listing 13-10 The FreeBSD server accepts two connections immediately. Subsequent connections
                    receive no response and eventually time out at the client.

      1 21:28:47.399872 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 46646, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
            63.203.76.212.2461 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
            S [tcp sum ok] 2998137201:2998137201(0) win 5808
            <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102309703 0,nop,wscale 2>

      2 21:28:47.413770 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 47, id 6876, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
            169.229.62.97.6666 > 63.203.76.212.2461:
            S [tcp sum ok] 5583769:5583769(0) ack 2998137202 win 1460
            <mss 1412,nop,wscale 0,nop,nop,timestamp 219082980 4102309703>

      3 21:28:47.414058 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 46648, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 52)
            63.203.76.212.2461 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
            . [tcp sum ok] 1:1(0) ack 1 win 1452
            <nop,nop,timestamp 4102309717 219082980>

      4 21:28:47.423673 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 19651, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
            63.203.76.212.2462 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
            S [tcp sum ok] 2996964252:2996964252(0) win 5808
            <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102309727 0,nop,wscale 2>

      5 21:28:47.436897 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 47, id 26581, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
            169.229.62.97.6666 > 63.203.76.212.2462:
            S [tcp sum ok] 3761536245:3761536245(0) ack 2996964253 win 1460
            <mss 1412,nop,wscale 0,nop,nop,timestamp 219082983 4102309727>

      6 21:28:47.437186 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 19653, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 52)
            63.203.76.212.2462 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
            . [tcp sum ok] 1:1(0) ack 1 win 1452
            <nop,nop,timestamp 4102309741 219082983>

      7 21:28:47.446198 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 24292, offset 0,
            flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)

      63.203.76.212.2463 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2991331729:2991331729(0) win 5808
      <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102309749 0,nop,wscale 2>

8 21:28:50.445771 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 24294, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
      63.203.76.212.2463 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2991331729:2991331729(0) win 5808
      <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102312750 0,nop,wscale 2>

9 21:28:56.444900 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 24296, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
      63.203.76.212.2463 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2991331729:2991331729(0) win 5808
      <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102318750 0,nop,wscale 2>

10 21:29:08.443031 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 24298, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60) 6
      3.203.76.212.2463 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2991331729:2991331729(0) win 5808
      <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102330750 0,nop,wscale 2>

11 21:29:32.439406 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 24300, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
      63.203.76.212.2463 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2991331729:2991331729(0) win 5808
      <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102354750 0,nop,wscale 2>

12 21:30:20.432118 IP (tos 0x0, ttl 64, id 24302, offset 0,
      flags [DF], proto 6, length: 60)
      63.203.76.212.2463 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
      S [tcp sum ok] 2991331729:2991331729(0) win 5808
      <mss 1452,sackOK,timestamp 4102402750 0,nop,wscale 2>

     The first client’s connection request from port 2461 is accepted by TCP (seg-
ments 1–3). The second client’s connection request from port 2462 is also accepted
by TCP (segments 4–6). The server application is still asleep and has not accepted
either connection yet. Everything has been done by the TCP module in the oper-
ating system. Also, the two clients have returned successfully from their active
opens, because the three-way handshakes are complete.
     We try to start a third whose SYN appears as segment 7 (port 2463), but the
server-side TCP ignores the SYNs because the queue for this listening endpoint
is full. The client retransmits its SYN in segments 8–12 using binary exponential
backoff. In FreeBSD and Solaris, TCP ignores the incoming SYN when the queue
is full.
     Recall that TCP accepts an incoming connection request (i.e., a SYN) if there is
room on the listener’s queue, without giving the application a chance to see where
it is from (the source IP address and source port number). This is not required
by TCP; it is just the common implementation technique (i.e., the way Berkeley

      sockets work). If an alternative to the Berkeley sockets API were used (e.g., TLI/
      XTI), the application could be provided a way to learn when a connection request
      arrives and then allow the application to choose whether to accept the connection
      or not. Even though TLI provided this capability in theory, it never fully caught
      on, so we are effectively left with the TCP interface provided by Berkeley sockets.
            So with Berkeley sockets, be aware that with TCP, when the application is told
      that a connection has just arrived, TCP’s three-way handshake is already over. This
      behavior also means that a TCP server has no way to cause a client’s active open to
      fail. When a new client connection is passed to the server application, TCP’s three-
      way handshake is over, and the client’s active open has completed successfully. If
      the server then looks at the client’s IP address and port number and decides it does
      not want to service this client, all the server can do is either close the connection
      (causing a FIN to be sent) or reset the connection (causing an RST to be sent). In
      either case the client thought everything was OK when its active open completed
      and may have already sent a request to the server. Other transport-layer proto-
      cols may be implemented that provide this separation to the application between
      arrival and acceptance (i.e., the OSI transport layer), but not TCP.

13.8 Attacks Involving TCP Connection Management
      A SYN flood is a TCP DoS attack whereby one or more malicious clients generate
      a series of TCP connection attempts (SYN segments) and send them at a server,
      often with a “spoofed” (e.g., random) source IP address. The server allocates some
      amount of connection resources to each partial connection. Because the connec-
      tions are never established, the server may start to deny service to future legiti-
      mate requests because its memory is exhausted holding state for many half-open
      connections.
           This attack is somewhat difficult to repel, because it is not always easy to dis-
      tinguish between legitimate connection attempts and SYN floods. One mecha-
      nism invented to deal with this issue is called SYN cookies [RFC4987]. The main
      insight with SYN cookies is that most of the information that would be stored for a
      connection when a SYN arrives could be encoded inside the Sequence Number field
      supplied with the SYN + ACK. The target machine using SYN cookies need not
      allocate any storage for the incoming connection request—it allocates real memory
      only once the SYN + ACK segment has itself been acknowledged (and the initial
      sequence number is returned). In that case, all the vital connection parameters can
      be recovered and the connection can be placed in the ESTABLISHED state.
           Producing SYN cookies involves a careful selection process of the TCP ISN
      at servers. Essentially, the server must encode any essential state in the Sequence
      Number field in its SYN + ACK that is returned in the ACK Number field from a
      legitimate client. There are several ways of doing this, but we will mention the
      technique adopted by Linux.
                  Section 13.8 Attacks Involving TCP Connection Management        641

     A server receiving an incoming SYN causes its ISN (supplied to the client in
the SYN + ACK segment) to be set to a value constructed in the following way: the
top 5 bits are (t mod 32) where t is a 32-bit counter that increases by 1 every 64s,
the next 3 bits are an encoding of the server’s MSS (one of eight possibilities), and
the remaining 24 bits are a server-selected cryptographic hash of the connection
4-tuple and t value. (See Chapter 18 for a detailed explanation of cryptographic
hashes.)
     When SYN cookies are used, the server always responds with a SYN + ACK (as
with any typical TCP connection establishment), and the server is able to rebuild
its queue of arriving SYNs when it receives a legitimate ACK where the value for
t still produces the same output from the cryptographic hash. There are at least
two pitfalls of this approach. First, the scheme prohibits the use of arbitrary-size
segments because of the encoding of the MSS. Second, and much less serious,
connection establishment cycles that are very long (longer than 64s) do not work
properly because the counter would wrap. For these reasons, this function is not
enabled by default.
     Another type of degradation attack on TCP involves PMTUD. In this case, an
attacker fabricates an ICMP PTB message containing a very small MTU value (e.g.,
68 bytes). This forces the victim TCP to attempt to fit its data into very small pack-
ets, greatly reducing its performance. This problem can be addressed in several
ways. The most brute-force way would be to simply disable PMTUD for the host.
Other options would be to disable PMTUD in cases where an ICMP PTB message
with next-hop MTU under 576 bytes is received. Another option, implemented
by Linux and mentioned briefly earlier, is to insist that the minimum packet size
(for large packets used by TCP) always be fixed at some value, and larger packets
simply not have the IPv4 DF bit field turned on. This approach is similar, although
perhaps somewhat more attractive, than completely disabling PMTUD.
     Another type of attack involves disrupting an existing TCP connection and
possibly taking it over (called hijacking). These forms of attacks usually involve a
first step of “desynchronizing” the two TCP endpoints so that if they were to talk
to each other, they would be using invalid sequence numbers. They are particu-
lar examples of sequence number attacks [RFC1948]. They can be accomplished in
at least two ways: by causing invalid state transitions during connection estab-
lishment (similar to TWA; see Section 13.6.4), and by generating extra data while
in the ESTABLISHED state. Once the two ends can no longer communicate (but
believe they have an open connection), an attacker can introduce traffic into the
connection, which is considered (by TCP at least) as valid.
     A collection of attacks generally called spoofing attacks involve TCP segments
that have been specially tailored by an attacker to disrupt or alter the behavior of
an existing TCP connection. A variety of these attacks and their mitigation tech-
niques are discussed in [RFC4953]. An attacker can generate a spoofed reset seg-
ment and send it to an existing TCP endpoint. Provided the connection 4-tuple
and checksum are correct, and the sequence number is in range, the reset gener-
ally results in a connection abort at either endpoint. This is of growing concern

      because as networks become faster, a wider range of sequence numbers are con-
      sidered “in window” to maintain performance (see Chapter 15). Other types of
      segments (SYNs, even ACKs) can also be spoofed (and combined with flooding
      attacks), causing myriad problems. Mitigation techniques include authenticating
      each segment (e.g., using the TCP-AO option), requiring reset segments to have
      one particular sequence number instead of one from a range, requiring particular
      values in the Timestamps option, and using other forms of cookies in which other-
      wise noncritical data values are arranged to depend on more exact knowledge of
      the connection or a secret value.
           There are spoofing attacks that are not part of the TCP protocol yet can affect
      TCP’s operation. For example, ICMP can be used to modify PMTUD behavior.
      It can also be used to indicate that a port or host is not available, and this often
      causes a TCP connection to be terminated. Many of these attacks are described in
      [RFC5927], which also suggests a number of ways of improving robustness against
      spoofed ICMP messages. The suggestions amount to validating not only the ICMP
      message but also as much of the contained TCP segment as possible. For example,
      the contained segment should have an appropriate 4-tuple and sequence number.

13.9 Summary
      Before two processes can exchange data using TCP, they must establish a connec-
      tion between themselves. When they are done, they terminate the connection. This
      chapter has provided a detailed look at how connections are established using a
      three-way handshake, and how they are terminated using four segments. We also
      saw how TCP can handle simultaneous open and close operations and how vari-
      ous options, including the Selective ACK, Timestamps, MSS, TCP-AO, and UTO
      options, are handled.
           We used tcpdump and Wireshark to show TCP’s behavior and its use of the
      fields in the TCP header. We also saw how connection establishment can time out,
      how resets are sent and interpreted, what happens with a half-open connection,
      and how TCP provides a half-close. TCP bounds both the number of connection
      attempts it will try when performing an active open and also the number of con-
      nection attempts it will service after performing a passive open.
           Fundamental to understanding the operation of TCP is its state transition
      diagram. We followed through the steps involved in connection establishment
      and termination, and the state transitions that take place. We also looked at the
      implications of TCP’s connection establishment for the design of concurrent TCP
      servers.
           A TCP connection is uniquely defined by a 4-tuple: the local IP address, local
      port number, foreign IP address, and foreign port number. Whenever a connec-
      tion is terminated, one end must maintain knowledge of the connection, and we
      saw that the TIME_WAIT state handles this. The rule is that the end that does
      the active close enters this state for twice the implementation’s MSL, which helps
                                                         Section 13.10 References    643

     protect TCP from processing segments from an older instantiation of the same
     connection. Using the Timestamps option can shorten the waiting time when new
     connections attempt to use the same 4-tuple, and it has other benefits for detecting
     wrapped sequence numbers and performing better RTT measurements.
          TCP can be vulnerable to both resource exhaustion and spoofing attacks, but
     a number of methods have been developed to resist such issues. In addition, TCP
     can be affected by other protocols such as ICMP. Additional protection for ICMP
     is possible by carefully processing the original datagram returned by ICMP mes-
     sages. Finally, TCP can be used in combination with protocols that provide secu-
     rity at other layers (e.g., IPsec and TLS/SSL, described in Chapter 18), which is
     now standard practice.

13.10 References
     [CERTISN] http://www.cert.org/advisories/CA-2001-09.html
     [ITP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names-port-numbers
     [LS10] M. Luckie and B. Stasiewicz, “Measuring Path MTU Discovery Behavior,”
     Proc. ACM IMC, Nov. 2010.
     [RFC0793] J. Postel, “Transmission Control Protocol,” Internet RFC 0793/STD
     0007, Sept. 1981.
     [RFC0854] J. Postel and J. K. Reynolds, “Telnet Protocol Specification,” Internet
     RFC 0854/STD 0008, May 1983.
     [RFC0879] J. Postel, “The TCP Maximum Segment Size and Related Topics,”
     Internet RFC 0879, Nov. 1983.
     [RFC1025] J. Postel, “TCP and IP Bake Off,” Internet RFC 1025, Sept. 1987.
     [RFC1122] R. Braden, ed., “Requirements for Internet Hosts—Communication
     Layers,” Internet RFC 1122/STD 0003, Oct. 1989.
     [RFC1191] J. C. Mogul and S. E. Deering, “Path MTU Discovery,” Internet RFC
     1191, Nov. 1990.
     [RFC1323] V. Jacobson, R. Braden, and D. Borman, “TCP Extensions for High
     Performance,” Internet RFC 1323, May 1992.
     [RFC1337] R. Braden, “TIME-WAIT Assassination Hazards in TCP,” Internet RFC
     1337 (informational), May 1992.
     [RFC1948] S. Bellovin, “Defending against Sequence Number Attacks,” Internet
     RFC 1948 (informational), May 1996.
     [RFC1981] J. McCann, S. Deering, and J. Mogul, “Path MTU Discovery for IP
     Version 6,” Internet RFC 1981, Aug. 1996.

      [RFC2018] M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd, and A. Romanow, “TCP Selective
      Acknowledgment Options,” Internet RFC 2018, Oct. 1996.
      [RFC2385] A. Heffernan, “Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5 Signature
      Option,” Internet RFC 2385 (obsolete), Aug. 1998.
      [RFC2675] D. Borman, S. Deering, and R. Hinden, “IPv6 Jumbograms,” Internet
      RFC 2675, Aug. 1999.
      [RFC2883] S. Floyd, J. Mahdavi, M. Mathis, and M. Podolsky, “An Extension to
      the Selective Acknowledgement (SACK) Option for TCP,” Internet RFC 2883, July
      2000.
      [RFC2923] K. Lahey, “TCP Problems with Path MTU Discovery,” Internet RFC
      2923 (informational), Sept. 2000.
      [RFC4254] T. Ylonen and C. Lonvick, ed., “The Secure Shell (SSH) Connection
      Protocol,” Internet RFC 4254, Jan. 2006.
      [RFC4727] B. Fenner, “Experimental Values in IPv4, IPv6, ICMPv4, ICMPv6, UDP,
      and TCP Headers,” Internet RFC 4727, Nov. 2006.
      [RFC4821] M. Mathis and J. Heffner, “Packetization Layer Path MTU Discovery,”
      Internet RFC 4821, Mar. 2007.
      [RFC4953] J. Touch, “Defending TCP against Spoofing Attacks,” Internet RFC
      4953 (informational), July 2007.
      [RFC4987] W. Eddy, “TCP SYN Flooding Attacks and Common Mitigations,”
      Internet RFC 4987 (informational), Aug. 2007.
      [RFC5482] L. Eggert and F. Gont, “TCP User Timeout Option,” Internet RFC 5482,
      Mar. 2009.
      [RFC5925] J. Touch, A. Mankin, and R. Bonica, “The TCP Authentication Option,”
      Internet RFC 5925, June 2010.
      [RFC5926] G. Lebovitz and E. Rescorla, “Cryptographic Algorithms for the TCP
      Authentication Option (TCP-AO),” Internet RFC 5926, June 2010.
      [RFC5927] F. Gont, “ICMP Attacks against TCP,” Internet RFC 5927 (informa-
      tional), July 2010.
      [RFC5961] A. Ramaiah, R. Stewart, and M. Dalal, “Improving TCP’s Robustness
      to Blind In-Window Attacks,” Internet RFC 5961, Aug. 2010.
      [RFC6056] M. Larsen and F. Gont, “Recommendations for Transport-Protocol
      Port Randomization,” Internet RFC 6056/BCP 0156, Jan. 2011.
      [RFC6146] M. Bagnulo, P. Matthews, and I. van Beijnum, “Stateful NAT64:
      Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4 Servers,”
      Internet RFC 6146, Apr. 2011.
                                                     Section 13.10 References   645

[RFC6191] F. Gont, “Reducing the TIME-WAIT State Using TCP Timestamps,”
Internet RFC 6191/BCP 0159, Apr. 2011.
[RFC6298] V. Paxson, M. Allman, J. Chu, and M. Sargent, “Computing TCP’s
Retransmission Timer,” Internet RFC 6298, June 2011.
[S96] B. Schneier, Applied Cryptography (Wiley, 1996).
[TPARAMS] http://www.iana.org/tcp-parameters
This page intentionally left blank
