     14

     TCP Timeout and
     Retransmission

14.1 Introduction
     Efficiency and performance are issues that we have not discussed much so far.
     We have primarily been concerned with correctness of operation. In this chapter
     and the next two, we will be focusing not only on the basic tasks TCP performs,
     but also on how well it performs them. The TCP protocol provides a reliable data
     delivery service between two applications using an underlying network layer
     (IP) that may lose, duplicate, or reorder packets. In order to provide an error-free
     exchange of data, TCP resends data it believes has been lost. To decide what data
     it needs to resend, TCP depends on a continuous flow of acknowledgments from
     receiver to sender. When data segments or acknowledgments are lost, TCP initi-
     ates a retransmission of the data that has not been acknowledged. TCP has two
     separate mechanisms for accomplishing retransmission, one based on time and
     one based on the structure of the acknowledgments. The second approach is usu-
     ally much more efficient than the first.
          TCP sets a timer when it sends data, and if the data is not acknowledged when
     the timer expires, a timeout or timer-based retransmission of data occurs. The time-
     out occurs after an interval called the retransmission timeout (RTO). It has another
     way of initiating a retransmission called fast retransmission or fast retransmit, which
     usually happens without any delay. Fast retransmit is based on inferring losses by
     noticing when TCP’s cumulative acknowledgment fails to advance in the ACKs
     received over time, or when ACKs carrying selective acknowledgment informa-
     tion (SACKs) indicate that out-of-order segments are present at the receiver. Gen-
     erally speaking, when the sender believes that the receiver might be missing some
     data, a choice needs to be made between sending new (unsent) data and retrans-
     mitting. In this chapter we look closely at how TCP determines that a segment

      is lost and what to send in response. The issue of how much to send is deferred
      until Chapter 16, where we discuss TCP’s congestion control procedures that are
      commonly invoked when packet loss is suspected. Here, we investigate how the
      RTO is set based on measurements of a connection’s round-trip time (RTT), the
      mechanics of a timer-based retransmission, and how TCP’s fast retransmission
      mechanism works. We also look at how SACKs are used to help a TCP sender
      determine what data is missing at the receiver, the effect of reordering and dupli-
      cation of IP packets on TCP’s behavior, and the way TCP can change its packet size
      when retransmitting. We also look briefly at some attacks that can be mounted to
      fool TCP into behaving more aggressively or more passively.

14.2 Simple Timeout and Retransmission Example
      We have already seen some examples of timeout and retransmission. (1) In the
      ICMP Destination Unreachable (Port Unreachable) example in Chapter 8 we saw
      the TFTP client using UDP employing a simple (and poor) timeout and retrans-
      mission strategy: it assumed 5s was an adequate timeout period and retransmit-
      ted every 5s. (2) In the attempted connection to a nonexistent host in Chapter 13,
      we saw that when TCP tried to establish the connection it retransmitted its SYN
      segment using a longer and longer delay between each successive retransmission.
      (3) In Chapter 3, we saw what happens when Ethernet encounters a collision. All
      of these mechanisms are initiated by the expiration of a timer.
           We shall first look at the timer-based retransmission strategy used by TCP. We
      will establish a connection, send some data to verify that everything is OK, isolate
      one end of the connection, send some more data, and watch what TCP does. In this
      case, we will use Wireshark to see how the connection progresses (see Figure 14-1).
           Segments 1, 2, and 3 correspond to the normal TCP connection establish-
      ment handshake. When the Web server completes the connection establishment,
      it remains silent, awaiting a Web request. Before we provide the request, we isolate
      (disconnect) the server host. The input at the client side is as follows:

      Linux% telnet 10.0.0.10 80
      Trying 10.0.0.10...
      Connected to 10.0.0.10.
      Escape character is '^]'.
      GET / HTTP/1.0
      Connection closed by foreign host.

          This request cannot be delivered to the server, so it remains in TCP’s queue at
      the client for quite some time. During this period, the netstat command on the
      client indicates that the queue is not empty:

      Active Internet connections (w/o servers)
      Proto Recv-Q Send-Q   Local Address       Foreign Address         State
      tcp        0     18   10.0.0.9:1043       10.0.0.10:www           ESTABLISHED
Figure 14-1   A simple example of TCP’s timeout and retransmission mechanism. The first retransmit occurs at time 42.954, followed
                    by other retransmissions at times 43.374, 44.215, 45.895, and 49.255. The intervals between successive retransmissions
                    are 206ms, 420ms, 841ms, 1.68s, and 3.36s, respectively. These times represent a doubling of the timeout between suc-
                    cessive retransmissions of the same segment.

           Here we see that 18 bytes are in the send queue, waiting to be delivered to
      the Web server. The 18 bytes consist of the characters displayed in the preceding
      request, plus two sets of carriage-return and newline characters. Details of the
      rest of the output, including addresses and state information, are described in the
      following paragraphs.
           Segment 4 is the client’s first attempt to send the Web request, at 42.748s. The
      next try is at 42.954, 0.206s later. Then it launches another try at 43.374, which
      is 0.420s later. Additional retries (retransmissions) occur at 44.215, 45.895, and
      49.255s. These represent time differences of 0.841, 1.680, and 3.360s, respectively.
           This doubling of time between successive retransmissions is called a binary
      exponential backoff, and we saw it in Chapter 13 during a failed TCP connection
      establishment attempt. We shall explore it in more detail later. If we measure the
      elapsed time between the initial request and the time at which the connection is
      finally aborted, the total time is about 15.5 minutes. After that, the following error
      message is displayed at the client:

      Connection closed by foreign host.

           Logically, TCP has two thresholds to determine how persistently it will attempt
      to resend the same segment. These thresholds are described in the Host Require-
      ments RFC [RFC1122], and we mentioned them briefly in Chapter 13. Threshold R1
      indicates the number of tries TCP will make (or the amount of time it will wait) to
      resend a segment before passing “negative advice” to the IP layer (e.g., causing it to
      reevaluate the IP route it is using). Threshold R2 (larger than R1) dictates the point
      at which TCP should abandon the connection. These thresholds are suggested to
      be at least three retransmissions and 100s, respectively. For connection establish-
      ment (sending SYN segments), these values may be different from those for data
      segments, and the R2 value for SYN segments is required to be at least 3 minutes.
           In Linux, the R1 and R2 values for regular data segments are available to be
      changed by applications or can be changed using the system-wide configuration
      variables net.ipv4.tcp_retries1 and net.ipv4.tcp_retries2, respec-
      tively. These are measured in the number of retransmissions, and not in units of
      time. The default value for tcp_retries2 is 15, which corresponds roughly to
      13–30 minutes, depending on the connection’s RTO. The default value for net.
      ipv4.tcp_retries1 is 3. For SYN segments, net.ipv4.tcp_syn_retries
      and net.ipv4.tcp_synack_retries bounds the number of retransmissions
      of SYN segments; their default value is 5 (roughly 180s). Windows also has a num-
      ber of variables that affect the overall behavior of TCP, including values for R1 and
      R2. These are all available by modifying values under the following registry keys
      [WINREG]:

      HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Services\Tcpip\Parameters
      HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Services\Tcpip6\Parameters

           Of immediate interest is the value called TcpMaxDataRetransmissions.
      This corresponds to the value of tcp_retries2 in Linux. It has a default value of
      5. Even in the simple retransmission example we have seen so far, TCP is required
      to assign some timeout value to its retransmission timer to dictate how long it
      should await an ACK for data it sends. If TCP were only ever used in one static
      environment, it would be possible to determine one particular correct value for the
      timeout value. Because TCP needs to operate in a large variety of environments,
      which themselves may change over time, TCP needs to determine this timeout
      value based on the current situation. For example, if a network link failed and traf-
      fic were rerouted, the RTT would change (possibly in a major way). In other words,
      TCP needs to dynamically determine its RTO. We consider this problem next.

14.3 Setting the Retransmission Timeout (RTO)
      Fundamental to TCP’s timeout and retransmission procedures is how to set the
      RTO based upon measurement of the RTT experienced on a given connection.
      If TCP retransmits a segment earlier than the RTT, it may be injecting duplicate
      traffic into the network unnecessarily. Conversely, if it delays sending until much
      longer than one RTT, the overall network utilization (and single-connection
      throughput) drops when traffic is lost. Knowing the RTT is made more compli-
      cated because it can change over time, as routes and network usage vary. TCP
      must track these changes and modify its timeout accordingly in order to maintain
      good performance.
           Because TCP sends acknowledgments when it receives data, it is possible to
      send a byte with a particular sequence number and measure the time required to
      receive an acknowledgment that covers that sequence number. Each such mea-
      surement is called an RTT sample. The challenge for TCP is to establish a good
      estimate for the range of RTT values given a set of samples that vary over time.
      The second step is how to set the RTO based on these values. Getting this “right”
      is very important for TCP’s performance.
           The RTT is estimated for each TCP connection separately, and one retransmis-
      sion timer is pending whenever any data is in flight that consumes a sequence
      number (including SYN and FIN segments). The proper way to set this timer has
      been a subject of research for years, and improvements are made on an occasional
      basis. In this section, we will explore some of the more important milestones in the
      evolution of the method used to compute the RTO. We begin with the first (“clas-
      sic”) method, as detailed in [RFC0793].

14.3.1 The Classic Method
      The original TCP specification [RFC0793] had TCP update a smoothed RTT estima-
      tor (called SRTT) using the following formula:

                               SRTT ← α(SRTT) + (1 − α) RTTs

           Here, SRTT is updated based on both its existing value and a new sample,
      RTTs. The constant α is a smoothing or scale factor with a recommended value
      between 0.8 and 0.9. SRTT is updated every time a new measurement is made.
      With the original recommended value for α, it is clear that 80% to 90% of each new
      estimate is from the previous estimate and 10% to 20% is from the new measure-
      ment. This type of average is also known as an exponentially weighted moving aver-
      age (EWMA) or low-pass filter. It is convenient for implementation reasons because
      it requires only one previous value of SRTT to be stored in order to keep the run-
      ning estimate.
           Given the estimator SRTT, which changes as the RTT changes, [RFC0793] rec-
      ommended that the RTO be set to the following:

                           RTO = min(ubound, max(lbound,(SRTT)β))

      where β is a delay variance factor with a recommended value of 1.3 to 2.0, ubound
      is an upper bound (suggested to be, e.g., 1 minute), and lbound is a lower bound
      (suggested to be, e.g., 1s) on the RTO. We shall call this assignment procedure the
      classic method. It generally results in the RTO being set either to 1s, or to about twice
      SRTT. For relatively stable distributions of the RTT, this was adequate. However,
      when TCP was run over networks with highly variable RTTs (e.g., early packet
      radio networks in this case), it did not perform so well.

14.3.2 The Standard Method
      In [J88], Jacobson detailed problems with the classic method further—basically,
      that the timer specified by [RFC0793] cannot keep up with wide fluctuations in the
      RTT (and in particular, it causes unnecessary retransmissions when the real RTT is
      much larger than expected). Unnecessary retransmissions add to the network load,
      when the network is already loaded, as indicated by the increasing sample RTT.
           To address this problem, the method used to assign the RTO was enhanced
      to accommodate a larger variability in the RTT. This is accomplished by keeping
      track of an estimate of the variability in the RTT measurements in addition to the
      estimate of its average. Setting the RTO based on both a mean and a variability
      estimator provides a better timeout response to wide fluctuations in the round-
      trip times than just calculating the RTO as a constant multiple of the mean.
           Figures 5 and 6 in [J88] show a comparison of the [RFC0793] RTO values for
      some actual round-trip times, versus the RTO calculations we show next, which
      take into account the variability of the round-trip times. If we think of the RTT
      measurements made by TCP as samples of a statistical process, estimating both
      the mean and variance (or standard deviation) helps to make better predictions
      about the possible future values the process may take on. A good prediction for
      the range of possible values for the RTT helps TCP determine an RTO that is nei-
      ther too large nor too small in most cases.

    As described by Jacobson, the mean deviation is a good approximation to the
standard deviation, but it is easier and faster to compute. Calculating the standard
deviation requires executing a square root mathematical operation on the vari-
ance, which was considered to be too expensive for a fast TCP implementation.
(This is not the whole story, really. See the fascinating history of “the debate” in
[G04].) We therefore need running estimates of both the average as well as the
mean deviation. This leads to the following equations that are applied to each RTT
measurement M (called RTTs earlier):

                                 srtt ← (1 - g)(srtt) + (g)M
                         rttvar ← (1 - h)(rttvar) + (h)(|M - srtt|)
                                   RTO = srtt + 4(rttvar)

     Here, the value srtt effectively replaces the earlier value of SRTT, and the value
rttvar, which becomes an EWMA of the mean deviation, is used instead of β to
help determine the RTO. This set of equations can also be written in a form that
requires a smaller number of operations when implemented on a conventional
computer:

                                       Err = M − srtt
                                    srtt ← srtt + g(Err)
                            rttvar ← rttvar + h(|Err| − rttvar)
                                   RTO = srtt + 4(rttvar)

    As suggested, srtt is the EWMA for the mean and rttvar is the EWMA for
the absolute error, |Err|. Err is the difference between the measured value M and
the current RTT estimator srtt. Both srtt and rttvar are used to calculate the RTO,
which varies over time. The gain g is the weight given to a new RTT sample M
in the average srtt and is set to 1/8. The gain h is the weight given to a new mean
deviation sample (absolute difference of the new sample M from the running aver-
age srtt) for the deviation estimate rttvar and is set to 1/4. The larger gain for the
deviation makes the RTO go up faster when the RTT changes. The values for g and
h are chosen as (negative) powers of 2, allowing the overall set of computations to
be implemented in a computer using fixed-point integer arithmetic with shift and
add operations instead of multiplies and divides.

    Note
    [J88] specified 2 * rttvar in the calculation of RTO, but after further research, [J90]
    changed the value to 4 * rttvar, which is what appeared in the BSD Net/1 imple-
    mentation and ultimately in the standard [RFC6298].

          Comparing the classic method with Jacobson’s, we see that the calculations of
      the RTT average are similar (α is 1 minus the gain g) but a different gain is used.
      Also, Jacobson’s calculation of the RTO depends on both the smoothed RTT and
      the smoothed deviation, whereas the classic method used a simple multiple of the
      smoothed RTT. This is the basis for the way many TCP implementations compute
      their RTOs to this day, and because of its adoption as the basis for [RFC6298] we
      shall call it the standard method, although there are slight refinements in [RFC6298],
      which we shall now discuss.

      14.3.2.1 Clock Granularity and RTO Bounds
      TCP has a continuously running “clock” that is used when taking RTT measure-
      ments. As with initial sequence numbers, real TCP connections do not start their
      clocks at zero and the clock does not have infinite precision. Rather, the TCP clock
      is usually the value of a variable that is updated as the system clock advances, not
      necessarily one-for-one. The length of the TCP’s clock “tick” is called its granular-
      ity. Traditionally, this value was relatively large (about 500ms), but more recent
      implementations use finer-granularity clocks (e.g., 1ms for Linux).
           The granularity can affect the details of making RTT measurements and also
      how the RTO is set. In [RFC6298], the granularity is used to refine how updates to
      the RTO are made. In addition, a lower bound is placed on the RTO. The equation
      used is as follows:

                            RTO = max(srtt + max(G, 4(rttvar)), 1000)

      where G is the timer granularity and 1000ms represents a lower bound on the total
      RTO (recommended by rule (2.4) of [RFC6298]). Consequently, the RTO is always at
      least 1s. An optional upper bound is also allowed, provided it has a value of at least 60s.

      14.3.2.2 Initial Values
      We have seen how the estimators are updated as time progresses, but we also need
      to know how to set their initial values. Before the first SYN exchange, TCP has no
      good idea what value to use for setting the initial RTO. It also does not know what
      to use as the initial values for its estimators, unless the system has provided hints
      at this information (some systems cache this information in the forwarding table;
      see Section 14.9). According to [RFC6298], the initial setting for the RTO should be
      1s, although 3s is used in the event of a timeout on the initial SYN segment. When
      the first RTT measurement M is received, the estimators are initialized as follows:

                                              srtt ← M
                                            rttvar ← M/2

          We now have enough detail to see how the estimators are initialized and main-
      tained. The procedures depend on obtaining RTT samples, which would appear to
      be straightforward. We now look at why this might not always be the case.

14.3.2.3 Retransmission Ambiguity and Karn’s Algorithm
A problem measuring an RTT sample can occur when a packet is retransmitted.
Say a packet is transmitted, a timeout occurs, the packet is retransmitted, and an
acknowledgment is received for it. Is the ACK for the first transmission or the sec-
ond? This is an example of the retransmission ambiguity problem. It happens because
unless the Timestamps option is being used, an ACK provides only the ACK num-
ber with no indication of which copy (e.g., first or second) of a sequence number
is being ACKed.
     The paper [KP87] specifies that when a timeout and retransmission occur, we
cannot update the RTT estimators when the acknowledgment for the retransmit-
ted data finally arrives. This is the “first part” of Karn’s algorithm. It eliminates
the acknowledgment ambiguity problem by removing the ambiguity for purposes
of computing the RTT estimate. It is a requirement in [RFC6298].
     If we were to simply ignore retransmitted segments entirely when setting the
RTO, however, we would be failing to take into account some useful information
being provided by the network (i.e., that it is probably experiencing some form of
inability to deliver packets quickly). In such cases, it would be beneficial to reduce
the load on the network by decreasing the retransmission rate, at least until pack-
ets are no longer being lost. This reasoning is the basis for the exponential backoff
behavior we saw in Figure 14-1.
      TCP applies a backoff factor to the RTO, which doubles each time a subsequent
retransmission timer expires. Doubling continues until an acknowledgment is
received for a segment that was not retransmitted. At that time, the backoff factor
is set back to 1 (i.e., the binary exponential backoff is canceled), and the retrans-
mission timer returns to its normal value. Doubling the backoff factor on subse-
quent retransmissions is the “second part” of Karn’s algorithm. Note that when
TCP times out, it also invokes congestion control procedures that alter its sending
rate. (Congestion control is discussed in detail in Chapter 16.) Karn’s algorithm,
then, really consists of two parts. As quoted directly from the 1987 paper [KP87]:

    When an acknowledgement arrives for a packet that has been sent more than once
    (i.e., is retransmitted at least once), ignore any round-trip measurement based on
    this packet, thus avoiding the retransmission ambiguity problem. In addition, the
    backed-off RTO for this packet is kept for the next packet. Only when it (or a suc-
    ceeding packet) is acknowledged without an intervening retransmission will the
    RTO be recalculated from SRTT.

    This algorithm has been a required procedure in a TCP implementation for
some time (since [RFC1122]). There is an exception, however, when the TCP Time-
stamps option is being used (see Chapter 13). In that case, the acknowledgment
ambiguity problem can be avoided and the first part of Karn’s algorithm does not
apply.

      14.3.2.4 RTT Measurement (RTTM) with the Timestamps Option
      The TCP Timestamps option (TSOPT), in addition to providing a basis for the
      PAWS algorithm we saw in Chapter 13, can be used for round-trip time measurement
      (RTTM) [RFC1323]. The basic format of the TSOPT was described in Chapter 13. It
      allows the sender to include a 32-bit number in a TCP segment that is returned in
      a corresponding acknowledgment.
           The timestamp value (TSV) is carried in the TSOPT of the initial SYN and
      returned in the TSER part of the TSOPT in the SYN + ACK, which is how the initial
      values for srtt, rttvar, and RTO are determined. Because the initial SYN “counts”
      as data (i.e., it is retransmitted if lost and consumes a sequence number), its RTT is
      measured. TSOPTs are also carried in other segments, so the connection’s RTT can
      be estimated on an ongoing basis. This seems straightforward enough but is made
      more complex because TCP does not always provide an ACK for each segment it
      receives. For example, TCP often provides one ACK for every other segment (see
      Chapter 15) when large volumes of data are transferred. In addition, when data is
      lost, reordered, or successfully retransmitted, the cumulative ACK mechanism of
      TCP means that there is not necessarily any fixed correspondence between a seg-
      ment and its ACK. To handle these challenges, TCPs that use this option (most of
      them today—Linux and Windows included), employ the following algorithm for
      taking RTT samples:

          1. The sending TCP includes a 32-bit timestamp value in the TSV portion of
             the TSOPT in each TCP segment it sends. This field contains the value of
             the sender’s TCP “clock” when the segment is transmitted.
          2. A receiving TCP keeps track of the received TSV value to send in the next
             ACK it generates (in a variable typically named TsRecent) and the ACK num-
             ber in the last ACK that it sent (in a variable named LastACK). Recall that
             ACK numbers represent the next in-order sequence number the receiver
             (i.e., sender of the ACK) expects to see.
          3. When a new segment arrives, if it contains the sequence number matching
             the value in LastACK (i.e., it is the next expected segment), the segment’s
             TSV is saved in TsRecent.
          4. Whenever the receiver sends an ACK, a TSOPT is included such that the
             timestamp value contained in TsRecent is placed in the TSER part of the
             TSOPT in the ACK.
          5. A sender receiving an ACK that advances its window subtracts the TSER
             from its current TCP clock and uses the difference as a sample value to
             update its RTT estimators.

          Timestamps are enabled by default in FreeBSD, Linux, and in response to sys-
      tems that use them for later versions of Windows. In Linux, the system configura-
      tion variable net.ipv4.tcp_timestamps dictates whether or not they are used

       (value 0 for not used, value 1 for used). In Windows, their use is controlled by the
       Tcp1323Opts value in the registry area mentioned earlier. If it has the value 0,
       timestamps are disabled. If its value is 2, timestamps are enabled. This key has
       no default value (it is not in the registry by default). The default behavior is to use
       timestamps if a peer uses them when initiating a connection.

14.3.3 The Linux Method
       The Linux RTT estimation procedure works somewhat differently from the stan-
       dard method. It uses a clock granularity of 1ms, which is finer than that of many
       other implementations, along with the TSOPT. The combination of frequent mea-
       surements of the RTT and the fine-grain clock contributes to a more accurate esti-
       mate of the RTT but also tends to minimize the value of rttvar over time [LS00].
       This happens because when a large enough number of mean deviation samples
       are accumulated, they tend to cancel each other out. This is one consideration for
       setting the RTO that differs somewhat from the standard method. Another relates
       to the way the standard method increases rttvar when an RTT sample is signifi-
       cantly below the existing RTT estimate srtt.
            To understand the second issue better, recall that the RTO is usually set to the
       value srtt + 4(rttvar). Consequently, any large change in rttvar causes the RTO to
       increase, whether the latest RTT sample is greater or less than srtt. This is counter-
       intuitive—if the actual RTT has dropped significantly, it is not desirable to have
       the RTO increase as a consequence. Linux deals with this issue by limiting the
       impact of significant downward drops in RTT sample values on the value of rttvar.
       We will now look at the details for the procedure Linux uses to set its RTO; the
       procedure addresses both of the issues just discussed.
            Linux keeps the variables srtt and rttvar, as with the standard method, but
       also two new ones called mdev and mdev_max. The value mdev keeps the running
       estimate of the mean deviation using the standard algorithm for rttvar described
       before. The value mdev_max holds the maximum value of mdev seen over the last
       measured RTT and is never allowed to be less than 50ms. In addition, rttvar is
       regularly updated to ensure that it is at least as large as mdev_max. Consequently,
       the RTO never dips below 200ms.

           Note
           The minimum RTO can be changed. TCP_RTO_MIN, which is a kernel configu-
           ration constant, can be changed prior to recompiling and installing the kernel.
           Some Linux versions also allow it to be changed using the ip route command.
           When TCP is used in data-center networks where RTTs may be a few microsec-
           onds, 200ms minimum RTO can lead to severe performance degradations due to
           slow TCP recovery after packet loss in local switches. This is the so-called TCP
           “incast” problem. Various solutions exist to this problem, including modification of
           the TCP timer granularity and minimum RTO to be on the order of microseconds
           [V09]. Such small minimum RTO values are not recommended for use on the
           global Internet.

          Linux updates rttvar to the value of mdev_max whenever the maximum
      increases. It always sets the RTO to be the sum of srtt and 4(rttvar) and ensures
      that the RTO never exceeds TCP_RTO_MAX, which defaults to 120s. See [SK02]
      for more details. We can see how the details of all of this work in Figure 14-2. This
      figure also shows how the Timestamps option operates.

         572                                   577
         6HW
                  VUWW   UWWYDU 7&3?&ORFN     6DPSOH
                                                                                                 /DVW$&.     7V5HFHQW

                                                              6<1?6
                                                                       HT
                                                                 769?? ???
                                                                         

                                                                 1 ? $ &.???                       ?
                                                             6<          ???
                                                                76(5
                                                   
                                                                 $&.??
                                                                769?? ?
                                                                         
                                                                              WH                                ??
                                                                     LQ ?XSGD
                                                                   Z
                                                           $&.?? (5????
                                                                76
                                     
                                                                        6HT??
                                                                    769?? ?
                                                                               
                                                                    6HT?? ??
                                                                               
                                                                    769?? ??                                    ???
                                                                                
                                                                                  
                                                                  $&. ???                        ????
                                                                          5   ??
                                                                    76(
                                                                     6HT??
                                                                                
                                                                    769?? ??
                                                                               
                                                                    6HT?? ??
                                                                                                                   
                                                                    769?? ??                     ????
                                                               6<1?6 ???
                                                                           HT???                                ???
                                                                    769            ???
                                                                               
                                                                            
                                                             .           ?                  ?
                                                          $& (5???                       ??? ?
                                                           76                        .??    ?    ????
                                                                                 $& 5???
                                                                     6HT??           6(
                                                                                   7
                                                                    769?? ??
                                                                    6HT?? ???
                                                                              
                                                                   769?? ??                                     ???
                                                                     6HT?????                    ????
                                                                               
                                                                    769?? ??                                    ???
                                                                              
                                                                   6HT?? ??
                                                                             
                                                                   769?? ???
                                                                                                    $GGLWLRQDO?$&.V
                                                                   6?HT???????
                                                                  7?6  ?         ?                5HPRYHG?IRU?&ODULW\
                                                            .       ? 9???? ?
                                                                      
                                                          $& (5                  ?
                                                           7 6
                                                   

Figure 14-2 The TCP Timestamps option carries a copy of the TCP clock at the sender. ACKs return
                  this value to the sender, which uses the difference (current clock - returned timestamp)
                  to update its srtt and rttvar estimates. For clarity, only one set of timestamps is depicted.
                  In this Linux system, the rttvar value is constrained to be at least 50 (millisecond) units,
                  and the RTO has a lower bound of 200ms.

     In Figure 14-2 we see a TCP connection using the Timestamps option as it
starts up. The sender is a Linux 2.6 system and the receiver is a FreeBSD 5.4 system.
Sequence numbers and timestamp values are depicted as relative values for clarity.
In addition, only the sender’s timestamps are shown. The figure is not drawn exactly
to temporal scale, in order to make the numerical values easier to read. Based on the
initial RTT measurement in this example, Linux makes the following updates:

    • srtt = 16ms
    • mdev = (16/2)ms = 8ms
    • rttvar = mdev_max = max(mdev, TCP_RTO_MIN) = max(8, 50) = 50ms
    • RTO = srtt + 4(rttvar) = 16 + 4(50) = 216ms

    After the initial SYN exchange, the sender supplies an ACK for the receiver’s
SYN and the receiver responds with a window update. As neither of these packets
contains data (or SYN or FIN bit fields, which are counted as data), they are not
timed, and no RTT estimator update is performed when the window update arrives
back at the sender. Segments that do not contain data are not reliably delivered by
TCP, meaning they are not retransmitted if lost. These types of segments do not
require a retransmission timer to be set, because they are never retransmitted.

    Note
    It is worth mentioning that TCP options, by themselves, are also not retransmitted
    or reliably delivered. Only when options are specifically arranged to be present in
    data segments (including SYN and FIN segments) will options be retransmitted if
    lost, and then only as a side effect.

     When the application performs its first write, the sending TCP emits two seg-
ments, each with a TSV value equal to 127. The values are identical in these two
segments because the TCP clock has advanced less than 1ms (the sending TCP’s
clock granularity) between the first and second transmission. It is not unusual to
see the clock fail to advance, or advance by small amounts, when the sender is
sending multiple segments “back-to-back” in this fashion.
     The LastACK variable at the receiver holds the ACK number last sent by the
receiver. In this example, LastACK starts with the value 1 because the last ACK
sent was the SYN + ACK packet sent during connection establishment. When the
first full-size segment arrives, its sequence number matches the LastACK value,
so the TsRecent variable is updated to contain the value 127 from the arriving seg-
ment’s TSV. The arrival of the second segment does not update the TsRecent vari-
able because its Sequence Number field does not match the value in LastACK. The
ACK sent in response to the arriving packets includes the value of TsRecent in its
TSER, and its transmission also causes the receiver to update the LastACK variable
to the ACK number, 2801.

           When this ACK arrives, TCP is able to make its second RTT measurement.
      It takes the current TCP clock and subtracts the TSER value from the arriving
      packet, forming the measurement m: m = 223 – 127 = 96. With this measurement,
      the Linux TCP updates the connection variables as follows:

          • mdev = mdev (3/4) + |m-srtt|(1/4) = 8(3/4) + |80|(1/4) = 26ms
          • mdev_max = max(mdev_max, mdev) = max(50, 26) = 50ms
          • srtt = srtt (7/8) + m(1/8) = 16(7/8) + 96(1/8) = 14 + 12 = 26ms
          • rttvar = mdev_max = 50ms
          • RTO = srtt + 4(rttvar) = 26 + 4(50) = 226ms

           As mentioned previously, Linux TCP has several special modifications to the
      classic RTT estimation algorithm that merit discussion. At the time the classic
      algorithms were developed, the typical granularity of the TCP clock was 500ms
      and the Timestamps option was not in widespread use. It was typical to take only
      one RTT sample per window and update the estimators accordingly. This is still
      used if timestamps are not available or not enabled.
           If only one RTT sample is taken per window, the rttvar term changes relatively
      slowly. With timestamps and per-packet timestamp measurements, many more
      measurements can take place. Because it is common for the RTT to vary little from
      one packet to the next in the same window of data, taking so many measurements
      in a small period of time (e.g., when the window is large) can lead to the mean
      deviation estimate being small (near zero, thanks to the law of large numbers
      [F68]). To address this issue, Linux maintains the mdev variable as the running
      mean deviation estimate but sets the RTO based on the rttvar, which is increased
      to the maximum value of mdev during one window of data and also clamped to
      be at least 50ms. Rttvar is allowed to decrease only one time, from one window to
      the next.
           The standard approach uses a heavy weight (factor of 4) given to the rttvar
      term, and consequently the RTO tends to increase, even when the RTT is decreas-
      ing. With a coarse-granularity clock (e.g., 500ms) this may have relatively little
      effect because there are so few values the RTO can take on. However, with a
      finer-granularity clock, such as the 1ms used by Linux, this can be of concern. To
      address this issue, Linux handles the case where the RTT is decreasing by giving
      less weight to the new sample if it is below the “lower end” of the estimated RTT
      range (srtt - mdev). The complete relationship is as follows:

                         if (m < (srtt – mdev))
                           mdev = (31/32) * mdev + (1/32) * |srtt - m|
                         else
                           mdev = (3/4) * mdev + (1/4) * |srtt - m|

            The conditional determines if the new RTT sample is below the bottom of the
       range of what an RTT measurement is expected to be. If so, the new sample indi-
       cates that the connection may be experiencing a significantly reducing RTT. To
       avoid increasing mdev (and consequently rttvar and RTO) in such cases, the new
       mean deviation sample, |srtt - m|, is given an 8x reduced weight versus its nor-
       mal weighting. Overall, this results in avoiding the problem of increasing the RTO
       in cases where the RTT is decreasing. For an in-depth discussion of these issues,
       please see [LS00] and [SK02]. In [RKS07], the authors evaluated the TCP RTT esti-
       mation algorithms with various operating systems on 2.8 million TCP flows. They
       conclude that the Linux estimator is the most effective among those studied, largely
       because of its relatively quick convergence, but that it can also be tuned most effec-
       tively by reducing the influence of RTT variance on setting the RTO.
            Returning now to Figure 14-2, when ACK 7001 is generated at the receiver, we
       see that its TSER contains a copy of a TSV value, not from the most recently arriv-
       ing segment, but instead from the oldest segment that has not been ACKed. When
       returned to the sender, this ACK causes the RTT sample to be measured from the
       first of the two segments, rather than from the last one sent. This is how the time-
       stamp algorithm works with delayed or otherwise erratic ACKs. When the RTT
       sample from the oldest packet is measured, the RTT sample is taken to be the time
       the sender should wait to expect an ACK, rather than the actual network RTT. This
       is important because the sender needs to base its RTO on the rate at which it can
       expect ACKs from the receiver, which may be less than the packet sending rate.

14.3.4 RTT Estimator Behaviors
       As we have seen, substantial innovation and engineering have been invested in
       how to set TCP’s RTO and how to estimate the RTT. Figure 14-3 shows how the
       more popular estimators work, based on applying the standard and Linux algo-
       rithms to a synthetic data set. The 1s RTO minimum recommended by [RFC6298]
       has been removed for the standard method for illustration. Most real-world TCP
       implementations today violate this directive anyhow [RKS07].
           The graph shows a time-series plot of 200 synthetic values drawn from two
       Gaussian probability distributions, N(200, 50) and N(50, 50). The first distribution
       is used for the first 100 points, and the second is used for the second 100 points.
       Any negative samples were made positive by sign inversion (applicable only to the
       second distribution). Each plus (+) indicates a specific sample value. The signifi-
       cant drop in sample values after sample 100 is apparent, and it is easy to see how
       the Linux approach drops the RTO almost immediately after sample 100, while the
       standard approach requires another 20 samples.
           If we focus now on the Linux rttvar line, we can see that it remains relatively
       constant. This is because of the 50ms minimum on the mdev_max value (and con-
       sequently the rttvar value). This has the effect of making the Linux RTO value
       always at least 200ms, and all unnecessary retransmissions are avoided (although
       the timer may not fire as quickly, leading to reduced performance when packets

Figure 14-3 The Linux and standard RTO assignment and RTT estimation algorithms applied to
                  synthetic (pseudorandom) sample points. The first 100 points are drawn from an N(200,
                  50) distribution, and the second 100 are drawn from an N(50, 50) distribution with neg-
                  ative values turned positive. Linux avoids the increase in RTO when the mean drops
                  after sample 100. With Linux, the minimum RTO is effectively set to 200ms, so after
                  sample 120, the standard method is tighter. Linux avoids setting the RTO too low in all
                  cases for this example. The standard approach runs into potential problems at samples
                  78 and 191.

      are lost). The standard approach runs into potential problems at samples 78 and
      191, where a spurious retransmission could take place. We shall discuss this problem
      later.

14.3.5 RTTM Robustness to Loss and Reordering
      The TSOPT has been shown to work properly when packets are not lost, whether
      or not the receiver delays some ACKs. The algorithm also operates correctly in the
      following cases:

          • Out-of-order segments: When a receiver receives an out-of-order segment,
            typically because of the loss of a previous segment, an ACK is supposed
            to be generated immediately to help the fast retransmit algorithm (see
            Section 14.5) operate. This ACK includes as its TSER value the TSV value
            from the most recent in-order segment that arrived at the receiver (i.e., the
            most recent one to advance the window, which is generally not the arriving

       out-of-order segment). This tends to cause the sender’s RTT sample values
       to increase, leading to a corresponding increase in the sender’s RTO. When
       packets are being reordered, this is beneficial because it tends to allow the
       sender a bit more time to realize that packets are reordered rather than lost
       before initiating a retransmission.
    • Successful retransmissions: When a receiver receives a segment that fills a
      hole in its receive buffer (e.g., because of the successful arrival of a retrans-
      mission), the window generally jumps forward. In this case, the value
      carried in the TSER of the corresponding ACK is from the most recently
      arriving segment. This is useful because if an older segment’s TSV were
      used, it might be more than one RTO’s worth of time old, leading to a large
      unwanted bias in the sender’s RTT estimate.

    The example in Figure 14-4 illustrates these points. Assume that three seg-
ments, each containing 1024 bytes, are received in the following order: segment 1
with bytes 1–1024, segment 3 with bytes 2049–3072, and then segment 2 with bytes
1025–2048.

                                                         /DVW?$&.   7V5HFHQW
                              6?? ?
                                       
                               769 ??
                                        
                     6?
                          76
                            9??

                                                                       
                                              $??? ??
                               
                               

                                                 ( 5 ?
                                              76
                                  

                                     6?? ??
                                                
                                        769??? ?

                                    
                              $??? ??
                                  5?
                              76(
                                                                       
                                      
                                $??? ??
                                    5?
                                76(

Figure 14-4   When segments are reordered, the returned timestamp is that of the last segment to
              advance the receiver’s window (not the largest timestamp to arrive at the receiver).
              This biases the sender’s RTO toward overestimating the RTT during periods of packet
              reordering and reduces its aggressiveness.

    The ACKs sent back in Figure 14-4 are ACK 1025 with the timestamp from
segment 1 (a normal ACK for data that was expected), ACK 1025 with the time-
stamp from segment 1 (a duplicate ACK in response to the in-window but out-of-
sequence segment), then ACK 3073 with the timestamp from segment 2 (not the

      timestamp from segment 3). This has the effect of overestimating the RTT when
      segments are reordered (or lost). A larger RTT estimate leads to a larger RTO, mak-
      ing the sender less aggressive to retransmit. This is especially desirable in cases
      where packet reordering occurs, because aggressive retransmissions are likely to
      be spurious.
           So, we have seen that the Timestamps option allows the sender to make esti-
      mates of the RTT even when there are packet delays, losses, and reorderings. The
      sender can measure the RTT using whatever values it wishes to in the option, but
      these units must at least be proportional to real time and of a reasonable granu-
      larity to be compatible with TCP sequence numbers and plausible link rates (see
      [RFC1323] for more details on this). In particular, to be useful to the sender, the
      TCP clock must “tick” at least once for any plausible RTT. On the other hand, it
      should not change faster than once every 59ns. If it did, the 32-bit TSV value hold-
      ing the TCP clock value could wrap around within the maximum time permitted
      by the IP layer for a single packet to exist (255s) [ID1323b]. Assuming all this to be
      correct, the RTO value can now be used to trigger retransmissions.

14.4 Timer-Based Retransmission
      Once a sending TCP has established its RTO based upon measurements of the
      time-varying values of effective RTT, whenever it sends a segment it ensures that
      a retransmission timer is set appropriately. When setting a retransmission timer,
      the sequence number of the so-called timed segment is recorded, and if an ACK
      is received in time, the retransmission timer is canceled. The next time the sender
      emits a packet with data in it, a new retransmission timer is set, the old one is
      canceled, and the new sequence number is recorded. The sending TCP therefore
      continuously sets and cancels one retransmission timer per connection; if no data
      is ever lost, no retransmission timer ever expires.

          Note
          This observation proved somewhat of a surprise to the designers of the host
          operating systems. In a typical operating system, timers are used to signal a wide
          variety of events, and the implementation of the timer facility is tuned to efficiently
          set up and expire timers (which invoke system functions). For TCP, however, the
          requirement is for efficient setting and resetting or canceling of timers; if TCP is
          working well, timers never expire.

          When TCP fails to receive an ACK for a segment it has timed on a connec-
      tion within the RTO, it performs a timer-based retransmission. We have seen this
      already in Figure 14-1. TCP considers a timer-based retransmission as a fairly
      major event; it reacts very cautiously when it happens by quickly reducing the rate
      at which it sends data into the network. It does this in two ways. The first way is
                                            Section 14.4 Timer-Based Retransmission      665

      to reduce its sending window size based on congestion control procedures (see
      Chapter 16). The other way is to keep increasing a multiplicative backoff factor
      applied to the RTO each time a retransmitted segment is again retransmitted. This
      is implemented in the “second part” of Karn’s algorithm mentioned previously.
      In particular, the RTO value is (temporarily) multiplied by the value γ to form the
      backed-off timeout when multiple retransmissions of the same segment occur:

                                          RTO = γRTO

           In ordinary circumstances, γ has the value 1. On subsequent retransmissions,
      γ is doubled: 2, 4, 8, and so forth. There is typically a maximum backoff factor that γ
      is not allowed to exceed (Linux ensures that the used RTO never exceeds the value
      TCP_RTO_MAX, which defaults to 120s). Once an acceptable ACK is received, γ is
      reset to 1.

14.4.1 Example
      We can see the action of the retransmission timer by creating a connection similar
      to the one we looked at in Figures 14-1 and 14-2, but where we purposely drop the
      segment with sequence number 1401 twice (see Figure 14-5).
           For this example, we send the TCP segments through a special function that
      is able to drop them a certain number of times based on their TCP sequence num-
      bers. This adds a bit of extra delay to the RTT as compared with Figure 14-2. The
      connection starts out as before, except when the pair of segments with sequence
      numbers 1 and 1401 is sent, the second packet is dropped. Presumably the first of
      these segments reaches the receiver, but the receiver is delaying ACKs and does not
      respond immediately. Lacking a response in 219ms, the sender’s retransmission
      timer expires, causing the packet with sequence number 1 to be resent (this time
      with TSV value 577). Its arrival elicits an ACK from the receiver, which returns to
      the sender. Because this ACK acknowledges data and moves the sender’s window
      forward, its TSER value is used to update the srtt and RTO values to 34 and 234,
      respectively.
           The next three ACKs are generated in response to packets that arrive at the
      receiver. The ACKs with the asterisks (*) are all duplicate ACKs and contain SACK
      information. We will discuss the effect of duplicate ACKs and SACKs in Sections
      14.5 and 14.6. For now, because these ACKs do not move the sender’s window for-
      ward, their TSER values are not used.
           With the eventual retransmission and arrival of segment 1401 (at TCP clock
      time 911) at the receiver, the repair period is complete, and the receiver responds
      with ACK number 7001, indicating that all data has been received.
           The retransmission timer provides a form of “last-resort restart” for a TCP
      connection that has ceased to move data through the network regularly. In most
      cases it is unnecessary (and undesirable) to have retransmission timers trigger
      retransmissions because the RTO is generally established to be larger than the

      572                                        577
      6HW      VUWW   UWWYDU 7&3?&ORFN          6DPSOH
                                                                                      /DVW$&.   7V5HFHQW

                                                             6<1?
                                                                  6HT
                                                              769? ???
                                                                     
                                                                                          
                                                                  $&.
                                                            6<1?? 5???
                                                              76 (
                                                    
                                                               $&.?
                                                                       
                                                              769? ?
                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                           WH
                                                                      XSGD
                                                                 ZLQ
                                                         $&.?? (5????
                                                              76
                                  
                                                                6HT??
                                                              76      ?
                                                         6HT?? 9?????
                                                                  
                                      7LPHRXW            769?                                      ???
                                          PV                 ????

                                  
                                                                 6HT??
                                                                769? ?
                                                                        

                                                                                                      

                                                                             
                                                                    $&.?? ???          ????
                                                                           
                                                                    76(5
                                                         6HT??
                                                                
                                                         769? ??
                                                                 
                                                               6HT??
                                                                         
                                                              769? ??
                                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                 $&.?? ???             ????        ???
                                                                        ( 5 ??
                                                                   76
                                  
                                                               6HT??
                                                                         
                                                              769? ??
                                                                          
                                                                             
                                                                 $&.?? ???             ????        ???
                                                                       ( 5 ??
                                                                   76
                                                               6HT??
                                                                         
                                                               769? ??
                                                               6HT??????
                                                                         
                                                              769? ??
                                                                                           
                                                                      
                                                         $&.?? ???                                 ???
                                                                                  
                                                         76(5 $&.????                  ????
                                                                          5 ?? ? ??
                                                                   76(
                                                    

Figure 14-5   Segment 1401 is forcibly dropped twice. This results in a timer-based retransmission at the sender.
              The srtt, rttvar, and RTO values are updated only by a returning ACK that advances the sender’s
              window. ACKs with asterisks (*) include SACK information.
                                                      Section 14.5 Fast Retransmit    667

     typical RTT (by about a factor of 2 or more), so a timer-based retransmission often
     leads to underutilization of the network capacity. Fortunately, TCP has another
     method for detecting and repairing lost packets, which is almost always more effi-
     cient than timer-based retransmissions. It is called fast retransmit because it does
     not require the expiration of a retransmission timer to be invoked.

14.5 Fast Retransmit
     Fast retransmit [RFC5681] is a TCP procedure that can induce a packet retransmis-
     sion based on feedback from the receiver instead of requiring a retransmission
     timer to expire. As a result, packet loss can often be more quickly and efficiently
     repaired using fast retransmit than with timer-based retransmission. A typical
     TCP implements both fast retransmit and timer-based retransmission. Before
     we describe fast retransmit in more detail, it is important to realize that TCP is
     required to generate an immediate acknowledgment (a “duplicate ACK”) when
     an out-of-order segment is received, and that the loss of a segment implies out-of-
     order arrivals at the receiver when subsequent data arrives. When this happens, a
     hole is created at the receiver. The sender’s job then becomes filling the receiver’s
     holes as quickly and efficiently as possible.
         The duplicate ACKs sent immediately when out-of-order data arrives are not
     delayed. The reason is to let the sender know that a segment was received out of
     order, and to indicate what sequence number is expected (i.e., where the hole is).
     When SACK is used, these duplicate ACKs typically contain SACK blocks as well,
     which can provide information about more than one hole.
         A duplicate ACK (with or without SACK blocks) arriving at a sender is a
     potential indicator that a packet sent earlier has been lost. As we discuss in Sec-
     tion 14.8 in more detail, duplicate ACKs can also appear when there is packet
     reordering in the network—if a receiver receives a packet for a sequence number
     beyond the one it is expecting next, the expected packet could be either missing
     or merely delayed. Because we generally do not know which one, TCP waits for a
     small number of duplicate ACKs (called the duplicate ACK threshold or dupthresh)
     to be received before concluding that a packet has been lost and initiating a fast
     retransmit. Traditionally, dupthresh has been a constant (with value 3), but some
     nonstandard implementations (including Linux) alter this value based on the cur-
     rent measured level of reordering (see Section 14.8).
         A TCP sender observing at least dupthresh duplicate ACKs retransmits one
     or more packets that appear to be missing without waiting for a retransmission
     timer to expire. It may also send additional data that has not yet been sent. This is
     the essence of the fast retransmit algorithm. Packet loss inferred by the presence
     of duplicate ACKs is assumed to be related to network congestion, and congestion
     control procedures (discussed in Chapter 16) are invoked along with fast retrans-
     mit. Without SACK, no more than one segment is typically retransmitted until
     an acceptable ACK is received. With SACK, ACKs contain additional information

      allowing the sender to fill more than one hole in the receiver per RTT. We explore
      the use of SACK with fast retransmit after illustrating an example of the basic fast
      retransmit algorithm.

14.5.1 Example
      In the following example, we create a TCP connection similar to the one from
      Figure 14-4, except this time we drop segments 23801 and 26601 and SACK is dis-
      abled. We will see how TCP uses the basic fast retransmit algorithm to repair these
      holes. The sender is a Linux 2.6 system and the receiver is a FreeBSD 5.4 system.
      The plot in Figure 14-6 from Wireshark’s Statistics | TCP Stream Graph | Time-
      Sequence Graph (tcptrace) screen shows fast retransmit in action.

                                                        Fast Retransmit
                                                                                   Retransmit Due
                                                                                   to Partial ACK

Figure 14-6   In this plot, TCP sequence numbers are on the y-axis and time is on the x-axis. Outgo-
                    ing segments are displayed as darker line segments, and the incoming ACK numbers
                    appear as lighter gray segments. Fast retransmit is triggered by the arrival of the third
                    duplicate ACK at time 0.993s. This connection does not use SACK, so it is able to repair
                    at most only one hole per RTT. Additional duplicate ACKs arriving after the third cause
                    the sender to send new segments (not retransmissions). A “partial ACK” arriving at
                    time 1.32 causes the next retransmission.
                                                                    Section 14.5 Fast Retransmit          669

              This plot indicates the relative sending sequence number on the y-axis and
         the elapsed time on the x-axis. The black vertical I-shaped extents indicate the
         span of sequence numbers present in the transmitted segment. The blue lines in
         Wireshark (lower light gray line in Figure 14-6) indicate ACK numbers in return-
         ing packets. At approximately time 1.0, sequence number 23801 is retransmitted
         because of the fast retransmit algorithm (the initial transmission is not visible
         because it was dropped by the process at the sender below the TCP protocol layer).
         The retransmission is triggered by the arrival of the third duplicate ACK, as illus-
         trated by the repeated lower line segments. The retransmit can also be seen using
         the basic analysis screen of Wireshark (see Figure 14-7).

Figure 14-7 The TCP exchange showing relative sequence numbers. Packets 50 and 66 are retransmissions.
            Packet 50 is retransmitted because of the fast retransmit algorithm, which triggers as a result of
            three duplicate ACKs. No retransmission timer is required, so recovery is relatively quick.

             The first line of Figure 14-7 (number 40) indicates the first time ACK 23801 is
         received. Wireshark highlights (in red, appearing as black in Figure 14-7) other
         “interesting” TCP packets. Such packets differ from what would be expected for

      a TCP transfer with no losses or other anomalies. We see window updates, dupli-
      cate ACKs, and retransmissions. The window update at time 0.853 is an ACK with
      a duplicate sequence number (because no data is being carried) but contains a
      change to the TCP flow control window. The window changes from 231,616 bytes
      to 233,016 bytes. Thus, it is not counted toward the three-duplicate-ACK threshold
      required to initiate a fast retransmit. Window updates merely provide a copy of
      the window advertisement. We will look at these in more detail in Chapter 15.
          The packets arriving at times 0.890, 0.926, and 0.964 are all duplicate ACKs for
      sequence number 23801. The arrival of the third of these duplicate ACKs triggers
      the fast retransmit of segment 23801 at time 0.993. This can also be seen using
      Wireshark’s Statistics | Flow Graph feature (see Figure 14-8).

Figure 14-8   The retransmission at time 0.993 is triggered by the fast retransmit algorithm after
                    receiving duplicate ACKs at times 0.890, 0.926, and 0.964. The ACK at time 0.853 is not
                    considered a duplicate ACK because it contains a window update.
                      Section 14.6 Retransmission with Selective Acknowledgments       671

          Here we see, in a slightly different way, the same fast retransmit at time 0.993.
     We can also see the second retransmission that takes place at time 1.326. This
     second retransmission takes place because of the arrival of the ACK at time 1.322.
          The second retransmission is somewhat different from the first. When the
     first retransmission takes place, the sending TCP notes the highest sequence num-
     ber it had sent just before it performed the retransmission (43401 + 1400 = 44801).
     This is called the recovery point. TCP is considered to be recovering from loss after
     a retransmission until it receives an ACK that matches or exceeds the sequence
     number of the recovery point. In this example, the ACKs at times 1.322 and 1.321
     are not for 44801, but instead for 26601. This number is larger than the previous
     highest ACK value seen (23801), but not enough to meet or exceed the recovery
     point (44801). This type of ACK is called a partial ACK for this reason. When par-
     tial ACKs arrive, the sending TCP immediately sends the segment that appears to
     be missing (26601 in this case) and continues this way until the recovery point is
     matched or exceeded by an arriving ACK. If permitted by congestion control pro-
     cedures (see Chapter 16), it may also send new data it has not yet sent.
          This example illustrates the behavior of a TCP not using SACKs, when using
     fast retransmit, and when performing additional retransmits during recovery
     based on the “NewReno” sending algorithm [RFC3782]. Because no SACKs are
     being used, the sender can learn of at most one receiver hole per round-trip time,
     indicated by the increase in the ACK number of returning packets, which can only
     occur once a retransmission filling the receiver’s lowest-numbered hole has been
     received and ACKed.
          The precise behavior during recovery varies, depending on the type and
     configuration of the TCP sender and receiver. This example illustrates a non-
     SACK sender using the NewReno algorithm, a fairly common arrangement. With
     NewReno, partial ACKs keep the sender in recovery as described. With older TCP
     variants (plain Reno), there is no such concept, and any acceptable ACK brings the
     TCP out of recovery. Doing so can present some performance problems for TCP,
     and these are discussed in detail in Chapter 16. NewReno and SACK, which we
     discuss next, are sometimes called “advanced loss recovery” techniques to distin-
     guish them from the older approaches.

14.6 Retransmission with Selective Acknowledgments
     With the standardization of the Selective Acknowledgment options in [RFC2018],
     a SACK-capable TCP receiver is able to describe data it has received with sequence
     numbers beyond the cumulative ACK Number field it sends in the primary portion
     of the TCP header. As we mentioned before, gaps between the ACK number and
     other in-window data cached at the receiver are called holes. Data with sequence
     numbers beyond the holes are called out-of-sequence data because that data is not
     contiguous, in terms of its sequence numbers, with the other data the receiver has
     already received.

           The job of a sending TCP is to fill the holes in the receiver by retransmitting
      any data the receiver is missing, yet to be as efficient as possible by not resend-
      ing data the receiver already has. In many circumstances, the properly operating
      SACK sender is able to fill these holes more quickly and with fewer unnecessary
      retransmissions than a comparable non-SACK sender because it does not have to
      wait an entire RTT to learn about additional holes. When the SACK option is being
      used, an ACK can be augmented with up to three or four SACK blocks that contain
      information about out-of-sequence data at the receiver. Each SACK block contains
      two 32-bit sequence numbers representing the first and last sequence numbers
      (plus 1) of a continuous block of out-of-sequence data being held at the receiver.
           A SACK option that specifies n blocks has a length of 8n + 2 bytes, so the
      40 bytes available to hold TCP options can specify a maximum of four blocks. It
      is expected that SACK will often be used in conjunction with the TSOPT, which
      takes an additional 10 bytes (plus 2 bytes of padding), meaning that SACK is typi-
      cally able to include only three blocks per ACK.
           With three distinct blocks, up to three holes can be reported to the sender. If
      not limited by congestion control (see Chapter 16), all three could be filled within
      one round-trip time using a SACK-capable sender. An ACK packet containing one
      or more SACK blocks is sometimes called simply a “SACK.”

14.6.1 SACK Receiver Behavior
      A SACK-capable receiver is allowed to generate SACKs if it has received the
      SACK-Permitted option during the TCP connection establishment (see Chapter
      13). Generally speaking, a receiver generates SACKs whenever there is any out-of-
      order data in its buffer. This can happen either because data was lost in transit, or
      because it has been reordered and newer data has arrived at the receiver before
      older data. We consider the first case here and discuss the second one later.
           The receiver places in the first SACK block the sequence number range con-
      tained in the segment it has most recently received. Because the space in a SACK
      option is limited, it is best to ensure that the most recent information is always
      provided to the sending TCP, if possible. Other SACK blocks are listed in the order
      in which they appeared as first blocks in previous SACK options. That is, they are
      filled in by repeating the most recently sent SACK blocks (in other segments) that
      are not subsets of another block about to be placed in the option being constructed.
           The purpose of including more than one SACK block in a SACK option and
      repeating these blocks across multiple SACKs is to provide some redundancy in
      the case where SACKs are lost. If SACKs were never lost, [RFC2018] points out that
      only one SACK block would be required per SACK for full SACK functionality.
      Unfortunately, SACKs and regular ACKs are sometimes lost and are not retrans-
      mitted by TCP unless they contain data (or the SYN or FIN control bit fields are
      turned on).
                       Section 14.6 Retransmission with Selective Acknowledgments        673

14.6.2 SACK Sender Behavior
      Although it is necessary for a SACK-capable receiver to generate proper SACK
      information to make full use of SACK, it is not sufficient for a TCP connection to
      benefit from SACKs. A SACK-capable sender must be used that treats the SACK
      blocks appropriately and performs selective retransmission by sending only those
      segments missing at the receiver, a process also called selective repeat. The SACK
      sender keeps track of any cumulative ACK information it receives (like any TCP
      sender), plus any SACK information it receives. It uses the SACK information it
      receives in ACKs generated at the receiver to avoid retransmitting data the receiver
      reports that it already has. One way it can do this is to keep a “SACKed” indication
      for each segment in its retransmission buffer that is set whenever a corresponding
      range of sequence numbers arrives in a SACK.
           When a SACK-capable sender has the opportunity to perform a retransmis-
      sion, usually because it has received a SACK or seen multiple duplicate ACKs, it
      has the choice of whether it sends new data or retransmits old data. The SACK
      information provides the sequence number ranges present at the receiver, so the
      sender can infer what segments likely need to be retransmitted to fill the receiver’s
      holes. The simplest approach is to have the sender first fill the holes at the receiver
      and then move on to send more new data [RFC3517] if the congestion control pro-
      cedures allow. This is the most common approach.
           There is one exception to this behavior. In [RFC2018], the current specification
      for SACK options, SACK blocks are considered advisory. This means that a receiver
      could provide a SACK to the sender indicating that some sequence numbers have
      been received successfully and then change its mind later (“renege”). Because of
      this, the SACK sender is not able to free its retransmission buffer of data it has
      received only a SACK for; it is permitted to free a block of data only once the regu-
      lar TCP ACK number of the receiver has passed by the highest sequence number of
      this data. The rule also affects what TCP is supposed to do when a retransmission
      timer expires. When a sending TCP initiates a timer-based retransmission, any
      information regarding out-of-sequence data at the receiver derived from SACKs is
      supposed to be forgotten. If out-of-sequence data remains at the receiver, the ACK
      for the retransmitted segment contains additional SACK blocks the sender can
      then use. Fortunately, reneging is rare and discouraged.

14.6.3 Example
      To understand how the use of SACK alters the sender and receiver behaviors, we
      repeat the preceding fast retransmit experiment with the same setup (dropping
      sequence numbers 23601 and 28801), but this time the sender and receiver are
      using SACK. To get an immediate idea of what happens, we again use Wireshark’s
      TCP sequence number (tcptrace) plot function (see Figure 14-9).

                                                                Second Retransmission
                                                                Sent During Same RTT

                                               First Retransmission Triggered
                                               by First Duplicate ACK

Figure 14-9 Fast retransmit is triggered by the arrival of the first duplicate ACK containing SACK informa-
            tion. The arrival of the next ACK allows the sender to learn of the second missing segment and
            retransmit it within the same RTT.

              Figure 14-9 is similar to Figure 14-6, but the SACK sender has not had to wait
         an RTT to retransmit lost segment 28801 after retransmitting segment 23601. This
         is a result of the SACK information contained in the arriving ACKs. We will look
         at those in detail later, but first we verify the negotiation of the SACK-Permitted
         option during connection setup. This can be seen in Figure 14-10.
              As expected, the receiver indicates its ability to use SACKs with the SACK-
         Permitted option. The SYN packet from the sender, the first packet of the trace,
         also contains an identical option. These options are present only at connection
         setup, and thus they only ever appear in segments with the SYN bit field set.
              Once the connection is permitted to use SACKs, packet loss generally causes
         the receiver to start producing SACKs. For example, Wireshark shows the contents
         of the SACK options when the first SACK is selected (see Figure 14-11).
                            Section 14.6 Retransmission with Selective Acknowledgments              675

Figure 14-10 The SACK-Permitted option is exchanged in SYN segments to indicate the capability to gener-
             ate and process SACK information. Most modern TCPs support the MSS, Timestamps, Window
             Scale, and SACK-Permitted options during connection establishment.

              Figure 14-11 shows the series of events after the first SACK is received. Wire-
         shark indicates SACK information by indicating the left edge and right edge of
         the SACK range. Here we see that the ACK for 23801 contains a SACK block of
         [25201,26601], indicating a hole at the receiver. The receiver is missing the sequence
         number range [23801,25200], which corresponds to the single 1400-byte packet
         starting with sequence number 23801. Note that this SACK is a window update
         and is not counted as a duplicate ACK for the reasons discussed earlier. It does not
         trigger fast retransmit.
              The SACK arriving at time 0.967 contains two SACK blocks: [28001,29401] and
         [25201,26601]. Recall that the first SACK blocks from previous SACKs are repeated
         in later positions in subsequent SACKs for robustness against ACK loss. This SACK
         is a duplicate ACK for sequence number 23801 and suggests that the receiver now
         requires two full-size segments starting with sequence numbers 23801 and 26601.
         The sender reacts immediately by initiating fast retransmit, but because of conges-
         tion control procedures (see Chapter 16), the sender sends only one retransmis-
         sion, for segment 23801. With the arrival of two additional ACKs, the sender is
         permitted to send its second retransmission, for segment 26601.

Figure 14-11 The first ACK containing SACK information indicates an out-of-order block with
                   sequence number range 25201 to 26601.

           A TCP SACK sender uses the recovery point idea introduced with NewReno.
      In this example, the highest sequence number sent prior to the retransmission is
      43400, which is lower than in the NewReno example from Figure 14-5. For this
      implementation of SACK fast retransmit, three duplicate ACKs are not required;
      the TCP initiates its retransmission earlier. The recovery exit is essentially the
      same, though. Once the ACK for sequence number 43401 is received at time 1.3958,
      recovery is complete.
           It is interesting to note that the potential for better control of the sender using
      SACKs does not always lead to increased overall throughput performance. This
      fact is suggested by looking at the two examples we have seen. The NewReno
      (non-SACK) sender completes the data transfer of 131,074 bytes in 3.592s. The
      SACK sender completes it in 3.674s. These two measurements are not directly com-
      parable, however, because they did not face precisely the same network conditions
      (this was not a simulation but rather a live test), although the conditions were
      largely similar. The benefits of SACKs are more pronounced when the RTT is large
      and packet loss is severe. Under such circumstances, the benefits of being able to
      fill more than one hole per RTT are likely to be more significant.
                                  Section 14.7 Spurious Timeouts and Retransmissions     677

14.7 Spurious Timeouts and Retransmissions
         Under a number of circumstances, TCP may initiate a retransmission even when
         no data has been lost. Such undesirable retransmissions are called spurious retrans-
         missions and are caused by spurious timeouts (timeouts firing too early) and other
         reasons such as packet reordering, packet duplication, or lost ACKs. Spurious
         timeouts can occur when the real RTT has recently increased significantly, beyond
         the RTO. This happens more frequently in environments where lower-layer pro-
         tocols have widely varying performance (e.g., wireless) and was a concern men-
         tioned in [KP87]. Here we focus primarily on spurious retransmissions caused by
         spurious timeouts. The effects of reordering and duplication on TCP are deferred
         until the following section.
              A number of approaches have been suggested to deal with spurious time-
         outs. They generally involve a detection algorithm and a response algorithm. The
         detection algorithm attempts to determine whether a timeout or timer-based
         retransmission was spurious. The response algorithm is invoked once a timeout
         or retransmission is deemed spurious. Its purpose is to undo or mitigate some
         action that is otherwise normally performed by TCP when a retransmission timer
         expires. In this chapter we discuss only the segment retransmission behavior. The
         response algorithms typically involve congestion control changes as well, and
         those aspects are discussed in Chapter 16.
              Figure 14-12 illustrates a highly simplified exchange that shows what happens
         to a basic TCP when a spurious retransmission occurs because of a delay spike in
         the ACK path after segment 8 is sent. After the retransmission of segment 5 occurs
         because of a timeout, there are still ACKs in flight from the original transmis-
         sions of segments 5 through 8. In this illustration, sequence and ACK numbers are
         based on packets instead of bytes, with ACKs indicating what has already arrived
         instead of what is expected next, for simplicity. When they arrive, TCP begins to
         retransmit additional segments that have already been received, starting with the
         segment following the ACKed segment. This causes TCP to behave in an unde-
         sirable “go-back-N” behavior pattern and in turn causes a collection of duplicate
         ACKs to be generated and returned to the sender, possibly triggering fast retrans-
         mit as well. Several techniques have been developed to mitigate these problems.
         We now have a look at some of the more popular ones.

14.7.1   Duplicate SACK (DSACK) Extension
         With a non-SACK TCP, an ACK can indicate only the highest in-sequence segment
         back to the sender. With SACK, it can signal other (out-of-order) segments as well.
         The basic SACK mechanism we discussed previously does not say what happens
         when a receiver receives duplicate data segments. Such segments can be the result
         of spurious retransmissions, duplication within the network, or other reasons.

                                                                   

                                                           
                                                                  $?
                                                                  $?
                                                           
                                                                  $?
                                                                  $?
                                                           
                                     7LPHRXW              ?

                                                                  $?
                                                                  $?
                                                                  $?
                                                                  $?
                                                                          $?
                                                               
                                                                   
                                                               

                                                          $? $? $?        ?? ??
                                               )DVW                         ??
                                               57;

                                                                                 

Figure 14-12   A delay spike occurs after the transmission of packet 8, causing a spurious retransmis-
                     sion timeout and retransmission of packet 5. After retransmission, an ACK for the first
                     copy of 5 arrives. The retransmission for 5 creates a duplicate packet at the receiver, fol-
                     lowed by an undesirable “go-back-N” behavior whereby packets 6, 7, and 8 are retrans-
                     mitted even though they are already present at the receiver.

            DSACK or D-SACK, which stands for duplicate SACK [RFC2883], is a rule,
      applied at the SACK receiver and interoperable with conventional SACK senders,
      that causes the first SACK block to indicate the sequence numbers of a duplicate
      segment that has arrived at the receiver. The main purpose of DSACK is to deter-
      mine when a retransmission was not necessary and to learn additional facts about
      the network. With it, a sender has at least the possibility of inferring whether
      packet reordering, loss of ACKs, packet replication, and/or spurious retransmis-
      sions are taking place.
            The implementation of DSACK is compatible with conventional SACK in the
      sense that no separate negotiation is required to make use of it. For it to work
      properly, a change is made to the content of SACKs sent from the receiver and
      a corresponding change to the logic at the sender. If a non-DSACK TCP shares
      a connection with a DSACK TCP, they will interoperate, but without any of the
      benefits of DSACK.
            The change to the SACK receiver is to allow a SACK block to be included even
      if it covers sequence numbers below (or equal to) the cumulative ACK Number field.
                                 Section 14.7 Spurious Timeouts and Retransmissions      679

       This was not the original intent of SACK, but its capability is well matched to this
       purpose. (It applies equally well in cases where the DSACK information is above
       the cumulative ACK Number field; this happens for duplicated out-of-order seg-
       ments.) DSACK information is included in only a single ACK, and such an ACK
       is called a DSACK. DSACK information is not repeated across multiple SACKs as
       conventional SACK information is. As a consequence, DSACKs are less robust to
       ACK loss than regular SACKs.
            Exactly what a sender given DSACK information is supposed to do with it
       is not specified by [RFC2883]. An experimental algorithm is given in [RFC3708]
       for detecting spurious retransmissions using DSACK but does not provide any
       response algorithm. One option it mentions is to use the Eifel Response Algo-
       rithm, which we investigate in Section 14.7.4 after introducing a few other detec-
       tion algorithms.

14.7.2 The Eifel Detection Algorithm
       At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed the retransmission ambiguity prob-
       lem. The experimental Eifel Detection Algorithm [RFC3522] deals with this problem
       using the TCP TSOPT to detect spurious retransmissions. After a retransmission
       timeout occurs, Eifel awaits the next acceptable ACK. If the next acceptable ACK
       indicates that the first copy of a retransmitted packet (called the original transmit)
       was the cause for the ACK, the retransmission is considered to be spurious.
             The Eifel Detection Algorithm is able to detect spurious behavior earlier than
       the approach using only DSACK because it relies on ACKs generated as a result
       of packets arriving before loss recovery is initiated. DSACKs, conversely, are able
       to be sent only after a duplicate segment has arrived at the receiver and able to be
       acted upon only after the DSACK is returned to the sender. Detecting spurious
       retransmissions early can offer advantages, because it allows the sender to avoid
       most of the go-back-N behavior mentioned earlier.
             The mechanics of the Eifel Detection Algorithm are simple. It requires the use
       of the TCP TSOPT. When a retransmission is sent (either a timer-based retransmis-
       sion or a fast retransmit), the TSV value is stored. When the first acceptable ACK
       covering its sequence number is received, the incoming ACK’s TSER is examined.
       If it is smaller than the stored value, the ACK corresponds to the original transmis-
       sion of the packet and not the retransmission, implying that the retransmission
       must have been spurious. This approach is fairly robust to ACK loss as well. If an
       ACK is lost, any subsequent ACKs still have TSER values less than the stored TSV
       of the retransmitted segment. Thus, a retransmission can be deemed spurious as a
       result of any of the window’s worth of ACKs arriving, so a loss of any single ACK
       is not likely to cause a problem.
             The Eifel Detection Algorithm can be combined with DSACKs. This can be
       beneficial in the situation where an entire window’s worth of ACKs are lost but
       both the original transmit and retransmission have arrived at the receiver. In this
       particular case, the arriving retransmit causes a DSACK to be generated. The Eifel

       Detection Algorithm would by default conclude that the retransmission is spuri-
       ous. It is thought, however, that if so many ACKs are being lost, allowing TCP
       to believe the retransmission was not spurious is useful (e.g., to induce it to start
       sending more slowly—a consequence of the congestion control procedures we dis-
       cuss in Chapter 16). Thus, arriving DSACKs cause the Eifel Detection Algorithm to
       conclude that the corresponding retransmission is not spurious.

14.7.3 Forward-RTO Recovery (F-RTO)
       Forward-RTO Recovery (F-RTO) [RFC5682] is a standard algorithm for detecting
       spurious retransmissions. It does not require any TCP options, so when it is imple-
       mented in a sender, it can be used effectively even with an older receiver that does
       not support the TCP TSOPT. It attempts to detect only spurious retransmissions
       caused by expiration of the retransmission timer; it does not deal with the other
       causes for spurious retransmissions or duplications mentioned before.
            F-RTO makes a modification to the action TCP ordinarily takes after a timer-
       based retransmission. These retransmissions are for the smallest sequence number
       for which no ACK has yet been received. Ordinarily, TCP continues sending addi-
       tional adjacent packets in order as additional ACKs arrive. This is the go-back-N
       behavior described previously.
            F-RTO modifies the ordinary behavior of TCP by having TCP send new (so far
       unsent) data after the timeout-based retransmission when the first ACK arrives.
       It then inspects the second arriving ACK. If either of the first two ACKs arriv-
       ing after the retransmission was sent are duplicate ACKs, the retransmission is
       deemed OK. If they are both acceptable ACKs that advance the sender’s window,
       the retransmission is deemed to have been spurious. This approach is fairly intui-
       tive. If the transmission of new data results in the arrival of acceptable ACKs, the
       arrival of the new data is moving the receiver’s window forward. If such data is
       only causing duplicate ACKs, there must be one or more holes at the receiver. In
       either case, the reception of new data at the receiver does not harm the overall data
       transfer performance (provided there are sufficient buffers at the receiver).

14.7.4 The Eifel Response Algorithm
       The Eifel Response Algorithm [RFC4015] is a standard set of operations to be exe-
       cuted by a TCP once a retransmission has been deemed spurious. Because the
       response algorithm is logically decoupled from the Eifel Detection Algorithm, it
       can be used with any of the detection algorithms we just discussed. The Eifel
       Response Algorithm was originally intended to operate for both timer-based and
       fast retransmit spurious retransmissions but is currently specified only for timer-
       based retransmissions.
            Although the Eifel Response Algorithm can be used with any of the detec-
       tion algorithms, it behaves somewhat differently based on whether a spurious
       timeout was detected early (e.g., by the Eifel or F-RTO detection algorithms) or
                          Section 14.7 Spurious Timeouts and Retransmissions      681

later (e.g., by DSACKs). The former cases are called spurious timeouts and operate
by inspecting ACKs for original transmissions. The latter are called late spurious
timeouts and are based on ACKs for retransmissions invoked as a result of (spuri-
ous) timeouts.
      The response algorithm operates on the first retransmission timer event only.
It is not executed if a subsequent timeout occurs before recovery is complete. After
the retransmission timer expires, it takes a snapshot of the values in srtt and rttvar
and records them in new variables srtt_prev and rttvar_prev as follows:

                               srtt_prev = srtt + 2(G)
                                 rttvar_prev = rttvar

These variables are assigned on any timer expiration but are used only when the
timeout is determined to be spurious. If so, they help form the basis for setting
the new RTO. In the formula, the value G represents the TCP clock granularity.
srtt_prev is set to srtt plus twice the timer granularity based on the following chain
of reasoning: The spurious timeout may have been invoked because the value of
srtt is just a tad too small. If it were just a bit larger, no timeout would have hap-
pened. Adding the term 2(G) to srtt deals with this situation by storing a slightly
increased value into srtt_prev, which is used later for setting the RTO.
     After the srtt_prev and rttvar_prev values are stored, one of the detection algo-
rithms is invoked. The result of running the algorithm produces a value assigned
to a special variable called SpuriousRecovery. If the algorithm detects a spurious
timeout, SpuriousRecovery is set to SPUR_TO. If it detects a late spurious timeout, it
sets SpuriousRecovery to LATE_SPUR_TO. Otherwise, the timeout is not spurious,
and ordinary TCP timeout processing continues.
     If SpuriousRecovery is SPUR_TO, TCP can take action before recovery is com-
plete. It does this by adjusting the sequence number of the next segment it is about
to send (called SND.NXT) to the first new, unsent segment (called SND.MAX).
This avoids the undesirable go-back-N behavior after the initial retransmission
discussed previously. If the detection algorithm detects a late spurious timeout,
an ACK for the initial retransmission has already taken place, so SND.NXT is not
changed. In either case, however, the congestion control state is reset (see Chapter
16). In addition, once an acceptable ACK is received for a segment transmitted
after the retransmission timer expires, the values of srtt, rttvar, and RTO can be
updated as follows:

                              srtt ← max(srtt_prev, m)
                           rttvar ← max(rttvar_prev, m/2)
                           RTO = srtt + max(G, 4(rttvar))

     Here, m is a sample of the RTT of the connection based on the arrival of the
first acceptable ACK for data sent after the timeout. The motivation for these

      modifications is that the real RTT may have changed so significantly that the RTT
      history in the current estimators is no longer a valid basis for setting the RTO. If
      the real path RTT has increased abruptly (e.g., because of wireless handoff to a
      new base station), the current srtt and rttvar values are likely to be too small and
      should be reinitialized. On the other hand, an increase in path RTT could be only
      temporary, implying that reinitializing srtt and rttvar might not be such a good
      idea because they are likely to be approximately correct.
           These equations try to balance between the two situations by reassigning the
      moving averages srtt and rttvar only if the new RTT samples are larger. Doing so
      effectively throws out the previous history of the RTT (and RTT variance). The val-
      ues of srtt and rttvar can only increase as a result of the response algorithm. If the
      RTT does not appear to be increasing, the running estimators remain unchanged,
      essentially ignoring the fact that a timeout has occurred. The RTO is reassigned
      in the conventional way in any case, and a new retransmission timer is set for this
      timeout value.

14.8 Packet Reordering and Duplication
      Most of the issues discussed so far relate to how TCP handles packet loss. This
      is a relatively common issue, and a great deal of work has gone into making TCP
      robust to packet drops. As we began to see in the last section, other packet delivery
      anomalies such as duplication and reordering can also affect TCP’s operation. In
      both of these cases, we wish TCP to be able to distinguish between packets that
      are reordered or duplicated and those that are lost. As we shall now see, this is
      sometimes not so simple.

14.8.1 Reordering
      Packet reordering can occur in an IP network because IP provides no guarantee
      that relative ordering between packets is maintained during delivery. This can be
      beneficial (to IP at least), because IP can choose another path for traffic (e.g., that is
      faster) without having to worry about the consequences that doing so may cause
      traffic freshly injected into the network to pass ahead of older traffic, resulting in
      the order of packet arrivals at the receiver not matching the order of transmission
      at the sender. There are other reasons packet reordering may occur. For example,
      some high-performance routers employ multiple parallel data paths within the
      hardware [BPS99], and different processing delays among packets can lead to a
      departure order that does not match the arrival order.
           Reordering may take place in the forward path or the reverse path of a TCP
      connection (or in some cases both). The reordering of data segments has a some-
      what different effect on TCP as does reordering of ACK packets. Recall that
      because of asymmetric routing, it is frequently the case that ACKs travel along
                                Section 14.8 Packet Reordering and Duplication       683

different network links (and through different routers) from data packets on the
forward path.
       When traffic is reordered, TCP can be affected in several ways. If reordering
takes place in the reverse (ACK) direction, it causes the sending TCP to receive
some ACKs that move the window significantly forward followed by some evi-
dently old redundant ACKs that are discarded. This can lead to an unwanted
burstiness (instantaneous high-speed sending) behavior in the sending pattern
of TCP and also trouble in taking advantage of available network bandwidth,
because of the behavior of TCP’s congestion control (see Chapter 16).
      If reordering occurs in the forward direction, TCP may have trouble distin-
guishing this condition from loss. Both loss and reordering result in the receiver
receiving out-of-order packets that create holes between the next expected packet
and the other packets received so far. When reordering is moderate (e.g., two adja-
cent packets switch order), the situation can be handled fairly quickly. When reor-
derings are more severe, TCP can be tricked into believing that data has been
lost even though it has not. This can result in spurious retransmissions, primarily
from the fast retransmit algorithm.
      Recall from previous discussions that the fast retransmit algorithm relies
on observing duplicate acknowledgments from a TCP receiver in order to infer
the loss of a packet and to initiate a retransmission without having to wait for a
retransmission timer to expire. Because a TCP receiver is supposed to immedi-
ately ACK any out-of-sequence data it receives in order to help induce fast retrans-
mit to be triggered on packet loss, any packet that is reordered within the network
causes a receiver to produce a duplicate ACK. If fast retransmit were to be invoked
whenever any duplicate ACK is received at the sender, a large number of unnec-
essary retransmissions would occur on network paths where a small amount of
reordering is common. To handle this situation, fast retransmit is triggered only
after the duplicate threshold (dupthresh) has been reached.
      The effect is illustrated in Figure 14-13. The left portion of the figure indicates
how TCP behaves with light reordering, where dupthresh is set to 3. In this case, the
single duplicate ACK does not affect TCP. It is effectively ignored and TCP over-
comes the reordering. The right-hand side indicates what happens when a packet
has been more severely reordered. Because it is three positions out of sequence,
three duplicate ACKs are generated. This invokes the fast retransmit procedure in
the sending TCP, producing a duplicate segment at the receiver.
      The problem of distinguishing loss from reordering is not trivial. Dealing
with it involves trying to decide when a sender has waited long enough to try to
fill apparent holes at the receiver. Fortunately, severe reordering on the Internet is
not common [J03], so setting dupthresh to a relatively small number (such as the
default of 3) handles most circumstances. That said, there are a number of research
projects that modify TCP to handle more severe reordering [LLY07]. Some of these
adjust dupthresh dynamically, as does the Linux TCP implementation.

                                                                                     

                                                                             
                                 $?                                     ?
                                 $?                                                 $?

                                 $?       ?                                 ?       $?   ?
                                                                             
                                 $?                                                 $?
                                 $?
                                 $?                                         ?       $?
                                 $?                                                 $?
                                                      )DVW                          $?
                                                   5HWUDQVPLW                       $?       ?
                                                                                              

Figure 14-13   Mild reordering (left) is overcome by ignoring a small number of duplicate ACKs.
                      When reordering is more severe (right), as in this case where packet 4 is three places
                      out of sequence, a spurious fast retransmit can be triggered.

14.8.2 Duplication
       Although rare, the IP protocol may deliver a single packet more than one time.
       This can happen, for example, when a link-layer network protocol performs a
       retransmission and creates two copies of the same packet. When duplicates are
       created, TCP can become confused in some of the ways we have seen already.
       Consider the case shown in Figure 14-14 in which packet number 3 has been dupli-
       cated three times.

                                                                 

                                                          
                                                                 
                                                         $?
                                                              $?
                                                                $?
                                                                $?          ?
                                                                $?
                                                                $? $?
                                                      
                                                                $?
                                         )DVW
                                      5HWUDQVPLW                $?
                                                                             
                                                                                 

Figure 14-14   Packet duplication in the network has caused a spurious fast retransmission due to the
                      presence of duplicate ACKs.
                                                    Section 14.9 Destination Metrics     685

         As we can see, the effect of packet 3 being duplicated is to produce a series
     of duplicate ACKs from the receiver. This is enough to trigger a spurious fast
     retransmit, as the non-SACK sender may mistakenly believe that packets 5 and
     6 have arrived earlier. With SACK (and DSACK, in particular) this is more easily
     diagnosed at the sender. With DSACK, each of the duplicate ACKs for A3 con-
     tains DSACK information that segment 3 has already been received. Furthermore,
     none of them contains an indication of any out-of-order data, meaning the arriv-
     ing packets (or their ACKs) must have been duplicates. TCP can often suppress
     spurious retransmissions in such cases.

14.9 Destination Metrics
     As we have seen, TCP “learns” the characteristics of the network path between
     the sender and the receiver over time. The learning is kept in state variables at
     the sender such as srtt and rttvar. Some TCP implementations also keep track of
     an estimate of the amount of packet reordering that has occurred recently along
     a path. Historically, this learning is lost once the connection is closed. That is, if
     a new TCP connection is opened to the same receiver, it must start to determine
     values for the state variables from scratch.
         Newer TCP implementations maintain many of the metrics that we have
     described in this chapter in a routing or forwarding table entry or other system-
     wide data structure that exists even after TCP connections are closed. When a
     new connection is created, TCP consults the data structure to see if there is any
     preexisting information regarding the path to the destination host with which it
     will be communicating. If so, initial values for srtt, rttvar, and so on can be initial-
     ized to some value based on previous, relatively recent experience. When a TCP
     connection closes down, it has the opportunity to update the statistics. This can be
     accomplished by replacing the existing statistics or updating them in some other
     way. In the case of Linux 2.6, the values are updated to be the maximum of the
     existing values and those measured by the most recent TCP. These values can be
     inspected using the ip program available from the iproute2 suite of tools [IPR2]:

     Linux% ip route show cache 132.239.50.184
     132.239.50.184 from 10.0.0.9 tos 0x10 via 10.0.0.1 dev eth0
         cache mtu 1500 rtt 29ms rttvar 29ms cwnd 2 advmss 1460 hoplimit 64

         This command shows information cached about previous connections with a
     particular DSCP value (16, indicating CS2 but represented using the older “ToS”
     byte terminology with value 0x10) between the local system and 132.239.50.184
     using the IPv4 next hop 10.0.0.1 and accessed using the network device eth0.
     We can see packet size information (the path MTU learned with PMTUD, the MSS
     advertised by the remote side), the maximum number of hops to use (for IPv6; not

      applicable here), values of srtt and rttvar, along with congestion control informa-
      tion such as cwnd that we discuss in Chapter 16.

14.10 Repacketization
      When TCP times out and retransmits, it does not have to retransmit the identi-
      cal segment. Instead, TCP is allowed to perform repacketization, sending a bigger
      segment, which can increase performance. (Naturally, this bigger segment cannot
      exceed the MSS announced by the receiver and should not exceed the path MTU.)
      This is allowed in the protocol because TCP identifies the data being sent and
      acknowledged by its byte number, not its segment (or packet) number.
           TCP’s ability to retransmit a segment with a different size from the original
      segment provides another way of addressing the retransmission ambiguity prob-
      lem. This has been the basis of an idea called STODER [TZZ05] that uses repack-
      etization to detect spurious timeouts.
           We can easily see repacketization in action. We use our sock program as a
      server and connect to it with Telnet. First we type the line hello there. This
      produces a segment of 13 data bytes, including the carriage-return and newline
      characters produced when the Enter key is pressed. We then disconnect the net-
      work and type line number 2 (14 bytes, including the newline). We then wait
      about 45s, type and 3, and terminate the connection:

      Linux% telnet 169.229.62.97 6666
      hello there                   (first line gets sent OK)
                                    (then we disconnect the Ethernet cable)
      line number 2                 (this line gets retransmitted)
      and 3                         (reconnect Ethernet)
      ^] telnet> quit

          We can see the results using tcpdump:t

      1 19:51:47.674418 IP 10.0.0.7.1029 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
            P 1:14(13) ack 1 win 5840                                         "hello there\r\n"
            <nop,nop,timestamp 2343578137 596377728>

      2 19:51:47.788992 IP 169.229.62.97.6666 > 10.0.0.7.1029:
            . ack 14 win 58254 <nop,nop,timestamp 596378252 2343578137>

      3 19:52:35.130837 IP 10.0.0.7.1029 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
            FP 29:36(7) ack 1 win 5840                                             "and 3\r\n"
            <nop,nop,timestamp 2343602439 596378252>

      4 19:52:35.146358 IP 169.229.62.97.6666 > 10.0.0.7.1029:
            . ack 14 win 58254
            <nop,nop,timestamp 596382987 2343578137,nop,nop,
            sack sack 1 {29:36}>
                                Section 14.11 Attacks Involving TCP Retransmission      687

     5 19:52:39.414253 IP 10.0.0.7.1029 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
                                                                         “line number2\r\n
           FP 14:36(22) ack 1 win 5840
                                                                         and 3\r\n”
           <nop,nop,timestamp 2343604633 596382987>

     6 19:52:39.429228 IP 169.229.62.97.6666 > 10.0.0.7.1029:
           . ack 37 win 58248 <nop,nop,timestamp 596383416 2343604633>

     7 19:52:39.429696 IP 169.229.62.97.6666 > 10.0.0.7.1029:
           F 1:1(0) ack 37 win 58254
           <nop,nop,timestamp 596383416 2343604633>

     8 19:52:39.430119 IP 10.0.0.7.1029 > 169.229.62.97.6666:
           . ack 2 win 5840 <nop,nop,timestamp 2343604641 596383416>

          In this trace, the initial SYN exchange has been removed. The first two seg-
     ments contain the data strings hello there and its acknowledgment. The next
     packet in the trace is not in sequence: it starts with sequence number 29 and con-
     tains the string and 3 (7 bytes). Its returning ACK contains ACK number 14 but
     a SACK block with relative sequence numbers {29,36}. The middle sequence of
     characters has been lost. TCP retransmits this but uses a larger packet, containing
     sequence numbers 14:36. Thus, we can see how the retransmission for sequence
     number 14 resulted in a repacketization to form a larger packet of size 22 bytes.
     Interestingly, this packet overlaps the data present in the SACK block and also car-
     ries the FIN bit field, indicating that it is the last data of the connection.

14.11 Attacks Involving TCP Retransmission
     There is a class of DoS attack called low-rate DoS attacks [KK03]. In such an attack,
     an attacker sends bursts of traffic to a gateway or host, causing the victim sys-
     tem to experience a retransmission timeout. Given an ability to predict when the
     victim TCP will attempt to retransmit, the attacker generates a burst of traffic at
     each retransmission attempt. As a consequence, the victim TCP perceives conges-
     tion in the network, throttles its sending rate to near zero, keeps backing off its
     RTO according to Karn’s algorithm, and effectively receives very little network
     throughput. The proposed mechanism to deal with this type of attack is to add
     randomization to the RTO, making it difficult for the attacker to guess the precise
     times when a retransmission will take place.
         A related but distinct form of DoS attack involves slowing a victim TCP’s seg-
     ments down so that the RTT estimate is too high. Doing so causes the victim TCP
     to be less aggressive in retransmitting its own packets when they are lost. The
     opposite attack is also possible: an attacker forges ACKs when data has been trans-
     mitted but has not actually arrived at the receiver yet. In this case, the attacker can
     cause the victim TCP to believe that the connection RTT is significantly smaller
     than it really is, leading to an overaggressive TCP that creates numerous unwanted
     retransmissions.

14.12 Summary
      This chapter provided a detailed look at TCP’s timeout and retransmission strat-
      egy. Our first example illustrated a case in which we simply unplugged the net-
      work when a TCP had a packet to send. This resulted in a retransmission timer
      initiating a timeout-based retransmission. Each successive retransmit took place
      at an interval twice as long as the previous transmission, the result of the second
      part of Karn’s algorithm that incorporates binary exponential backoff.
           TCP measures the RTT and then uses these measurements to keep track of a
      smoothed RTT estimator and a smoothed mean deviation estimator. These two
      estimators are then used to calculate the next retransmission timeout value. With-
      out the Timestamps option, a TCP measures only a single RTT per window of data.
      Karn’s algorithm removes the retransmission ambiguity problem by preventing
      the use of RTT measurements for segments that have been lost. Today, most TCPs
      use the Timestamps option, which permits each segment to be individually timed.
      The Timestamps option operates correctly even in the face of packet reordering or
      packet duplication.
           We looked at the fast retransmit algorithm, which can be triggered without
      requiring a timer to expire. This is the most efficient method (and the most fre-
      quently used one) for TCP to fill holes at the receiver caused by missing packets.
      Fast retransmit can be improved with the use of selective ACKs. These carry addi-
      tional information in the ACKs and permit the SACK-capable TCP sender to repair
      more than one hole per RTT. Doing so can lead to improved performance under
      some circumstances.
           If the RTT estimate is below the actual RTT of the connection, a spurious
      retransmission may take place. In such cases, if TCP waited a little longer, the
      (unnecessary) retransmission would not happen. A number of algorithms have
      been developed to detect when a TCP has experienced a spurious timeout. The
      DSACK approach requires the arrival of a duplicate segment at the receiver. The
      Eifel Detection Algorithm depends on TCP timestamps but can react faster than
      DSACKs because it detects spurious timeouts based on ACKs returning from seg-
      ments that were sent prior to the timeout. F-RTO is another algorithm that behaves
      similarly to Eifel but does not require timestamps. It also changes the sender to
      send new data after a timeout that is deemed to be spurious. All of these detection
      algorithms can be combined with a response algorithm. The main one described
      so far is the Eifel Response Algorithm, which can reset RTT and RTT variance
      estimates if the delay has increased substantially (and otherwise “undoes” any
      changes TCP would otherwise perform on a timeout).
           We also looked at how TCP state can be cached across connections, how TCP
      is allowed to repacketize its data, and some attacks that can be mounted to fool
      TCP into behaving in undesired ways such as being too passive or aggressive. We
      shall see more about the consequences of these attacks in Chapter 16, where we
      investigate TCP’s congestion control procedures.
                                                            Section 14.13 References     689

14.13 References
     [G04] S. Gorard, “Revisiting a 90-Year-Old Debate: The Advantages of the Mean
     Deviation,” Department of Educational Studies, University of York, paper
     presented at the British Educational Research Association Annual Conference,
     University of Manchester, September 16–18, 2004.
     [BPS99] J. Bennett, C. Partridge, and N. Shectman, “Packet Re-ordering Is Not
     Pathological Network Behavior,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 7(6), Dec.
     1999.
     [F68] W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Volume 1
     (Wiley, 1968).
     [ID1323b] V. Jacobson, B. Braden, and D. Borman, “TCP Extensions for High Per-
     formance” (expired), Internet draft-jacobson-tsvwg-1323bis-01, work in progress,
     Mar. 2009.
     [IPR2] http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/networking/
     iproute2
     [J88] V. Jacobson, “Congestion Avoidance and Control,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
     Aug. 1988.
     [J90] V. Jacobson, “Berkeley TCP Evolution from 4.3-Tahoe to 4.3 Reno,” Proc. 18th
     IETF, Sept. 1990.
     [J03] S. Jaiswal et al., “Measurement and Classification of Out-of-Sequence Pack-
     ets in a Tier-1 IP Backbone,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr. 2003.
     [KK03] A. Kuzmanovic and E. Knightly, “Low-Rate TCP-Targeted Denial of Ser-
     vice Attacks,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 2003.
     [KP87] P. Karn and C. Partridge, “Improving Round-Trip Time Estimates in Reli-
     able Transport Protocols,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 1987.
     [LLY07] K. Leung, V. Li, and D. Yang, “An Overview of Packet Reordering in
     Transmission Control Protocol (TCP): Problems, Solutions and Challenges,” IEEE
     Trans. Parallel and Distributed Systems, 18(4), Apr. 2007.
     [LS00] R. Ludwig and K. Sklower, “The Eifel Retransmission Timer,” ACM Com-
     puter Communication Review, 30(3), July 2000.
     [RFC0793] J. Postel, “Transmission Control Protocol,” Internet RFC 0793/
     STD0007, Sept. 1981.
     [RFC1122] R. Braden, ed., “Requirements for Internet Hosts,” Internet RFC 1122/
     STD 0003, Oct. 1989.
     [RFC1323] V. Jacobson, R. Braden, and D. Borman, “TCP Extensions for High
     Performance,” Internet RFC 1323, May 1992.

      [RFC2018] M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd, and A. Romanow, “TCP Selective
      Acknowledgment Options,” Internet RFC 2018, Oct. 1996.
      [RFC2883] S. Floyd, J. Mahdavi, M. Mathis, and M. Podolsky, “An Extension to
      the Selective Acknowledgement (SACK) Option for TCP,” Internet RFC 2883, July
      2000.
      [RFC3517] E. Blanton, M. Allman, K. Fall, and L. Wang, “A Conservative Selec-
      tive Acknowledgment (SACK)-Based Loss Recovery Algorithm for TCP,” Internet
      RFC 3517, Apr. 2003.
      [RFC3522] R. Ludwig and M. Meyer, “The Eifel Detection Algorithm for TCP,”
      Internet RFC 3522 (experimental), Apr. 2003.
      [RFC3708] E. Blanton and M. Allman, “Using TCP Duplicate Selective Acknowl-
      edgement (DSACKs) and Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)
      Duplicate Transmission Sequence Numbers (TSNs) to Detect Spurious Retrans-
      missions,” Internet RFC 3708 (experimental), Feb. 2004.
      [RFC3782] S. Floyd, T. Henderson, and A. Gurtov, “The NewReno Modification to
      TCP’s Fast Recovery Algorithm,” Internet RFC 3782, Apr. 2004.
      [RFC4015] R. Ludwig and A. Gurtov, “The Eifel Response Algorithm for TCP,”
      Internet RFC 4015, Feb. 2005.
      [RFC5681] M. Allman, V. Paxson, and E. Blanton, “TCP Congestion Control,”
      Internet RFC 5681, Sept. 2009.
      [RFC5682] P. Sarolahti, M. Kojo, K. Yamamoto, and M. Hata, “Forward RTO-
      Recovery (F-RTO): An Algorithm for Detecting Spurious Retransmission Time-
      outs with TCP,” Internet RFC 5682, Sept. 2009.
      [RFC6298] V. Paxson, M. Allman, and J. Chu, “Computing TCP’s Retransmission
      Timer,” Internet RFC 6298, June 2011.
      [RKS07] S. Rewaskar, J. Kaur, and F. D. Smith, “Performance Study of Loss Detec-
      tion/Recovery in Real-World TCP Implementations,” Proc. IEEE ICNP, Oct. 2007.
      [SK02] P. Sarolahti and A. Kuznetsov, “Congestion Control in Linux TCP,” Proc.
      Usenix Freenix Track, June 2002.
      [TZZ05] K. Tan and Q. Zhang, “STODER: A Robust and Efficient Algorithm for
      Handling Spurious Timeouts in TCP,” Proc. IEEE Globecomm, Dec. 2005.
      [V09] V. Vasudevan et al., “Safe and Fine-Grained TCP Retransmissions for Data-
      center Communication,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 2009.
      [WINREG] TCP/IP Registry Values for Microsoft Windows Vista and Windows
      Server 2008, Jan. 2008. See http://www.microsoft.com/download/en/details.
      aspx?id=9152
