     16

     TCP Congestion Control

16.1 Introduction
     In this chapter we investigate how TCP approaches the issue of congestion control,
     which is most important in the context of bulk data transfers. Congestion control
     is a set of behaviors determined by algorithms that each TCP implements in an
     attempt to prevent the network from being overwhelmed by too large an aggre-
     gate offered traffic load. The basic approach is to have TCP slow down when it has
     reason to believe the network is about to be congested (or is already so congested
     that routers are discarding packets). The challenge is to determine exactly when
     and how TCP should slow down, and when it can speed up again.
           TCP is a protocol designed to provide reliable delivery of data from one system
     to another. We have already seen in Chapter 15 how a sending TCP can be made
     to slow down if its peer (receiving) TCP cannot keep up. This is accomplished by
     TCP’s procedures for flow control and is realized by a sender adapting its sending
     rate based on the advertised Window Size field provided by a receiver in its ACKs.
     This provides explicit information about the state of the receiver back to the sender
     and allows it to avoid overrunning the receiver’s buffers.
           Consider what happens when the network between a collection of senders and
     receivers is asked to carry more traffic than it can handle. Either the senders must
     slow down or the network must ultimately throw some data away (or some combi-
     nation thereof). This fact arises from the most basic observation from queuing the-
     ory as applied at a router: even if the router can store some data, if the long-term data
     arrival rate exceeds the long-term departure rate, any amount of intermediate stor-
     age will grow without bound. Stated more simply, if a router receives more data per
     unit time than it can send out, it must store that data. If this situation persists, eventu-
     ally the storage will run out and the router will be forced to drop some of the data.
           This situation, when a router is forced to discard data because it cannot handle
     the arriving traffic rate, is called congestion. The router is said to be congested when
     it is in this state, and even a single connection can drive one or more routers into

         congestion. Left unaddressed, congestion can cause the performance of a network
         to be reduced so badly that it becomes unusable. In the very worst cases, it is said
         to be in a state of congestion collapse. To either avoid or at least react effectively to
         mitigate this situation, each TCP implements congestion control procedures. Differ-
         ent versions or variants of TCP (and the operating systems that host the TCP/IP
         stack) have somewhat different procedures and behaviors. We will discuss most
         of the better-known ones in this chapter.

16.1.1   Detection of Congestion in TCP
         As we have seen, the primary mechanism TCP has available to combat packet loss
         is retransmission, induced either by a retransmission timer expiring, or by the fast
         retransmit algorithm (see Chapter 14). Consider, for a moment, the consequence
         of many TCP connections that share an Internet path simply retransmitting more
         packets while the network is in a state of congestion collapse. As you can imagine,
         this only makes the situation worse. It has been called the analog of pouring gaso-
         line on a fire and is something to be avoided.
              In order to deal with congestion, we would like to have sending TCPs slow
         down when congestion is present (or about to be) and, if the congestion has sub-
         sided, detect and use an appropriate amount of new bandwidth when it becomes
         available. In the Internet, this can be quite challenging, as there has traditionally
         been no explicit way for a sending TCP to learn about the state of the intermediate
         routers. In other words, there is no explicit signaling about congestion. Instead, if
         a typical TCP is to react somehow to congestion, it must first conclude that con-
         gestion is occurring. This is usually accomplished by detecting that one or more
         packets have been lost. In TCP, an assumption is made that a lost packet is an indi-
         cator of congestion, and that some response (i.e., slowing down in some way) is
         required. We shall see that TCP has been this way since the late 1980s. Other meth-
         ods for detecting congestion, including measuring delay and network-supported
         Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN), which we discuss in Section 16.11, allow TCP
         to learn about congestion even before it has become so bad as to cause dropped
         packets. We discuss these approaches after studying the “classic” algorithms.

             Note
             In today’s wired networks, packet loss is caused primarily by congestion in routers
             or switches. With wireless networks, transmission and reception errors become a
             significant cause of packet loss. Determining whether loss is due to congestion or
             transmission errors has been an active research topic since the mid-1990s when
             wireless networks started to attain widespread use.

              In Chapter 14 we saw how TCP can use timers, acknowledgments, and selec-
         tive acknowledgments to detect and recover from dropped packets. When packets
         are detected as lost, it is TCP’s responsibility to resend them. We are now concerned
                                                           Section 16.1 Introduction        729

      with what else TCP does when it observes a lost packet. In particular, we are inter-
      ested in how it interprets this as a signal that congestion has occurred, and that it
      should slow down. Just how it slows down and when (and how it speeds back up
      again) are the main subjects of the following sections. We begin with the classic
      algorithm used on a new connection to establish the base data rate and continue
      with another classic algorithm that is used by TCP during its steady-state operation
      when performing large data transfers. We will also incorporate the recommended
      variations on these algorithms into the discussion and discuss other modifica-
      tions that have been made over the years. We will also examine an extended trace
      in detail. We conclude with a discussion of some of the security issues related to
      TCP congestion control and summarize the most important points. The area of
      congestion control has been a fertile area for networking researchers [RFC6077],
      and several new papers on this subject tend to appear each year.

16.1.2 Slowing Down a TCP Sender
      One detail we need to address right away is just how to slow down a TCP sender.
      We saw in Chapter 15 that the Window Size field in the TCP header is used to sig-
      nal a sender to adjust its window based on the availability of buffer space at the
      receiver. We can go a step further and arrange for the sender to slow down if either
      the receiver is too slow or the network is too slow. This is accomplished by intro-
      ducing a window control variable at the sender that is based on an estimate of the
      network’s capacity and ensuring that the sender’s window size never exceeds the
      minimum of the two. In effect, a sending TCP then sends at a rate equal to what
      the receiver or the network can handle, whichever is less.
           The new value used to hold the estimate of the network’s available capacity is
      called the congestion window, written more compactly as simply cwnd. The sender’s
      actual (usable) window W is then written as the minimum of the receiver’s adver-
      tised window awnd and the congestion window:

                                     W = min(cwnd, awnd)

          With this relationship, the TCP sender is not permitted to have more than W
      unacknowledged packets or bytes outstanding in the network. The total amount
      of data a sender has introduced into the network for which it has not yet received
      an acknowledgment is sometimes called the flight size, which is always less than or
      equal to W. In general, W can be maintained in either packet or byte units.

          Note
          When TCP does not make use of selective acknowledgment, the restriction on
          W means that the sender is not permitted to send a segment with a sequence
          number greater than the sum of the highest acknowledged sequence number and
          the value of W. A SACK TCP sender treats W somewhat differently, using it as an
          overall limit to the flight size.

           This all seems logical but is far from the whole story. Because both the state
      of the network and the state of the receiver change with time, the values of both
      awnd and cwnd change over time. In addition, because of the lack of explicit signals
      (see the preceding section), the “correct” value of cwnd is generally not directly
      available to the sending TCP. Thus, all of the values W, cwnd, and awnd must be
      empirically determined and dynamically updated. In addition, as we said before,
      we do not want W to be too big or too small—we want it to be set to about the
      bandwidth-delay product (BDP) of the network path, also called the optimal window
      size. This is the amount of data that can be stored in the network in transit to the
      receiver. It is equal to the product of the RTT and the capacity of the lowest capac-
      ity (“bottleneck”) link on the path from sender to receiver. Generally, the sending
      strategy is to keep the network busy by arranging to have an amount of data at
      least as large as the BDP in the network. Using an outstanding limit that substan-
      tially exceeds the BDP, however, is usually undesirable as it can lead to unwanted
      delays (see Section 16.10). On the Internet, determining the BDP for a connection
      can be challenging, given that routes, delay, and the level of statistical multiplex-
      ing (i.e., sharing of capacity) change as a function of time.

          Note
          Although handling congestion at the TCP sender is our primary area of inter-
          est, work has been done on handling the cases where congestion occurs on the
          reverse path, because of ACKs. In [RFC5690] a method is introduced to inform
          a TCP receiver of the ACK ratio it should use (i.e., how many packets it should
          receive before sending an ACK).

16.2 The Classic Algorithms
      When a new TCP connection first starts out, it usually has no idea what the initial
      value for cwnd should be, as it has no idea how much network capacity is available
      for it to send its data. (There are some exceptions, such as systems that cache per-
      formance values that were determined earlier. These were called destination met-
      rics in Chapter 14.) TCP learns the value for awnd with one packet exchange to the
      receiver, but without any explicit signaling, the only obvious way it has to learn a
      good value for cwnd is to try sending data at faster and faster rates until it experi-
      ences a packet drop (or other congestion indicator). This could be accomplished
      by either sending immediately at the maximum rate it can (subject to the value
      of awnd), or it could start more slowly. Because of the detrimental effects on the
      performance of other TCP connections sharing the same network path that could
      be experienced when starting at full rate, a TCP generally uses one algorithm to
      avoid starting so fast when it starts up to get to steady state. It uses a different one
      once it is in steady state.
           The operation of TCP congestion control at a sender is driven or “clocked” by
      the receipt of ACKs. If a TCP is operating at steady state (with an appropriate value

of cwnd), receipt of an ACK indicates that one or more packets have been removed
from the network, and consequently that an opportunity to send more has arisen.
Following this line of reasoning, the TCP congestion behavior in steady state
attempts to achieve a conservation of packets in the network (see Figure 16-1). The
term conservation here is used in the sense it is in physics—that some quantity
(e.g., momentum, energy) going into a system does not simply disappear or appear
but rather can be found as long as proper accounting is performed.

                                                     3E
                                                                                   3U

       6HQGHU                                                                                5HFHLYHU

                       $V                                                               $U
                                                    $E

Figure 16-1 TCP congestion control operates on a principle of conservation of packets. Packets (Pb)
            are “stretched out” in time as they are sent from sender to receiver over links with con-
            strained capacity. As they are received at the receiver spaced apart (Pr), ACKs are gener-
            ated (Ar), which return to the sender. ACKs traveling from receiver to sender become
            spaced out (Ab) in relation to the inter-packet spacing of the packets. When ACKs reach
            the sender (As), their arrivals provide a signal or “ACK clock,” used to tell the sender it
            is time to send more. In steady state, the overall system is said to be “self-clocked.” The
              figure is adapted from [J88] and copied from S. Seshan’s CMU Lecture Notes dated March 22, 2005.

     This idea is illustrated in Figure 16-1. We shall call the top and bottom objects
“funnels.” The top funnel holds (larger) data packets traveling along the path from
the sender to the receiver. The comparatively narrow width of the funnel depicts
how packets are “stretched out” in time as they travel through a relatively slow
link. The ends of the funnels (at sender and receiver) show the queues where pack-
ets are held before or after they travel along the path. The bottom funnel holds the
ACKs sent by the receiver back to the sender that correspond to the data packets
in the top funnel. When operating efficiently at steady state, there are no bunches
of packets in the top or bottom funnels. In addition, there is no significant extra
space between packets in the top funnel. Note that an arrival of an ACK at the
sender “liberates” another data packet to be sent into the top funnel, and that
this happens at just the right time (i.e., when the network is able to accept another
packet). This relationship is sometimes called self-clocking, because the arrival of
an ACK, called the ACK clock, triggers the system to take the action of sending
another packet.
     We now turn to the main two algorithms of TCP: slow start and congestion
avoidance. These algorithms, based on the principles of packet conservation and
ACK clocking, were first formally described in the classic paper by Jacobson [J88].

       An update to the congestion avoidance algorithm was given by Jacobson a couple
       of years later [J90]. These algorithms do not operate at the same time—TCP exe-
       cutes only one at any given time, but it may switch back and forth between the
       two. We now explore these in more detail and examine what determines when
       each of them is used. We also look at how they have been modified and extended
       since they were initially implemented. Each TCP connection is able to individually
       execute these algorithms.

16.2.1 Slow Start
       The slow start algorithm is executed when a new TCP connection is created or
       when a loss has been detected due to a retransmission timeout (RTO). It may also
       be invoked after a sending TCP has gone idle for some time. The purpose of slow
       start is to help TCP find a value for cwnd before probing for more available band-
       width using congestion avoidance and to establish the ACK clock. Typically, a
       TCP begins a new connection in slow start, eventually drops a packet, and then
       settles into steady-state operation using the congestion avoidance algorithm (Sec-
       tion 16.2.2). To quote from [RFC5681]:

           Beginning transmission into a network with unknown conditions requires TCP
           to slowly probe the network to determine the available capacity, in order to avoid
           congesting the network with an inappropriately large burst of data. The slow start
           algorithm is used for this purpose at the beginning of a transfer, or after repairing
           loss detected by the retransmission timer.

            A TCP begins in slow start by sending a certain number of segments (after
       the SYN exchange), called the initial window (IW). The value of IW was originally
       one SMSS, although with [RFC5681] it is allowed to be larger. The formula works
       as follows:

          IW = 2*(SMSS) and not more than 2 segments (if SMSS > 2190 bytes)
          IW = 3*(SMSS) and not more than 3 segments (if 2190 ≥ SMSS > 1095 bytes)
          IW = 4*(SMSS) and not more than 4 segments (otherwise)

            While this assignment for IW may allow several packets (e.g., three or four)
       in the initial window, we shall discuss the case where IW = 1 SMSS for simplicity.
       A TCP just starting out begins its connection, then, with cwnd = 1 SMSS, meaning
       the initial usable window W is also equal to SMSS. Note that in most cases SMSS
       is equal to the smaller of the receiver’s MSS and the path MTU (less header sizes).
            Assuming no packets are lost and each packet causes an ACK to be sent in
       response, an ACK is returned for the first segment, allowing the sending TCP
       to send another segment. However, slow start operates by incrementing cwnd by
       min(N, SMSS) for each good ACK received, where N is the number of previously

unacknowledged bytes ACKed by the received “good ACK.” A good ACK is one
that returns a higher ACK number than has been seen so far.

    Note
    The number of bytes ACKed is used to support Appropriate Byte Counting (ABC)
    [RFC3465], an experimental specification recommended by [RFC5681]. It can be
    used to counter an “ACK division” attack, described in Section 16.12, where many
    small ACKs are used in an attempt to cause a TCP sender to send faster than nor-
    mal. Linux uses the Boolean system configuration variable net.ipv4.tcp_abc
    to determine if ABC is enabled (default no). In recent versions of Windows, ABC
    defaults to on.

     Thus, after one segment is ACKed, the cwnd value is ordinarily increased to 2,
and two segments are sent. If each of those causes new good ACKs to be returned,
2 increases to 4, 4 to 8, and so on. In general, assuming no loss and an ACK for
every packet, the value of W after k round-trip exchanges is W = 2k. Rewriting,
we can say that k = log2W RTTs are required to reach an operating window of W.
This growth seems quite “fast” (increasing as an exponential function) but is still
“slower” than what TCP would do if it were allowed to send immediately a win-
dow of packets equal in size to the receiver’s advertised window. (Recall that W is
still never allowed to exceed awnd.)
     If we imagine a TCP connection where the receiver’s advertised window is
very large (say, infinitely large), cwnd is the primary governor of the sending rate
(provided there is something for the sender to send). As we saw, this value grows
exponentially fast in the RTT of the connection. So, eventually, cwnd (and thus
W) could become so large that the corresponding window of packets sent over-
whelms the network (recall that TCP’s throughput rate is proportional to W/RTT).
When this happens, cwnd is reduced substantially (to half of its former value). In
addition, this is the point at which TCP switches from operating in slow start to
operating in congestion avoidance. The switch point is determined by the relation-
ship between cwnd and a value called the slow start threshold (or ssthresh).
Figure 16-2 (left) illustrates the operation of slow start. The numbers are in
units of the RTT of the connection. Assuming the connection starts out with one
packet (top), one ACK is returned, allowing two packets to be sent during the
second RTT. These packets cause two ACKs to be returned. The TCP sender incre-
ments cwnd by one segment for each ACK returned, so the process continues. The
exponential growth of cwnd as a function of time is illustrated on the right. The
second line shows how cwnd grows when every other packet is acknowledged,
which is common when delayed ACKs are being used. In this case, the growth
is still exponential but not as rapid. For this reason, some TCPs arrange to delay
ACKs only after the connection has completed slow start. In Linux, this is called
quick acknowledgments (“quickack mode”) and has been part of the basic TCP/IP
stack since kernel version 2.4.4.

       

       

       

       

Figure 16-2   Operation of the classic slow start algorithm. In the simple case where ACKs are not delayed,
              every arriving good ACK allows the sender to inject two new packets (left). This leads to an expo-
              nential growth in the size of the sender’s window as a function of time (right, upper line). When
              ACKs are delayed, such as when an ACK is produced for every other packet, the growth is still
              exponential but slower (right, lower line).

16.2.2 Congestion Avoidance
          Slow start, just described, is used when initiating data flow across a connection or
          after a loss event invoked by a timeout. It increases cwnd fairly rapidly and helps to
          establish a value for ssthresh. Once this is achieved, there is always the possibility
          that more network capacity may become available for a connection. If such capac-
          ity were to be immediately used with large traffic bursts, other TCP connections
          with packets sharing the same queues in routers would likely experience signifi-
          cant packet drops, leading to overall instability in the network as many connec-
          tions simultaneously experience packet drops and react with retransmissions.
              To address the problem of trying to find additional capacity that may become
          available, but to not do so too aggressively, TCP implements the congestion avoid-
          ance algorithm. Once ssthresh is established and cwnd is at least at this level, a
          TCP runs the congestion avoidance algorithm, which seeks additional capacity by
          increasing cwnd by approximately one segment for each window’s worth of data
          that is moved from sender to receiver successfully. This provides a much slower
          growth rate than slow start: approximately linear in terms of time, as opposed to
          slow start’s exponential growth. More precisely, cwnd is usually updated as fol-
          lows for each received nonduplicate ACK:

                                     cwndt+1 = cwndt + SMSS * SMSS/cwndt

             Looking at this relationship briefly, assume cwnd0 = k*SMSS bytes were sent
         into the network in k segments. After the first ACK arrives, cwnd is updated to be
         larger by a factor of (1/k):

              cwnd1 = cwnd0 + SMSS * SMSS/cwnd0 = k*SMSS + SMSS * (SMSS/(k*SMSS)) =
                    k*SMSS + (1/k) * SMSS = (k + (1/k))*SMSS = cwnd0 + (1/k)*SMSS

              Because the value of cwnd grows slightly with each new ACK arrival, and this
         value is in the denominator of the expression in the first equation above, the overall
         growth rate of cwnd is slightly sublinear. Nonetheless, we generally think of con-
         gestion avoidance growing the window linearly with respect to time (Figure 16-3),
         whereas slow start grows it exponentially with respect to time (Figure 16-2). This
         function is also called additive increase because a particular value (about one packet
         in this case) is added to cwnd for each successfully received window’s worth of data.

    

    

    

    

Figure 16-3   Operation of the congestion avoidance algorithm. In the simple case where ACKs are not delayed,
              every arriving good ACK allows the sender to inject approximately 1/W fraction of a new packet.
              This leads to approximately linear growth in the size of the sender’s window as a function of time
              (right, upper line). When ACKs are delayed, such as when an ACK is produced for every other
              packet, the growth is still approximately linear but somewhat slower (right, lower line).

Figure 16-3 (left) illustrates the operation of congestion avoidance. Once again,
         the numbers are in units of the RTT of the connection. Assuming the connection
         sends four packets (top), four ACKs are returned, allowing cwnd to grow slightly.
         By the second RTT period, the growth is enough to overcome the integer rounding
         and cause an increase of one SMSS to cwnd, allowing one additional packet to be

      sent. The growth of cwnd as a nearly linear function of time is illustrated on the
      right, on a linear-linear plot. The second line to the right shows how cwnd grows
      when every other packet is acknowledged, simulating the use of delayed ACKs. In
      this case, the growth is still about linear, but not as rapid.
           The assumption of the algorithm is that packet loss caused by bit errors is very
      small (much less than 1%), and therefore the loss of a packet signals congestion
      somewhere in the network between the source and destination. If this assumption
      is false, which it sometimes is for wireless networks, TCP slows down even when
      no congestion is present. In addition, many RTTs may be required for the value
      of cwnd to grow large, which is required for efficient use of networks with high
      capacity. Fixing these issues with TCP has been a popular area for research, and
      we discuss some of the various approaches later.

16.2.3 Selecting between Slow Start and Congestion Avoidance
      In normal operations, a TCP connection is always running either the slow start or
      the congestion avoidance procedure, but never the two simultaneously. We now
      turn to the question, What determines the algorithm TCP uses at any given time?
      We already know that slow start is used when a new connection is created or
      when a timeout-based retransmission occurs. We now turn to what controls the
      selection between slow start and congestion avoidance.
           We mentioned ssthresh earlier. This threshold is a limit on the value of cwnd
      that determines which algorithm is in operation, slow start or congestion avoid-
      ance. When cwnd < ssthresh, slow start is used, and when cwnd > ssthresh, con-
      gestion avoidance is used. When they are equal, either can be used. The most
      important distinction between slow start and congestion avoidance, as we have
      seen, is how each modifies the value of cwnd when new ACKs arrive. What makes
      TCP somewhat tricky and interesting is that the value of ssthresh is not fixed but
      instead varies over time. Its main purpose is to remember the last “best” estimate
      of the operating window when no loss was present. Said another way, it holds the
      lower bound on TCP’s best estimate of the optimal window size.
           The initial value of ssthresh may be set arbitrarily high (e.g., to awnd or higher),
      which causes TCP to always start with slow start. When a retransmission occurs,
      caused by either a retransmission timeout or the execution of fast retransmit,
      ssthresh is updated as follows:

                               ssthresh = max(flight size/2, 2*SMSS)                        [1]

          Note
          In Microsoft’s most recent (“Next Generation”) TCP/IP stack, this equation is
          reportedly changed to the somewhat more conservative relationship: ssthresh =
          max(min(cwnd, awnd)/2, 2*SMSS) [NB08].

           Here we see that if a retransmission is required, TCP assumes that the oper-
      ating window must have been too large for the network to handle. Reducing
      the estimate of the optimal window size is accompanied by altering ssthresh to
      be about half of what the current window size is (but not ever below twice the
      SMSS). This usually results in lowering ssthresh, but it can also result in increasing
      ssthresh. If we examine the congestion avoidance procedure for TCP, we recall that
      if an entire window’s worth of data is successfully exchanged, the value of cwnd is
      allowed to increase by approximately 1 SMSS. Thus, if cwnd has grown large over
      a considerable amount of time, setting ssthresh to half of the flight size could cause
      it to increase. This happens when TCP has discovered more usable bandwidth.
      The interplay between ssthresh and cwnd, in conjunction with the operation of slow
      start and congestion avoidance, gives TCP its characteristic behavior in the face of
      congestion. We now explore the complete, combined algorithms.

16.2.4 Tahoe, Reno, and Fast Recovery
      The algorithms discussed so far, slow start and congestion avoidance, constitute
      the first congestion control algorithms applied to TCP. They were introduced in
      the late 1980s with the 4.2 release of UC Berkeley’s version of UNIX, called the
      Berkeley Software Distribution, or BSD UNIX. Thus began the convention of nam-
      ing various versions of TCP after U.S. cities, especially those where gambling is
      permitted.
           The 4.2 release of BSD (called Tahoe) included a version of TCP that started
      connections in slow start, and if a packet was lost, detected by either a timeout or
      the fast retransmit procedure, the slow start algorithm was reinitiated. Tahoe was
      implemented by simply reducing cwnd to its starting value (1 SMSS at that time)
      upon any loss, forcing the connection to slow start until cwnd grew to the value
      ssthresh.
           One problem with this approach is that for large BDP paths, this can cause the
      connection to significantly underutilize the available bandwidth while the send-
      ing TCP goes through slow start to get back to the point at which it was operating
      before the packet loss. To address this problem, the reinitiation of slow start on any
      packet loss was reconsidered. Ultimately, if packet loss is detected by duplicate
      ACKs (invoking fast retransmit), cwnd is instead reset to the last value of ssthresh
      instead of only 1 SMSS. (Slow start is still initiated on a timeout, which is generally
      the case for most TCP variants.) This approach allows the TCP to slow down to
      half of its previous rate without reverting to slow start.
           In exploring the issue of large BDP paths further and thinking back to the
      conservation of packets principle mentioned before, it has been observed that any
      ACKs that are received, even while recovering after a loss, still represent oppor-
      tunities to inject new packets into the network. This became the basis of the fast
      recovery procedure, which was released in conjunction with the popular 4.3 BSD
      Reno version of BSD UNIX. Fast recovery allows cwnd to (temporarily) grow by 1
      SMSS for each ACK received while recovering. The congestion window is therefore

      inflated for a period of time, allowing an additional new packet to be sent for each
      ACK received, until a good ACK is seen. Any nonduplicate (“good”) ACK causes
      TCP to exit recovery and reduces the congestion back to its pre-inflated value. TCP
      Reno became very popular and ultimately the basis for what might reasonably be
      called “standard TCP.”

16.2.5 Standard TCP
      Although what constitutes “standard” TCP is subject to some debate, the algo-
      rithms we have discussed so far constitute the primary procedures identified
      with standard TCP operation. The slow start and congestion avoidance algorithms
      are usually implemented together, and the baseline overall behavior is given in
      [RFC5681]. This specification does not require the use of these exact algorithms,
      but a requirement is imposed that any TCP implementation not be more aggres-
      sive than these algorithms would allow.
          To summarize the combined algorithm from [RFC5681], TCP begins a con-
      nection in slow start (cwnd = IW) with a large value of ssthresh, generally at least
      the value of awnd. Upon receiving a good ACK (one that acknowledges new data),
      TCP updates the value of cwnd as follows:

                       cwnd += SMSS         (if cwnd < ssthresh)   Slow start
          cwnd += SMSS*SMSS/cwnd            (if cwnd > ssthresh)   Congestion avoidance

          When fast retransmit is invoked because of receipt of a third duplicate ACK
      (or other signal, if conventional fast retransmit initiation is not used), the follow-
      ing actions are performed:

          1. ssthresh is updated to no more than the value given in equation [1].
          2. The fast retransmit algorithm is performed, and cwnd is set to (ssthresh +
             3*SMSS).
          3. cwnd is temporarily increased by SMSS for each duplicate ACK received.
          4. When a good ACK is received, cwnd is reset back to ssthresh.

           The actions in steps 2 and 3 constitute fast recovery. Step 2 first adjusts cwnd,
      which usually causes it to be reduced to half of its former value, and then tempo-
      rarily inflates it to take into account the fact that the receipt of each duplicate ACK
      indicates that some packet has left the network (and thus should permit another to
      be inserted). This step is also where multiplicative decrease occurs, as cwnd is ordi-
      narily multiplied by some value (0.5 here) to form its new value. Step 3 continues
      the inflation process, allowing the sender to send additional packets (assuming
      awnd is not exceeded). In step 4, the TCP is assumed to have recovered, so the
      temporary inflation is removed (and so this step is sometimes called “deflation”).
                                   Section 16.3 Evolution of the Standard Algorithms          739

           Slow start is always used in two cases: when a new connection is started, and
      when a retransmission timeout occurs. It can also be invoked when a sender has
      been idle for a relatively long time or there is some other reason to suspect that
      cwnd may not accurately reflect the current network congestion state (see Section
      16.3.5). In this case, the initial value of cwnd is set to the restart window (RW). In
      [RFC5681], the recommended value of RW = min(IW, cwnd). Other than this case,
      when slow start is invoked, cwnd is set to IW.

16.3 Evolution of the Standard Algorithms
      The classic and standard TCP algorithms made a tremendous contribution to the
      operation of TCP, essentially addressing the major problem of Internet congestion
      collapse.

          Note
          The problem of Internet congestion collapse was a serious concern during the
          years 1986–1988. In October 1986 the NSFNET backbone, an important compo-
          nent of the early Internet, had been observed to operate with an effective capac-
          ity some 1000 times less than it should have (called the “NSFNET meltdown”).
          The primary reason for the problem was aggressive retransmissions during times
          of loss without any controls. This behavior drove the network into a persistently
          congested state where packet loss was massive (causing more retransmissions)
          and throughput was low. Adoption of the classic congestion control algorithms
          effectively eliminated this problem.

           However, there remained several areas for improvement. Given TCP’s popu-
      larity, a growing amount of effort was put into ensuring that TCP could be made
      to work well under a wider range of conditions. We now mention several of these
      that are found in many TCP implementations today.

16.3.1 NewReno
      One problem with fast recovery is that when multiple packets are dropped in
      a window of data, once one packet is recovered (i.e., successfully delivered and
      ACKed), a good ACK can be received at the sender that causes the temporary
      window inflation in fast recovery to be erased before all the packets that were lost
      have been retransmitted. ACKs that trigger this behavior are called partial ACKs.
      A Reno TCP reacting to a partial ACK by reducing its inflated congestion window
      can go idle until a retransmission timer fires. To understand why this happens,
      recall that (non-SACK) TCP depends on the signal of three (or dupthresh) duplicate
      ACKs to trigger its fast retransmit procedure. If there are not enough packets in
      the network, it is not possible to trigger this procedure on packet loss, ultimately

      leading to the expiration of the retransmission timer and invocation of the slow
      start procedure, which drastically impacts TCP throughput performance.
           To address this problem with Reno, a modification called NewReno [RFC3782]
      has been developed. This procedure modifies fast recovery by keeping track of the
      highest sequence number from the last transmitted window of data (the recovery
      point, which we first saw in Chapter 14). Only when an ACK with an ACK num-
      ber at least as large as the recovery point is received is the inflation of fast recov-
      ery removed. This allows a TCP to continue sending one segment for each ACK
      it receives while recovering and reduces the occurrence of retransmission time-
      outs, especially when multiple packets are dropped in a single window of data.
      NewReno is a popular variant of modern TCPs—it does not suffer from the prob-
      lems of the original fast recovery and is significantly less complicated to imple-
      ment than SACKs. With SACKs, however, a TCP can perform better than NewReno
      when multiple packets are lost in a window of data, but doing this requires careful
      attention to the congestion control procedures, which we discuss next.

16.3.2 TCP Congestion Control with SACK
      With the introduction of SACKs and selective repeat to TCP, a sender is able to
      make better decisions about what segments to send in order to fill holes at the
      receiver (see Chapter 14). In filling the receiver’s holes, the sender generally sends
      each of the missing segments, in order, until all of the retransmissions for the lost
      segments have been received successfully. This procedure differs from the basic
      fast retransmit/recovery procedure mentioned previously in a somewhat subtle
      way.
           In the case of fast retransmit/recovery, when a packet is lost, the sending TCP
      transmits only the segment it believes is lost and is able to send new data if the
      window W allows. Because the window is inflated for each arriving ACK dur-
      ing fast recovery, with larger windows TCP typically is able to send some addi-
      tional data after performing its retransmission. With SACK TCP, the sender can be
      informed of multiple missing segments and would theoretically be able to send
      them all immediately because they would all be in the valid window. However,
      this might involve sending too much data into the network at once, thereby com-
      promising the congestion control. The following issue arises with SACK TCP:
      using only cwnd as a bound on the sender’s sliding window to indicate how many
      (and which) packets to send during recovery periods is not sufficient. Instead, the
      selection of which packets to send needs to be decoupled from the choice of when
      to send them. Said another way, SACK TCP underscores the need to separate the
      congestion management from the selection and mechanism of packet retransmis-
      sion. Conventional (non-SACK) TCP mixes these together.
           One way to implement this decoupling is to have a TCP keep track of how
      much data it has injected into the network separately from the maintenance of
      the window. In [RFC3517] this is called the pipe variable, an estimate of the flight
      size. Importantly, the pipe variable counts bytes (or packets, depending on the
                                  Section 16.3 Evolution of the Standard Algorithms    741

      implementation) of transmissions and retransmissions, provided they are not
      known to be lost. Assuming a large value of awnd, a SACK TCP is permitted to
      send a segment anytime the following relationship holds true: cwnd - pipe ≥ SMSS.
      In other words, cwnd is still used to place a limit on the amount of data that can
      be outstanding in the network, but the amount of data estimated to be in the net-
      work is accounted for separately from the window itself. How SACK TCP using
      this approach to congestion control compares with conventional TCP was first
      explored in detail with a series of simulations in [FF96].

16.3.3 Forward Acknowledgment (FACK) and Rate Halving
      For TCP variants based on Reno (including NewReno), the typical behavior is that
      when cwnd is reduced after a fast retransmit, ACKs for at least one-half of the
      current window’s outstanding data must be received before the sending TCP is
      allowed to continue transmitting. This is an expected consequence of reducing
      the congestion window by half immediately when a loss is detected. It causes the
      sending TCP to wait for about half of an RTT and then send any new data during
      the second half of the same RTT, a more bursty behavior than is really required.
          In an effort to avoid the initial pause after loss but not violate the convention
      of emerging from recovery with a congestion window set to half of its size on
      entry, forward acknowledgment (FACK) was described in [MM96]. It consists of two
      algorithms called “overdamping” and “rampdown.” Since the initial proposal,
      the authors updated their approach to form a unified and improved algorithm
      they call rate halving, based on earlier work by Hoe [H96]. To ensure that it works
      as effectively as possible, they further govern its behavior by adding bounding
      parameters, resulting in the complete algorithm being called Rate-Halving with
      Bounding Parameters (RHBP) [PSCRH].
          The basic operation of RHBP allows the TCP sender to send one packet for
      every two duplicate ACKs it receives during one RTT. This causes the recovering
      TCP to have sent the appropriate amount of data by the end of the recovery period,
      but it spaces or paces this data evenly, rather than bunching all the transmissions
      into the second half of the RTT period. Avoiding the bunching or burstiness is
      advantageous because bursts tend to persist across multiple RTTs, stressing router
      buffers more than required.
          To keep an accurate estimate of the flight size, RHBP uses information from
      SACKs to determine the FACK: the highest sequence number known to have
      reached the receiver, plus 1. Taking the difference between the highest sequence
      number about to be sent by the sender (SND.NXT in Figure 15-9) and the FACK
      gives an estimate of the flight size, not including retransmissions.
          With RHBP, a distinction is made between the adjustment interval (the period
      when cwnd is modified) and the repair interval (when some segments are retrans-
      mitted). The adjustment interval is entered immediately upon a loss or conges-
      tion indicator. The final value for cwnd when the interval completes is half of
      the correctly delivered portion of the window of data in the network at the time

       of detection. The following expression allows the RHBP sender to transmit, if
       satisfied:

                          (SND.NXT – fack + retran_data + len) < cwnd

            This expression captures the flight size, including retransmissions, and
       ensures that if injecting another packet of length len, cwnd will not be exceeded.
       Provided all the data prior to the FACK is indeed no longer in the network (i.e.,
       is lost or stored at the receiver), this causes the SACK sender to be appropriately
       controlled by cwnd. However, it can be overly aggressive if packets have been reor-
       dered in the network because the holes indicated by SACK have not been lost.
            In Linux, FACK and rate halving are implemented and enabled by default.
       FACK is activated only when SACK is enabled and the Boolean configuration vari-
       able net.ipv4.tcp_fack is set to 1. When reordering is detected in the network,
       the more aggressive behavior of FACK is disabled.
            Rate halving is one of several ways of pacing TCP’s sending procedure to
       avoid or limit burstiness. Although it offers a number of benefits, it also has a few
       problems. In [ASA00], the authors analyze TCP pacing in some detail using simu-
       lations, concluding that in many cases it offers inferior performance to TCP Reno.
       Furthermore, rate-halving TCP has been known to exhibit poor performance when
       the connection may become limited by the receiver’s advertised window [MM05].

16.3.4 Limited Transmit
       In [RFC3042], the authors propose limited transmit, a small modification to TCP
       designed to help it perform better when the usable window is small. Recall from
       the experience with Reno TCP that when operating with a small window, there
       may not be enough packets in the network to trigger the fast retransmit/recovery
       algorithms when loss occurs, as these algorithms typically require three duplicate
       ACKs to be observed prior to initiation.
            With limited transmit, a TCP with unsent data is permitted to send a new
       packet for each pair of consecutive duplicate ACKs it receives. Doing this helps
       to keep at least a minimal number of packets in the network—enough so that
       fast retransmit can be triggered upon packet loss. This is advantageous to TCP
       because waiting for an RTO (which can be a relatively large amount of time—sev-
       eral hundred milliseconds) can degrade throughput performance considerably.
       As of [RFC5681], limited transmit is now a recommended TCP behavior. Note that
       rate halving is one form of limited transmit.

16.3.5 Congestion Window Validation (CWV)
       One of the issues with congestion management in TCP arises when the TCP
       sender stops sending for a period of time, either because it has no more data to
       send, or because it has been prevented from sending when it wants to for some
                             Section 16.3 Evolution of the Standard Algorithms     743

other reason. If all goes well, a sender never pauses, and it continues sending data
and receiving ACKs from its peer. This continuous feedback enables it to keep a
reasonably current (within one RTT) estimate of what cwnd and ssthresh should be.
      If the TCP sender has been sending for some time, its cwnd may have grown
to a substantial size. If it then fails to send for some time but resumes later, the
large cwnd may allow the sender to inject an undesirably large number of packets
(i.e., a high-rate burst) into the network without delay. Furthermore, if the pause
is sufficiently long, its last cwnd value may no longer be appropriate for the path
and congestion state.
      In [RFC2861], the authors propose an experimental Congestion Window Valida-
tion (CWV) mechanism. Essentially, the sender’s current value of cwnd decays over
a period of nonuse, and ssthresh maintains the “memory” of it prior to the initia-
tion of the decay. To understand the scheme, a distinction is made between an idle
sender and an application-limited sender. The idle sender has stopped producing
data it wants to send into the network; ACKs for all the data it has sent so far
have been received. Thus, the connection is truly quiescent—no data is flowing,
so no ACKs are either, except for occasional window updates (see Chapter 15). The
application-limited sender does have more data to send but has been unable to
for some reason. This could be because the sending computer is busy doing other
tasks, or because some mechanism or protocol layer below TCP is preventing data
from being sent. This case results in underutilization of the allowed congestion
window, but the connection is not completely quiescent. In particular, ACKs may
still be returning for previously sent data.
      The CWV algorithm work as follows: Whenever a new packet is to be sent, the
time since the last send event is measured to determine if it exceeds one RTO. If so,

    • ssthresh is modified but not reduced—it is set to max(ssthresh, (3/4)*cwnd).
    • cwnd is reduced by half for each RTT of idle time but is always at least 1
      SMSS.

     For application-limited periods that are not idle, the following similar behav-
ior is used:

    • The amount of window actually used is stored in W_used.
    • ssthresh is modified but not reduced—it is set to max(ssthresh, (3/4)*cwnd).
    • cwnd is set to the average of cwnd and W_used.

     Both of these changes decay the value of cwnd while “remembering” it in
ssthresh. The first case can dramatically affect cwnd in one operation, if the applica-
tion has been idle for a long time. Handling the congestion window in this way
can lead to better performance under some circumstances. As the authors report,
reducing the burst of packets that can arise after an idle period eases the pressure

      on potentially limited buffer space in routers, ultimately leading to fewer dropped
      packets. Note that because cwnd is decayed and ssthresh is not, the typical conse-
      quence of applying this algorithm is to place the sender into slow start after a long
      enough pause. CWV is enabled by default in Linux TCP implementations.

16.4 Handling Spurious RTOs—the Eifel Response Algorithm
      As we saw in Chapter 15, when TCP encounters a large delay spike, it can expe-
      rience a retransmission timeout even if no packet has been lost. Such spurious
      retransmissions arise in a number of circumstances relating to changes in the
      underlying link layer (such as cellular handoff) or sudden onset of severe conges-
      tion contributing to a large increase in RTT. When this happens, the TCP adjusts
      ssthresh and enters slow start by setting cwnd to IW. If no packets have been lost,
      ACKs arriving after the RTO cause cwnd to grow relatively quickly, but TCP still
      sends unnecessary retransmissions and underutilizes the capacity until cwnd and
      ssthresh resettle.
           To avoid the performance problems associated with spurious retransmissions,
      several methods have been proposed to detect them. We discussed some of them
      (e.g., DSACK, Eifel, F-RTO) in Chapter 14. Any one of these, or possibly others
      that may be developed, can be coupled with a response algorithm used to “undo”
      the changes TCP makes to its congestion control variables after a timeout. One
      popular (i.e., in the IETF standards track) response algorithm is the Eifel Response
      Algorithm [RFC4015].
           Eifel comprises both a detection and a response algorithm, which are logically
      disjoint. Any TCP implementation using the Eifel Response Algorithm is com-
      pelled to use some detection algorithm specified in a standards-track or experi-
      mental RFC (i.e., one that is documented).
           The Eifel Response Algorithm is aimed at handling the retransmission timer
      and congestion control state after a retransmission timer has expired. Here we
      discuss only the congestion-related portions of the response algorithm. It is initi-
      ated after the first timeout-based retransmission is sent. Its purpose is to undo a
      change to ssthresh when a retransmission is deemed to be spurious. In all cases,
      before ssthresh is modified as a result of the RTO, it is captured in a special variable
      as follows: pipe_prev = min(flight size, ssthresh). Once this has been accomplished,
      a detection algorithm, such as one of those mentioned previously, is invoked in
      order to determine if the RTO is spurious. If it is, the following steps are executed
      when an ACK arrives after the retransmission:

          1. If a received good ACK includes an ECN-Echo flag, stop (see Section 16.11).
          2. cwnd = flight size + min(bytes_acked, IW) (assuming cwnd is measured in
             bytes).
          3. ssthresh = pipe_prev.

          The pipe_prev variable is set before ssthresh is changed in the ordinary way. It
     provides a memory for ssthresh, so that it can be reinstantiated in step 3 if necessary.
     Step 1 deals with the case of an arriving ACK carrying the ECN flag. (We discuss
     ECN more in Section 16.11.) When this happens, it is considered unsafe to avoid
     undoing the reduction of ssthresh, so the algorithm terminates. Steps 2 and 3 consti-
     tute the important part of the algorithm (with respect to cwnd). Step 2 restores cwnd
     to a point where it may be able to inject some additional traffic into the network, but
     not more than IW new data. IW is considered a safe amount of data to inject into a
     network path with unknown congestion state. Step 3 restores ssthresh to its value
     before the RTO occurred, completing the undo operation.

16.5 An Extended Example
     We now turn to an extended example to demonstrate most of the behaviors
     described in the preceding sections. Using the sock program, we arrange to send
     about 2.5MB of data from a Linux (2.6) sender to a FreeBSD (5.4) receiver over a
     DSL line. The DSL line is rate-limited in this direction to approximately 300Kb/s.
     The FreeBSD receiver is attached to a high-bandwidth connection. The minimum
     RTT between sender and receiver is 15.9ms, and there are 17 hops in the path. The
     systems are configured to use the baseline algorithms (i.e., slow start and conges-
     tion avoidance) for most of their processing. This avoids many of the operating-
     system-specific details. (We cover some of these later.) To set up this experiment,
     we run the following command at the receiver:

     FreeBSD% sock -i -r 32768 -R 233016 -s 6666

     This command arranges for the sock program to use a fairly large socket receive
     buffer (228KB) and perform fairly large application reads (32KB). For the path
     used, this is an adequate size of buffer for the receiver. At the sender we run the
     sock program in sending mode, as follows:

     Linux% sock -n20 -i -w 131072 -S 262144 128.32.37.219 6666

     This selects a large send buffer and sends 20*131,072 bytes (2.5MB) of data. The
     packet trace is captured using tcpdump on the sender. The command used to
     capture this trace is as follows:

     Linux# tcpdump -s 128 -w sack-to-free-12.td port 6666

     This ensures that at least 128 bytes of each packet are captured, plenty to capture
     all interesting TCP and IP header information. After the trace is collected, we can
     use the tcptrace tool [TCPTRACE] to get a number of useful summary statistics
     regarding the connection:

     Linux% tcptrace -Wl sack-to-free-12.td

      This command requests the program to provide information on the congestion
      window and output using a long (verbose) format. It produces the following
      output:

      1 arg remaining, starting with 'sack-to-free-12.td'
      Ostermann's tcptrace -- version 6.6.7 -- Thu Nov 4, 2004

      3175 packets seen, 3175 TCP packets traced
      elapsed wallclock time: 0:00:00.167213, 18987 pkts/sec analyzed
      trace file elapsed time: 0:01:40.475872
      TCP connection info:
      1 TCP connection traced:
      TCP connection 1:
            host a:        adsl-63-203-72-138.dsl.snfc21.pacbell.net:1059
            host b:        dwight.CS.Berkeley.EDU:6666
            complete conn: yes
            first packet: Wed Sep 28 22:15:29.956897 2005
            last packet:   Wed Sep 28 22:17:10.432769 2005
            elapsed time: 0:01:40.475872
            total packets: 3175
            filename:      sack-to-free-12.td
        a->b:                                  b->a:
        total packets:          1903           total packets:           1272
        ack pkts sent:          1902           ack pkts sent:           1272
        pure acks sent:            2           pure acks sent:          1270
        sack pkts sent:            0           sack pkts sent:            79
        dsack pkts sent:           0           dsack pkts sent:            0
        max sack blks/ack:         0           max sack blks/ack:          2
        unique bytes sent:   2621440           unique bytes sent:          0
        actual data pkts:       1900           actual data pkts:           0
        actual data bytes:   2659240           actual data bytes:          0
        rexmt data pkts:          27           rexmt data pkts:            0
        rexmt data bytes:      37800           rexmt data bytes:           0
        zwnd probe pkts:           0           zwnd probe pkts:            0
        zwnd probe bytes:          0           zwnd probe bytes:           0
        outoforder pkts:           0           outoforder pkts:            0
        pushed data pkts:         44           pushed data pkts:           0
        SYN/FIN pkts sent:       1/1           SYN/FIN pkts sent:        1/1
        req 1323 ws/ts:          Y/Y           req 1323 ws/ts:           Y/Y
        adv wind scale:            2           adv wind scale:             2
        req sack:                  Y           req sack:                   Y
        sacks sent:                0           sacks sent:                79
        urgent data pkts:          0 pkts      urgent data pkts:           0 pkts
        urgent data bytes:         0 bytes     urgent data bytes:          0 bytes
        mss requested:          1412 bytes     mss requested:           1460 bytes
        max segm size:          1400 bytes     max segm size:              0 bytes
        min segm size:           640 bytes     min segm size:              0 bytes
        avg segm size:          1399 bytes     avg segm size:              0 bytes
        max win adv:            5808 bytes     max win adv:           233016 bytes
        min win adv:            5808 bytes     min win adv:           170016 bytes
        zero win adv:              0 times     zero win adv:               0 times
        avg win adv:            5808 bytes     avg win adv:           232268 bytes

  max owin:                137201 bytes         max owin:                     1 bytes
  min non-zero owin:            1 bytes         min non-zero owin:            1 bytes
  avg owin:                 37594 bytes         avg owin:                     1 bytes
  wavg owin:                33285 bytes         wavg owin:                    0 bytes
  initial window:            2800 bytes         initial window:               0 bytes
  initial window:               2 pkts          initial window:               0 pkts
  ttl stream length:      2621440 bytes         ttl stream length:            0 bytes
  missed data:                  0 bytes         missed data:                  0 bytes
  truncated data:         2556640 bytes         truncated data:               0 bytes
  truncated packets:         1900 pkts          truncated packets:            0 pkts
  data xmit time:          99.631 secs          data xmit time:           0.000 secs
  idletime max:            7778.8 ms            idletime max:            7930.4 ms
  throughput:               26090 Bps           throughput:                   0 Bps

    From this useful tool we can learn quite a bit about the connection. We are
primarily interested in the left portion of the output (a->b). First of all, we see that
1903 packets were sent in the a->b direction and 1902 of them were ACKs. This is
expected, as the very first packet is normally a SYN—the only packet without the
ACK flag turned on. Pure ACKs refer to packets containing no data. The sender
produces one of these early in the connection, when providing an ACK to its peer’s
SYN + ACK and when producing the final ACK when the connection is closed,
so this is also expected. In the second column (b->a direction), we find that the
receiver sent 1272 packets, all of which are ACKs. Of these, 1270 were pure ACKs,
and 79 SACK packets (i.e., ACKs containing the SACK option) were sent. The two
“non-pure” ACKs are the SYN + ACK and the FIN + ACK sent at the beginning
and end of the connection, respectively.
    The next five values indicate the proportion of data that was retransmitted. As
we can see, 2,621,440 unique bytes were sent (i.e., not retransmitted), but 2,659,240
bytes were sent in total, meaning some 2,659,240 – 2,621,440 = 37,800 bytes must
have been sent more than once. The next two fields confirm this and indicate
that these retransmitted bytes were contained in 27 retransmitted packets, for an
average retransmitted segment size of 1399 bytes. Because this connection trans-
ferred 2,659,240 bytes in 100.476s, its average throughput is 26,466 bytes/s (about
212Kb/s). Its average goodput, the amount of unretransmitted data transferred
per unit time, is 2,621,440/100.476 = 26,090 B/s, about 209Kb/s. As we shall see, this
connection experiences a number of significant disruptions to its normal opera-
tion. We shall use Wireshark’s analysis capabilities and our own analysis to follow
TCP’s behavior when such events occur.
    To get a visual image of the trace, we can use the Statistics | TCP Stream
Graph | Time-Sequence Graph (tcptrace) function in Wireshark’s Statistics
menu to obtain the image shown in Figure 16-4 (enhanced with arrows for the
discussion that follows).
    The y-axis of Figure 16-4 represents the relative TCP sequence number. Each
small tick mark represents 100,000 sequence numbers. The x-axis is time, in sec-
onds. The dark solid line comprises many smaller I-shaped line segments, each
of which represents the range of sequence numbers contained in a TCP segment.

                                                                                          

                                                                         

                                                                                                     

                                                                                      

                                                                             

                                                                

                                                      
                     

                                        

Figure 16-4       Wireshark trace of a 2.5MB file upload executed by a Linux 2.6.10 TCP sender over a
                        DSL line rate-limited to approximately 300Kb/s. The dark line represents sent sequence
                        numbers. The top line is the highest sequence number advertised by the receiver (its
                        right window edge), and the lower line represents the highest segment acknowledged
                        by the receiver so far seen at the sender. The 11 events labeled represent cases where the
                        congestion window has been modified.

      The height of the I indicates the user-data payload size, in bytes. The slope of the
      “line” formed by these I-shaped characters is the data rate achieved by the con-
      nection. Any movement to the lower right indicates a retransmission. The slope of
      the line for any given time range provides the average throughput over that time.
      As we can see, the highest sequence number sent was about 2600000 at time 100,
      which provides for a rough average goodput rate of 26,000 bytes/s, quite close to
      the numeric value from the preceding tcptrace output.
           The top line is the largest sequence number the receiver is willing to accept
      (its highest advertised window) so far. As we can see, at the beginning of the time
      series, this line is at about 250000, with the actual value being 233016, as indi-
      cated in the tcptrace output, in the b→a column. The bottom line represents the
      highest ACK number received at the sender so far. As discussed previously, TCP
      searches for additional bandwidth while it operates, by increasing its congestion

       window. It does not violate the receiver’s advertised window. We see this in opera-
       tion in this graph as the solid line moves from the lower line toward the upper
       line over time. If the upper line is never reached, either the sender or the usable
       network capacity is the limiting factor for the throughput of the connection. If the
       upper line is always reached, the receiver’s window is the likely limiting factor.

16.5.1 Slow Start Behavior
       We begin our analysis by observing the operation of the slow start algorithm
       described earlier. In Wireshark, we select the first packet of the trace and then
       use its Statistics | Flow graph function to illustrate the packets exchanged at the
       beginning of the connection (see Figure 16-5).

Figure 16-5 The Wireshark analysis shows the sequence and ACK numbers exchanged when the
                   connection is first established. Each ACK received at the sender liberates two or three
                   packets. This characteristic is typical of a sender in slow start.

            Here we see the initial SYN and SYN + ACK exchange. The ACK at time 0.032
       is a window update (see Chapter 15). The first two data packets are sent at times
       0.126 and 0.127. The ACK at time 0.210 is not for a single packet. Its ACK num-
       ber is 2801 and thus ACKs both of the previously sent data packets because of the
       cumulative property of TCP ACKs. This is an example of delayed ACKs, which are
       often generated for every other data packet (or more frequently, as recommended
       by [RFC5681]). As we shall see for this particular (FreeBSD 5.4) receiver, it alter-
       nates between ACKing one packet and two packets. This means there are two

       ACKs returned for every three data packets sent on average (assuming no errors or
       retransmissions). We discussed delayed ACKs and window updates in Chapter 15.
            An ACK arriving that covers two packets allows the sliding window at the
       sender to move forward by two packets and therefore permits two additional
       packets to be sent into the network. However, because this connection is just start-
       ing out and it is still executing slow start, the arrival of a good ACK causes the
       sender to increase its congestion window by one packet (this Linux TCP manages
       its congestion window in packet units). In this case, the cwnd grows from 2 to 3.
       This has effect of allowing three packets to be sent overall as a result of the arriving
       ACK. They are sent at times 0.215, 0.216, and 0.217.
            The ACK arriving at time 0.264 ACKs a single packet and indicates that the
       receiver next expects to see sequence number 4201. That packet, however, and the
       one after it with sequence number 5601, have already been sent and are still out-
       standing. Thus, the ACK arrival allows cwnd to grow from 3 to 4, but because
       two packets are already outstanding, only two more are allowed to be sent (one
       because the ACK slid the window forward, another because the received good
       ACK allowed cwnd to grow by one packet). They are sent at times 0.268 and 0.268
       (within the same 1/1000s).
            This startup behavior is typical of a sender executing slow start with a receiver
       delaying ACKs. The process continues in this fashion (each ACK liberating two
       or three packets) until something interesting occurs at about time 5.6. We now
       explore this further.

16.5.2 Sender Pause and Local Congestion (Event 1)
       Looking at Figure 16-4, we find that after a segment is sent at time 5.512, a pause
       occurs until the next data segment is set at time 6.162. This can be better seen by
       using Wireshark’s graphical zoom-in feature as shown in Figure 16-6.
            In this figure we see that the sender has stopped sending, no retransmitted
       packet appears to be present, yet the data rate appears to decrease after the pause.
       Why is this? We can investigate further with the flow trace function once again
       (see Figure 16-7).
            The sending TCP has evidently ceased its sending demand at time 5.559. This
       is supported by the fact that the last transmitted data segment before the pause
       has the PSH flag turned on, which typically indicates that the sending buffer has
       been emptied. There could be several reasons for this, including the possibility
       that the host system is busy doing something else, preventing the sending applica-
       tion from initiating its next write of data into the network.
            We can observe that this pause is not the beginning of a retransmission recov-
       ery period, yet the slope of the line decreases after the pause, indicating a reduced
       sending rate. Let us explore this behavior more closely to figure out why.
            The last sequence number sent before the pause is 343001 + 1400 – 1 = 344400,
       which has never been sent before and is therefore not a retransmission. After the
       segment is sent at time 5.486 (highlighted), this connection will have its greatest
       amount of outstanding data: 341,601 + 1400 – 205,801 = 137,200 bytes (98 packets).

Figure 16-6 After starting using the slow start procedure, the connection pauses for about 512ms, at
            time 5.512, and then continues by sending a burst.

This tells us that the value of cwnd is 98 packets. The arrival of the ACK at time
5.556 indicates that two more packets have been received at the receiver. The last
packet to be sent before the pause contains sequence number 344400, so 97 packets
are outstanding.
     While the application is paused, 11 ACKs arrive (each alternating between
ACKing either one or two full-size segments as mentioned before). The last one
indicates that sequence number 233800 has been received, meaning 110,600 bytes
(79 packets) now remain outstanding. At this point, the sender wakes up and con-
tinues to transmit. As a result of receiving this ACK at time 6.204, it should be able
to inject 98 – 79 = 19 more packets at this point but is able to send only 8. The last
sequence number it is able to send is 354201 + 1400 – 1 = 355600 at time 6.128.
     What happens to the TCP at this point is not immediately obvious from the
trace. We would have expected 19 packets to be sent, but only 8 were. The reason
is that the sender filled a local (lower-layer) queue with its burst of packets and the
subsequent ones were unable to be sent. Using the following command in Linux,
and knowing that our transfer takes place over the ppp0 network interface, we
can try to determine if some lower layer has caused TCP to have problems:

Figure 16-7   The sender pauses at time 5.559. In addition, the burst of packets at time 6.209 is limited
                    to eight because of local congestion. Some TCP implementations such as this one limit
                    the sending rate to avoid congesting queues on the sending host.

      Linux% tc -s -d qdisc show dev ppp0
      qdisc pfifo_fast 0: bands 3 priomap 1 2 2 2 1 2 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
      Sent 122569547 bytes 348574 pkts (dropped 2, overlimits 0 requeues 0)

           The tc program is used to administer the packet scheduling and traffic control
      subsystem in Linux [LARTC]. The –s and –d options provide detailed statistics.
      The directive qdisc show dev ppp0 means the queuing discipline for device
      ppp0 should be displayed, which is the method used to hold and prioritize the
      order in which packets are sent. Notice the two dropped packets. These packets
      were not dropped in the network but rather in the sending computer in a protocol
      layer below TCP. Furthermore, because they were dropped in a layer below TCP
      but above the layer where the packet capture facility operates, these packet trans-
      mission attempts are not visible in the trace. Dropping transmitted TCP packets at
      the sending system is sometimes called local congestion, and it arises because TCP
      is producing data faster than the underlying local queues can be emptied.

    Note
    The Linux traffic control subsystem and other priority or QoS features supported
    in routers and operating systems (e.g., Microsoft’s qWave API [WQOS]) support
    different queuing disciplines that may order packets differently based on features
    in the packets (e.g., the IP DSCP value or TCP port number). Placing priority
    on some packets (e.g., multimedia data packets, TCP pure ACKs) may improve
    the user experience for interactive applications in networks that support priority.
    Much of the Internet does not support such priorities, but many LANs and some
    enterprise IP networks do.

     Local congestion is one of several reasons the Linux TCP implementation may
be placed in the Congestion Window Reducing (CWR) state [SK02]. It starts by set-
ting ssthresh to cwnd/2, and by setting cwnd to min(cwnd, flight size + 1). In the
CWR state, the sender reduces cwnd by one packet for every two ACKs received
until cwnd reaches the new ssthresh or the CWR state is exited for some other rea-
son such as a loss event. It is essentially the rate-halving algorithm we mentioned
previously. It is also invoked when the sending TCP receives an ECN-Echo indica-
tion in the received TCP header (see Section 16.1.1).
     With this knowledge, we can now understand what happened. When TCP
continues after the pause, it is able to send only 8 packets. Any additional packets
cannot be sent because of local congestion and instead place the TCP into the CWR
state. Immediately, ssthresh is reduced to 98/2 = 49 packets and cwnd is set to 79 + 8
= 87 packets. It then remains in the CWR state where it reduces cwnd by 1 for every
two ACKs it receives, leading to a reduction in sending rate, until cwnd reaches 66
packets at time 8.364.
     The reduction in sending rate can also be observed as follows: Looking at Fig-
ure 16-6, before time 5.5 the slope of the line gives an effective data rate of approxi-
mately 500Kb/s. This is higher than the capacity of the link in the direction of the
data transfer, so this extra apparent capacity is the result of one or more queues
being filled up in the path, leading to an increased RTT because of queuing delay.
We can use the Statistics | TCP Stream Graph | Round Trip Time Graph to visual-
ize this effect (see Figure 16-8).
     In this figure, the y-axis represents the estimated RTT in seconds and the x-axis
represents the sequence number. We can see that at approximately sequence num-
ber 340000, the RTT begins to decrease. This sequence number corresponds closely
to the last sequence number sent before the pause described earlier (344400). The
decreasing RTT corresponds to the fact that as the sender slows down, the net-
work is becoming less loaded (i.e., the rate at which data is draining from the net-
work exceeds the rate at which new traffic is arriving). This causes queues within
network routers to empty, leading to a smaller wait time and a consequentially
lower RTT.
     The sending rate reduction continues while TCP remains in the CWR state.
Eventually, if this continued, the RTT would decrease to its bare minimum value
of about 17ms. In general, TCP avoids allowing this to happen because it wants to

Figure 16-8   The sender’s estimated connection round-trip time. Periods of increasing RTT (dense
                    groupings of increasing values) correspond to buffers filling because of an excess of
                    sending rate over forwarding rate at a router along the path. Decreasing RTTs represent
                    the opposite effect, resulting from the sender slowing down and the queues draining.

      “keep the pipe full” to ensure that it is using the maximum amount of network
      capacity currently available to it.

16.5.3 Stretch ACKs and Recovery from Local Congestion
      At time 8.364, following the gradual reduction in cwnd initially caused by the TCP
      entering the CWR state, the TCP appears to start decreasing more quickly. This is
      a consequence of a change in the relationship of cwnd and the amount of outstand-
      ing data indicated by the ACK at time 8.362 (highlighted in Figure 16-9).
          The ACK at time 8.362 is for sequence number 317801, but the previously
      received ACK is for sequence number 313601, meaning this new ACK is for 317,801
      – 313,601 = 4200 bytes (three packets). This is commonly called a stretch ACK, mean-
      ing it ACKs more than twice the largest segment sent so far. It could be caused by
      a number of possibilities, the simplest of which is a lost ACK. It is usually difficult
      to determine with certainty the cause of the stretch ACK, but the precise reason

Figure 16-9 A “stretch ACK” acknowledges three packets’ worth of sequence numbers. Such ACKs
            can cause the sender to act in a bursty manner and can occur when other ACKs are lost
            in transit.

is not usually important. In this example, we can assume that an earlier ACK was
lost and continue to investigate how the sender behaves. Its arrival causes cwnd to
drop from 68 to 66.
     The Linux TCP implementation attempts to revise its estimate of the number
of outstanding packets whenever it receives an ACK. (It also attempts to validate
the congestion window whenever it sends segments, according to the Conges-
tion Window Validation algorithm described previously, but this does not have
an effect here.) When in CWR state, if the outstanding packet count estimate is
reduced for some reason, as it is here after receiving the stretch ACK, cwnd is
adjusted to be the estimate plus 1. Note that this is in addition to its ordinary
behavior in CWR, where it reduces cwnd by 1 for each pair of ACKs received.
Generally, cwnd is reduced by either 1 or 0 for each ACK, and then cwnd is set to
min(flight size + 1, [possibly reduced] cwnd). The CWR state remains operating
until cwnd reaches ssthresh or some other event, such as a loss and retransmission,
occurs.
     Prior to receiving the stretch ACK, at time 8.258, 407,401 + 1400 – 313,601 =
95,200 bytes (68 packets) are outstanding. After the stretch ACK is received, the
number of outstanding packets is reduced to 65 and cwnd is set to 66.
     Because the flight size estimate and cwnd are closely coupled in the CWR
state, and the TCP receiver in this example delays ACKs, the result of a pair of
ACKs arriving is to reduce cwnd by 2 and to liberate one packet. The reason for

      this is as follows: Assume that before the arrival of any ACKs, cwnd is c0 and the
      flight size estimate is f0 = c0. When the first ACK arrives (i.e., for one packet), f 1 =
      f0 - 1 and cwnd is updated to c1 = min(c0 - 1, f 1 + 1) = c0 - 1. When the second ACK
      arrives (for two packets, because of delayed ACKs), f 2 = f 1 – 2 = c0 - 3 and cwnd is set
      to c2 = min(c1, f 2 + 1) = min(c0 - 1,c0 - 2) = c0 - 2. Because the congestion window has
      shrunk by two packets, but three packets have been ACKed during this period, a
      single packet is liberated after the receipt of the second ACK.
            The sender exits the CWR state at time 9.37 when cwnd reaches ssthresh at 49
      packets. TCP now returns to normal behavior and continues in congestion avoid-
      ance (see Figures 16-10 and 16-11).

Figure 16-10   By time 9.369, the sender reverts to normal and sends either one or two packets per
                     received ACK.

          In Figure 16-10, the circled packets indicate where the sender’s state changes
      from CWR back to normal, where the congestion avoidance algorithm takes over.
      Figure 16-11 shows this behavior in more detail.
          The sender continues in congestion avoidance, achieving relatively stable
      throughput until time 17.232. At this point, severe network congestion begins to

Figure 16-11   TCP has completed its recovery and is back in the normal (congestion avoidance) state.
                     It sends one or two packets for each ACK received.

      form, contributing to a large increase in the RTT. In Figure 16-8, this happens at
      sequence number 720000, where the RTT grows to about 6.5s—a more than three-
      fold increase from its previously stable value of about 2s. This effect is common
      with the onset of severe congestion. Eventually, the network congestion is suf-
      ficiently severe so as to cause a packet to be dropped. The sending TCP responds
      with its first retransmission.

16.5.4 Fast Retransmission and SACK Recovery (Event 2)
      At time 21.209, after the dramatic increase in measured RTT, we observe the first
      retransmission. We can see this in more detail by zooming in as shown in Figure 16-12.
      The first retransmission (circled) is for the packet starting with sequence number
      690201, matching the highest ACK received so far (also 690201). It is triggered by
      the receipt of a single duplicate ACK carrying the SACK block [698601,700001].
      Recall that these numbers indicate the sequence number range already received at
      the receiver. In this case, it is a single packet.
           At time 21.209, when the retransmission takes place, the largest sequence
      number sent so far is 761601 + 1400 – 1 = 763000, and cwnd is 52. In conjunction
      with this fast retransmit, ssthresh is reduced from 49 to 26, and TCP enters the
      Recovery state. This TCP remains in Recovery state until it receives a cumula-
      tive ACK for the recovery point: sequence number 763000 (or higher). In addition,

Figure 16-12 The first retransmission (circled) occurs at time 21.209. SACK blocks are used to guide
                   the sender as to what packets to retransmit. Eight retransmissions in total occur
                   between times 21.0 and 22.0.

      cwnd is reduced to (flight size + 1) packets. However, because data has likely been
      lost, determining the flight size is not so straightforward. It is accomplished using
      the following relationship:

            flight size = packets_outstanding + packets_retransmitted - packets_removed

          The first term on the right-hand side represents all the packets sent once by
      the sender and not yet ACKed with the regular TCP cumulative ACK field. The
      second term represents any that have been resent (and not ACKed), and the final
      term represents any packets that are no longer in the network but also have not
      been ACKed by the basic TCP cumulative ACK. The value of packets_removed must
      be estimated because TCP has no reliable way to directly learn it. It represents the
      sum of any (out-of-order) packets cached at the receiver plus any packets that have
      been lost in the network. With SACK, it is possible to learn the number of packets
      cached at the receiver, but the number of lost packets must still be estimated.

            The value of packets_outstanding here is (763,001 – 690,201)/1400 = 72,800/1400
       = 52 and the number of packets cached in the receiver is (700,001 – 698,601)/1400
       = 1400/1400 = 1 (derived from the sequence numbers in the SACK block). With
       FACK enabled, as it is here by default, holes in the receiver inferred by SACK infor-
       mation are considered to be lost. Thus, in this case, TCP estimates that 698,601 –
       690,201 = 8400 (6 packets) have been lost. The flight size is therefore 52 + 1 - (1 + 6)
       = 46 packets, and cwnd is set to 47. While in the Recovery state, TCP reduces cwnd
       by one packet for every two packets it receives, similar to the CWR state. After the
       first retransmission, another seven retransmissions take place, followed by trans-
       mission of new data, based on SACK option data carried in each of the arriving
       ACKs between times 21.2 and 21.7 (see Figure 16-13).
            In this figure, much of the normal Wireshark information has been removed
       to more clearly see the SACK options on each ACK. By looking at the SACK
       sequence numbers (SLE and SRE), we can see that most of the time there are two
       active blocks at the receiver: [698601,700001], which holds one packet, and another
       [702801,763001] (at its largest), that grows to be 43 packets. During the recovery
       period, the general rate-halving algorithm applicable to the CWR and Recovery
       states reduces cwnd by at least one packet for every pair of ACKs received. Because
       each received ACK effectively ACKs one packet in this case (through an increase
       in the SACK block size by one packet), flight size reduces by 1, which would permit
       another packet to be sent. However, because cwnd is also reduced by 1 for every
       other ACK, it takes two ACKs to liberate a new packet. Note how this differs from
       the CWR case. In that case, some ACKs provided acknowledgment for two pack-
       ets, whereas here only one packet is ACKed (SACKed) per arriving ACK. Thus, for
       each of the transmissions and retransmissions shown in the plot, cwnd is reduced
       by 1 after each pair of ACKs has been received. During this recovery period, over-
       all, cwnd shrinks from 47 to 20.
            Most ACKs containing SACK options are duplicate ACKs for sequence num-
       ber 690201 (44 of them), as Wireshark points out. There are five good ACKs that
       contain the SACK blocks [702801,763001] and [698601,700001]. Two more contain
       only the SACK block [702801,763001]. These good ACKs do not take the sender out
       of recovery, because their ACK numbers are all below the sequence number of the
       recovery point at 763000; they are partial ACKs, as discussed earlier.
            TCP recovers from fast retransmit at time 23.301 with the arrival of a good
       ACK equal to a sequence number (765801) larger than the recovery point. At this
       point, cwnd is 20 and ssthresh is 26, meaning TCP is in slow start. By time 23.659,
       after several round trips, cwnd reaches the value 27, TCP is in the normal operat-
       ing state, and the congestion avoidance algorithm takes over. This completes the
       sender’s first fast retransmit recovery period.

16.5.5 Additional Local Congestion and Fast Retransmit Events
       The next four events consist of local congestion, a fast retransmit, and two more
       local congestion episodes. They are very similar to the types of events we have
       seen already, so they are summarized here only briefly.

Figure 16-13 SACK recovery after fast retransmission. Packet 871 contains the first SACK option used on the connection.
                   Subsequent ACKs contain SACK information until packet 950.

         16.5.5.1 CWR Again (Event 3)
         A CWR event due to local congestion occurs at time 30.745. At this point, 1,090,601
         + 1400 – 1,051,401 = 40,600 (29 packets) are outstanding, and cwnd is 31. This should
         allow two additional packets to be injected, but none are, because of local conges-
         tion. In this particular case, cwnd is set to flight size + 1 = 30, and ssthresh is reduced
         to 15. TCP exits the CWR state when cwnd reaches ssthresh. This happens at time
         34.759, after another significant increase in the connection’s RTT.

         16.5.5.2 Second Fast Retransmit (Event 4)
         At time 36.914, there is another fast retransmit when cwnd = 16. Using the basic
         display from Wireshark, such retransmissions are easy to spot (see Figure 16-14).

Figure 16-14   A Linux TCP sender enters the Disorder state upon receiving a duplicate ACK or an ACK with
               SACK information. Packets arriving while in this state trigger transmissions of new data. Subse-
               quent duplicate ACKs (or presence of SACK information) place the sender into the Recovery state
               where retransmissions take place.

           Here, the ACK arriving at time 36.878 (packet 1366) carries the SACK block
      [1117201,1118601] and ACK number 1110201. This places Linux TCP in the Disorder
      state, where arriving packets liberate one packet each (similar to limited transmit)
      of new data. Packet 1367 is the packet liberated in this case.
           With the arrival of the ACK at time 36.912 (packet 1368), containing SACK
      block [1117201,1120001] and a duplicate ACK, TCP enters the Recovery state and
      triggers the fast retransmit at time 36.914 (packet 1369). The highest sequence num-
      ber sent so far is 1132601 + 1400 – 1 = 113400. Recovery is eventually completed
      at time 37.455, with the arrival of the ACK containing sequence number 1134001
      (packet 1391). Note that immediately following this ACK is a window update. For
      bulk data transfers such as the present example, where the receiver’s window is
      large relative to the bandwidth-delay product of the network, such updates are not
      usually of much consequence. When we have interactive traffic, small windows,
      or servers that only occasionally read from the network, these updates can become
      quite important, as we saw in Chapter 15. When the first retransmission takes
      place, ssthresh is reduced from 16 to 8. Eventually, when recovery completes, cwnd
      = 4 and ssthresh = 8. This leaves the sender in slow start because cwnd is smaller
      than ssthresh.

      16.5.5.3 CWR Again (Events 5 and 6)
      After the arrival of the ACK for sequence number 1359401 at time 43.356, TCP
      once again enters the CWR state because of local congestion when it tries to send
      subsequent packets. This ultimately reduces ssthresh to 8 and cwnd becomes 15. A
      second transmission failure, while in the CWR state, brings ssthresh down to 12.
      The CWR state is exited with cwnd = 7 and ssthresh = 8.
          Another round of local congestion at time 59.652 forces TCP into CWR when
      cwnd = 19 and ssthresh = 10. In this case, the CWR state is interrupted by a timeout
      that places TCP into the Loss state. This represents a new type of event for us to
      investigate.

16.5.6 Timeouts, Retransmissions, and Undoing cwnd Changes
      Although TCP keeps a retransmission timer in case fast retransmit is unable to
      repair a loss, we have not yet seen it in operation. This is fortunate, because gener-
      ally when a timeout occurs, the connection is experiencing significant congestion
      and performance problems. In the next portion of the trace, shown in Figure 16-15,
      we see how the sending TCP handles the situation when its retransmission timer
      expires.

      16.5.6.1 First Timeout (Event 7)
      A retransmission occurs at time 62.486 (packet 2157) for sequence number 1773801
      (highlighted in Figure 16-15). Immediately prior to this, there is no evidence of
      duplicate ACKs or SACKs.

Figure 16-15 The sender experiences its first timeout when RTO = 1.57s. In this case, the sender declares the
             timeout to be spurious and undoes the modifications it made to its congestion control state.

             In Figure 16-15, at time 62.486, about 1.58s have elapsed since the last ACK was
         received, but according to Figure 16-8, the estimated RTT at this point is only about
         800ms. Thus, we may conclude this retransmission to be the result of a retransmis-
         sion timer expiration. This places TCP into the Loss state, which ordinarily causes
         a drastic reduction of cwnd and effectively restarts the TCP in slow start. Here,
         TCP sets cwnd = 1 and ssthresh = 5, placing TCP in slow start, as expected. The
         timeout also forces any stored SACK information to be discarded. However, the
         receiver continues to send SACK information, so the sender can still make use of
         new SACK information it receives.

              Note
              TCP is supposed to “forget” its knowledge about received SACK information when
              experiencing a timeout because of the possibility that a receiver may renege on
              SACK information it provided earlier. This is suggested by [RFC2018] because
              of the (obscure) possibility that a receiver may wish to adjust its buffering so
              as to delete out-of-order data it has accumulated. Although not common, such
              behavior is permitted. When a receiver reneges, it is required to include the most

          recently received data blocks in the first SACK block of ACKs generated, even if
          it is discarded. Except for this block, additional blocks must cease to report data
          no longer being held at the receiver.

          Most interestingly here, this congestion action is undone. As discussed earlier,
      the Eifel Response Algorithm can be invoked when TCP believes a retransmission
      timeout to be erroneous. In this case, it is declared erroneous because of evidence
      in the timestamp. The ACK received at time 62.757 for sequence number 1775201
      (packet 2158) carries a TSOPT with TSV of 17152514. However, the retransmission
      has the TSV of 17155274. Because the TSER field in the ACK covering the retrans-
      mitted segment is earlier than the retransmission, the hole the retransmission was
      attempting to fill was not really a hole at all. Instead, the expiration of the retrans-
      mission timer must have been erroneous.
          By declaring the retransmission timer expiration to be erroneous and invok-
      ing an Eifel-like response algorithm, TCP restores cwnd and ssthresh to their for-
      mer values of 10 and immediately shifts to a normal operating state. This activates
      the congestion avoidance algorithm, and TCP continues without much fuss.

      16.5.6.2 Fast Retransmit (Event 8)
      The arrival of a duplicate ACK for sequence number 1789201 carrying SACK block
      [1792001,1793401] at time 67.510 (packet 2179) places TCP into the Disorder state
      once again. The largest sequence number sent so far when this state is entered
      is 1806000. Additional arriving SACKs trigger entry into the Recovery state and
      sending of another fast retransmit at time 67.550 for sequence number 1789201
      (packet 2182). This reduces ssthresh to 5 and cwnd begins shrinking until it also
      reaches 5. Recovery is complete with the arrival of an ACK at time 67.916 contain-
      ing sequence number 1806001 (packet 2197).

      16.5.6.3 CWR Again (Event 9)
      There is another local congestion event at time 77.121 when cwnd = 18. This sets
      ssthresh = 9 and places TCP into the CWR state once again. However, the reduction
      of cwnd in the CWR state this time is interrupted early by a timeout, when cwnd
      has been reduced by only 1, to 8.

      16.5.6.4 Second Timeout (Event 10)
      Another retransmission timeout triggers a retransmission at time 78.515 for
      sequence number 2175601 (not pictured). This sets cwnd = 1; ssthresh is still 9 and
      the retransmitted segment carries the TSOPT TSV value of 17171306. As with
      timeout event 7, this congestion action is also undone, by the arrival of the ACK
      at time 80.093 for sequence number 2179801 (packet 2641) containing the TSOPT
      TSER value of 17169948. When this happens, the flight size estimate is 2,184,001 +
      1400 – 2,179,801 = 5600 bytes (four packets). If cwnd were immediately restored
      to its pre-timeout condition (8), this would allow four packets to be immediately

         injected into the network. Doing so is considered undesirable because it may lead
         to increased changes of dropped packets because of burstiness.
              To prevent this bursty behavior, this Linux TCP implementation has a conges-
         tion window moderation procedure, which limits the maximum number of packets
         generated in response to a single ACK to maxburst, with a value of 3 packets in
         this example. In this case, cwnd is therefore set to (flight size + maxburst) = 4 + 3 =
         7. This regulation is related to the parameter of the same name proposed for TCP
         and evaluated using the NS-2 network simulator. This simulator has been used
         extensively in the exploration and development of new TCP algorithms [NS2].

         16.5.6.5 Timeout and Final Recovery (Event 11)
         At time 88.929 a retransmission timer has expired and a retransmission for
         sequence number 2185401 occurs, as depicted in Figure 16-16.

Figure 16-16 A retransmission timer expires, initiating a timeout-based retransmission that cannot be undone.
             TCP continues in slow start.

             The expiring timer places the sender into slow start with ssthresh = 5. This
         time, TCP is not able to undo the timeout, so cwnd is set to 1 and slow start pro-
         gresses. This can be seen more clearly from the flow trace (see Figure 16-17).

Figure 16-17 In Wireshark, the slow start behavior is apparent after a retransmission timeout. Each
                   arriving ACK liberates two or three packets.

           The retransmission for sequence number 2185401 is highlighted. Following
      the retransmission, we see the typical slow start behavior we saw during the
      beginning of the connection, when each arriving ACK liberates two or three pack-
      ets, depending on how many packets were covered by the ACK. By time 89.434,
      when cwnd has reached ssthresh at 5, TCP continues in congestion avoidance.

16.5.7 Connection Completion
      The final exchange of packets commences with the sender’s transmission of a FIN
      at time 99.757. Following this transmission, 13 ACKs arrive followed by the receiv-
      er’s FIN. The very last packet (a final ACK) is sent at time 100.476. This exchange
      is depicted in Figure 16-18.
           The largest sequence number sent is 2620801 + 640 – 1 = 2621440, equiva-
      lent to the size of the overall transfer, 2.5MB. At time 99.757, (2,619,401 + 1400 –
      2,594,201)/1400 + 1 = 20 packets are outstanding. The arrival of 13 ACKs (7 of
      which ACK two packets each) covers the whole window of (2*7) + (13 - 7) = 20
      packets. Note that the ACK arriving at time 100.474 ACKs the final two packets of
      sizes 1400 and 640 bytes, respectively: 2,621,442 – 2,619,401 = 1400 + 640.
                                                     Section 16.6 Sharing Congestion State            767

Figure 16-18   During the connection closing procedure, the receiver produces 13 pure ACKs to indi-
                    cate that it has received all of the data the sender has produced. The final FIN-ACK
                    exchange completes closure of the other half of the connection. Note that the FIN seg-
                    ments contain valid ACK numbers.

          This extended example illustrates most of the algorithms described so far and
     includes aspects of the basic TCP algorithms (slow start, congestion avoidance),
     selective acknowledgment, rate halving, as well as some newer procedures such
     as spurious RTO detection. We now discuss some modifications and capabilities
     that are less widespread, more speculative, or more recent. The Linux TCP stack
     implements many of these procedures, but not all of them are enabled by default.
     Frequently, a small change using the sysctl program is sufficient to experiment
     with them. More recent versions of the Windows stack (i.e., Windows Vista and
     later) also implement improvements beyond the features discussed so far.

16.6 Sharing Congestion State
     The discussion so far and the example we have just seen have focused on how a
     single TCP connection adapts to congestion along the path. If other connections
     between the same hosts are made later, these subsequent connections typically

      have to establish their own values for ssthresh and cwnd over time as described pre-
      viously. In many cases, subsequent connections could possibly learn of these values
      from earlier connections to the same hosts or from other currently active connec-
      tions to the same hosts. This idea involves sharing the congestion state across mul-
      tiple connections in the same machine. An early description in [RFC2140], entitled
      “TCP Control Block Interdependence,” describes how this might be accomplished.
      This work notes the difference between temporal sharing (new connections share
      information with others that are now CLOSED) and ensemble sharing (new connec-
      tions share state with other active connections).
           In an effort to generalize this idea and extend it to protocols and applica-
      tions other than TCP, [RFC3124] describes the Congestion Manager, which provides
      a local operating system service available to protocol implementations to learn
      information such as path loss rate, estimated congestion, RTT, and so forth to des-
      tination hosts.
           In Linux, this idea is made available in the same subsystem that contains rout-
      ing information and is known as destination metrics, which we saw in Chapter
      15. These metrics are enabled (but they were disabled for the extended example
      by setting the sysctl variable net.ipv4.tcp_no_metrics_save to 1). When
      a TCP connection goes to the CLOSED state, the following information is saved:
      RTT measurements (srtt and rttvar), an estimate of reordering, and the congestion
      control variables cwnd and ssthresh. These are used when new connections to the
      same destination start to help initialize the corresponding measurements.

16.7 TCP Friendliness
      TCP being the dominant transport protocol on the Internet, it is commonplace for
      several TCP connections to be sharing one or more routers along their delivery
      paths. While they do not always share bandwidth equally in such circumstances,
      they do at least react to the dynamics of other TCP connections as they come and
      go over time. This is not guaranteed to be the case, however, when TCP competes
      for bandwidth with other (non-TCP) protocols, or when it competes with a TCP
      using some alternative set of controls on its congestion window.
           To provide a guideline for protocol designers to avoid unfairly competing with
      TCP flows when operating cooperatively on the Internet, researchers have devel-
      oped an equation-based rate control limit that provides a bound of the bandwidth
      used by a conventional TCP connection operating in a particular environment.
      This method is called TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC) [RFC5348][FHPW00]. It
      is designed to provide a sending rate limit based on a combination of connection
      parameters and with environmental factors such as RTT and packet drop rate. It
      also gives a more stable bandwidth utilization profile than conventional TCP, so it
      is expected to be appropriate for streaming applications that use moderately large
      packets (e.g., video transfer). TFRC uses the following equation to determine a
      sending rate:
                                                     Section 16.7 TCP Friendliness   769

                          (          )           (
                   X = s R 2bp 3 + 3 pt RTO 1 + 32 p 2       ) 3bp 8                 [2]

     Here, X is the throughput rate limit (bytes/second), s is the packet size (bytes,
excluding headers), R is the RTT (seconds), p is the number of loss events as a frac-
tion of packets sent [0,1.0], tRTO is the retransmission timeout (seconds), and b is the
maximum number of packets acknowledged by a single ACK. The value of tRTO is
recommended to be 4R, and the recommended value of b is 1.
     The TCP sending rate can be expressed another way, based on how it adjusts
its window in response to receiving a good ACK during congestion avoidance.
Recall from the earlier discussion that standard TCP, when using the congestion
avoidance algorithm, increases cwnd by an additive amount of 1/cwnd for each
arriving good ACK and decreases it by a multiplicative factor of one-half on a loss
event. This is called additive increase/multiplicative decrease (AIMD) congestion con-
trol, and we can produce a generalized AIMD congestion avoidance equation by
replacing the values of 1/cwnd and ½ with variables a and b as follows:

                              cwndt+1 = cwnd t + a / cwndt
                              cwndt+1 = cwndt – b* cwndt

Based on results from [FHPW00], this equation gives TCP the following sending
rate, in packets per RTT:

                                          a (2 − b )
                                    T=       2b                                      [3]
                                              p

     For regular TCP, where a = 1 and b = 0.5, this simplifies to T = 1.2 p , known
as the simplified standard TCP response function. It relates the speed of TCP (regula-
tion of cwnd) to the packet drop rate the TCP experiences, without accounting for
retransmission timeouts. When TCP is not limited by other factors (sender’s or
receiver’s buffers, window scaling, etc.), this relationship governs TCP’s perfor-
mance in benign operating environments.
     Any alteration to TCP’s response function obviously affects the way it (or
another protocol implementing a similar congestion control scheme) competes
with standard TCP. Therefore, new proposed congestion control schemes are typi-
cally analyzed using a measure of relative fairness. Relative fairness gives the ratio
of the speed of the protocol using a modified congestion control scheme relative
to standard TCP, as a function of the packet drop rate. This is a strong indicator of
how fair any such modified schemes are with respect to sharing bandwidth across
a common Internet path.

          Note that understanding these equations is only the first step in creating a
      speed regulation regime that competes fairly with standard TCP. The details of
      implementing TFRC for any particular protocol can be subtle and include how to
      correctly measure the RTT, loss event rate, and packet size. These issues are dis-
      cussed in some detail in [RFC5348].

16.8 TCP in High-Speed Environments
      In high-speed networks with large BDPs (e.g., WANs of 1Gb/s or more), conven-
      tional TCP may not perform well because its window increase algorithm (the con-
      gestion avoidance algorithm, in particular) takes a long time to grow the window
      large enough to saturate the network path. Said another way, TCP can fail to take
      advantage of fast networks even when no congestion is present. This issue arises
      primarily from the fixed additive increase behavior of congestion avoidance. If
      we consider a TCP using 1500-byte packets operating over a 10Gb/s long-distance
      link, some 83,000 segments are required to be outstanding in order to fully uti-
      lize the available bandwidth, assuming no packet drops or errors in five billion
      packets. For an RTT of 100ms, this takes about 1.5 hours to achieve. In order to
      address this deficiency, a number of researchers and developers have explored
      ways to alter TCP in order for it to perform better in such networks, while retain-
      ing a degree of fairness to standard TCP, especially for more common lower-speed
      environments.

16.8.1 HighSpeed TCP (HSTCP) and Limited Slow Start
      The experimental HighSpeed TCP (HSTCP) specifications [RFC3649][RFC3742]
      propose to alter the standard TCP behavior when the congestion window is larger
      than a base value Low_Window, suggested to be 38 MSS-size segments. This value
      corresponds to a packet drop rate of 10 -3 based on the simplified TCP response
      function given previously. This function is linear on a log-log plot of sending rate
      versus packet loss rate, so it is really a power law function.

          Note
          Functions that form a line on a log-log plot are called power law functions. They
          have equations of the form y = axk , meaning log y = log a + k log x (a and k are
          constants). This equation forms a line with slope k on a log-log plot.

           To construct the type of power law function required, we select two points
      and create the equation that describes the line passing between them. Consider
      two such points as (p1, w1) and (P0, W0) where w1 > W0 > 0 and 0 < p1 < P0. On a lin-
      ear plot, this would form a line with slope (w1 - W0)/( p1 - P0), but on a log-log plot
      it forms a line with slope S = (log w1 - log W0)/(log p1 - log P0). Then, based on the
                                    Section 16.8 TCP in High-Speed Environments               771

equation in the Note, we have w = CpS, and we require some point, say (P0, W0), to
determine C. After some algebra, we find that C = P0 -S W0, meaning w = pS P0 -S W0.
     In Figure 16-19, we see a plot of both the conventional TCP response func-
tion and a proposed response function for HSTCP based on the point (P0, W0) =
(.0015, 31) and S = -0.82. Note that for larger packet drop rates (over about .001)
the response functions are the same, so these equations apply only for a certain
maximum value of p. Comparing the two lines, when the packet drop rate is small
enough, HSTCP is allowed to send more aggressively.

Figure 16-19 With HighSpeed TCP, the TCP response function is altered to be more aggressive
             for low packet drop rates and large windows, leading to higher throughputs for
             high bandwidth-delay-product networks. Image from presentation by Sally Floyd to IETF
              TWVWG, Mar. 2003.

   To have TCP achieve this response function, the congestion avoidance proce-
dure is modified to take into account the current size of the window when making
changes. This takes place, as with conventional TCP, upon the arrival of a good
ACK. The response for a good arriving ACK is generalized as follows:

                             cwndt+1 = cwndt + a(cwndt )/cwndt

    When responding to a congestion event (e.g., packet loss, ECN indication), it
responds as follows:

                             cwndt+1 = cwndt - b(cwndt )* cwndt

           Here, a() is the additive increase function and b() is the multiplicative decrease
       function. In this generalization of standard TCP, they are functions of the current
       window size. To achieve the desired response function, we start by generalizing
       from equation [3]:

                                                 a(w)(2 – b(w))
                                                    2b(w)
                                        W0 =
                                                       P0

       This gives:

                                    a(w) = 2P0W02 b(w)/(2 – b(w))

            This relationship does not have a unique solution—that is, there are many
       combinations of a() and b() that satisfy the relationship, even though some of
       them may not be practical or desirable for deployment.
            Additional details of the changes proposed to the congestion avoidance pro-
       cedure for TCP suggested by HSTCP are available in [RFC3649]. A companion
       document [RFC3742] describes how slow start can be modified to help TCP obtain
       a working congestion window in such environments. This is called limited slow
       start and is designed to slow down slow start, so that a TCP operating with large
       windows (thousands or tens of thousands of packets) does not double its window
       in one RTT.
            With limited slow start, a new parameter called max_ssthresh is introduced.
       This value is not the maximum value of ssthresh but instead a threshold for cwnd
       that works as follows: If cwnd <= max_ssthresh, slow start proceeds as normal. If
       max_ssthresh < cwnd <= ssthresh, then cwnd is increased by at most (max_ssthresh/2)
       SMSS per RTT. This is accomplished by modifying the management of cwnd dur-
       ing slow start as follows:

       if (cwnd <= max_ssthresh) {
             cwnd = cwnd + SMSS       (regular slow start)
       } else {
             K = int(cwnd / (0.5 * max_ssthresh))
             cwnd = cwnd + int((1/K)*SMSS)              (limited slow start)
       }

           A suggested possible initial value for max_ssthresh is 100 packets, or 100*SMSS
       in bytes.

16.8.2 Binary Increase Congestion Control (BIC and CUBIC)
       HSTCP is one of several proposals for modifying TCP to provide higher through-
       put for large BDP networks. While it considers throughput and fairness with
       respect to conventional TCPs in similar circumstances, and elects to be more
                                Section 16.8 TCP in High-Speed Environments       773

aggressive than standard TCP under certain circumstances, it does not attempt
to directly control what happens when HSTCP connections with differing RTTs
compete with each other (called “RTT fairness”). This was studied for standard
TCP some years back, revealing that TCPs with shorter RTTs obtain a larger share
of the bandwidth on shared links as compared to those having larger RTTs, when
using the same packet size and ACK strategy [F91]. For TCPs that increase cwnd
as a function of its size (so-called bandwidth-scalable TCPs), this unfairness can be
even more severe. Whether RTT fairness should be considered desirable is sub-
ject to debate. Although RTT fairness would seem attractive from first principles,
connections with larger RTTs are likely to be using more network resources (e.g.,
passing through more routers), so it may be reasonable for them to receive some-
what less throughput. In any case, knowing just how RTT (un)fairness behaves is
a driving factor behind the popular TCP variants we explore next.

16.8.2.1 BIC-TCP
In an effort to create a scalable TCP and deal with the issue of RTT fairness, BIC-
TCP (formerly called BI-TCP) [XHR04] was developed and deployed in Linux ker-
nels starting with version 2.6.8. The main goal of BIC TCP is to provide linear RTT
fairness even though congestion windows may be quite large (which is required
to use high-bandwidth links). Linear RTT fairness means that connections receive
a bandwidth share inversely proportional to their RTTs, rather than some more
complicated or unknown function.
     The approach modifies a standard TCP sender with two algorithms: binary
search increase and additive increase. These algorithms are invoked after a conges-
tion indication (e.g., packet loss), but only one of the algorithms is in operation at
any given point in time. The binary search increase algorithm operates as follows:
The current minimum window is the last point at which the connection experienced
no packet loss during an entire RTT. The maximum window is the window size at
which the connection last experienced loss, if known. The desired window lies
somewhere between the two. Using a binary search technique, BIC-TCP selects a
trial window in the midpoint of these two values and tries again recursively. If this
point shows continued packet loss, it becomes the new maximum and the process
repeats. If not, it becomes the new minimum and the process repeats. The process
terminates when the difference between the minimum and maximum windows is
less than a predefined threshold called the minimum increment, or Smin.
     The algorithm tends to find the desirable window, also called the saturation
point, in a logarithmic number of trials, whereas a standard TCP would require
a linear number (half of the difference in window sizes, on average). Thus, this
approach makes BIC-TCP more aggressive than standard TCP during certain
periods of operation, but this is desired in order to take advantage of high-speed
environments without unwanted delay. The protocol is unusual, relative to other
proposals, because its increase function is concave at some points—that is, its
increase gets smaller as it gets closer to the saturation point. Most other algorithms
use large change increments nearest the saturation point.

           The additive increase algorithm works as follows: When using binary search
      increase, the situation can arise where the distance from the current window size
      to the midpoint (in the sense of the binary search described previously) is large.
      Increasing the window to the midpoint in one RTT may be ill advised because of
      the potential for injecting large packet bursts into the network. This is prevented
      by the additive increase algorithm, which is invoked when the distance to the
      midpoint from the current window is more than some amount Smax. When this
      happens, the increment is limited to Smax per RTT, called window clamping. Once the
      midpoint is closer than Smax to the trial window, binary search increase takes over.
      Overall, upon detection of a loss, the window is reduced by a multiplicative factor
      β, and its growth starts again with additive increase and switches to binary search
      once the desired increase amount is less than Smax. The authors call the combined
      algorithms binary increase, or BI.
           When the window grows beyond the current maximum, or no maximum
      is yet known because no loss event has occurred, it must be established. This is
      accomplished by a procedure known as max probing. The purpose of max probing
      is to use bandwidth when it becomes available. It proceeds in a way symmetric to
      the additive increase and binary increase algorithms. It starts in small initial incre-
      ments, followed by larger increments if no congestion is indicated. The approach
      shows good stability because small changes are made near the saturation point,
      where the network is believed to be operating near its greatest capacity.
           Linux (kernels 2.6.8 through 2.6.17) includes an implementation of BIC-
      TCP that is enabled by default. Four sysctl parameters control its operation:
      net.ipv4.tcp_bic, net.ipv4.tcp_bic_beta, net.ipv4.tcp_bic_low_
      window, and net.ipv4.tcp_bic_fast_convergence. The first Boolean vari-
      able controls whether BIC is used (as opposed to the conventional fast retransmit/
      recovery procedures). The next contains a scaling factor for cwnd to determine
      Smax (default 819). The next parameter controls the minimum size of the conges-
      tion window before the BIC-TCP control algorithms take over. Its default value
      is 14, meaning that for small window values standard TCP congestion control is
      used. The last parameter is a flag, enabled by default. When set, it affects the way
      the new maximum and target windows are selected when the binary increase
      algorithm is in a downward trend. During a window reduction, the new maxi-
      mum and minimum windows are set to the current and scaled (down by a factor
      of beta) values of cwnd, respectively. If fast convergence is enabled and the value
      of the new maximum is less than its previous value before it was set to cwnd, the
      value of the maximum window is further reduced between the average of it and
      the minimum window. After this, whether or not fast convergence is enabled, the
      target window is the average of the maximum and minimum values. This helps to
      achieve even bandwidth sharing more quickly when multiple BIC-TCP flows are
      sharing the same router.
                               Section 16.8 TCP in High-Speed Environments       775

16.8.2.2 CUBIC
The authors of BIC-TCP revised their basic algorithms to form a new control algo-
rithm called CUBIC [HRX08]. It has been the default congestion control algorithm
used in Linux TCP since kernel version 2.6.18. It addresses concerns raised that
BIC-TCP may be too aggressive under some circumstances. It also simplifies the
window growth procedures. Instead of using a threshold (Smax) to decide when to
invoke the binary search increase versus additive increase, an odd-degree polyno-
mial function, in particular a cubic function, is used instead to control the window
increase function. Cubic functions can have both convex and concave portions,
meaning that they can grow more slowly in some portions (concave) and more
quickly in others (convex). Until BIC and CUBIC, virtually all of the TCP literature
advocated convex window growth functions. The specific window growth func-
tion, used by CUBIC to set cwnd, is as follows:

                              W(t) = C(t – K) 3 + Wmax

In this equation, W(t) is the window at time t. C is a constant parameter (default
0.4), t is the elapsed time in seconds since the last window reduction, and K is the
time period the function takes to increase W to Wmax when there is no further loss
event. Wmax is the last window size prior to the last window adjustment. K can be
calculated as follows:

                                         βWmax
                                   K=3
                                          C

where β is the multiplicative decrease constant (default 0.2). An illustration of the
CUBIC window growth function for K = 2.71, Wmax = 10, and C = 0.4 on the interval
t = [0, 5] is shown in Figure 16-20.
     This figure illustrates how the CUBIC window growth function contains both
a concave portion and convex portion. When a fast retransmit occurs, Wmax is set to
cwnd, and new values of cwnd and ssthresh are set to β*cwnd. CUBIC uses a default
value of 0.8 for β. The value W(t + RTT) gives the next target congestion win-
dow value. When an additional ACK arrives during congestion avoidance, cwnd is
increased by (W(t + RTT) - cwnd)/cwnd.
     It is worth noting that having t be the amount of elapsed time since the last
window reduction event helps to ensure RTT fairness. Instead of changing the
window by some fixed amount when ACKs arrive, the window change amount is
a function of the elapsed time since the last window change. This decouples the
window change operations from the particular pattern of ACK arrivals.
     In addition to the cubic operating region, CUBIC also has a “TCP-friendly”
region that operates when the window is small to ensure that CUBIC is not

                                                                                 :W
                                                                        : W ? ?? W?±????? ??????

                                          6WHDG\?6WDWH
                                            %HKDYLRU
                                          : W ???:PD[

                              :PD[

              :LQGRZ
               6L]H

                                                                             0D[?3URELQJ
                                                                              %HKDYLRU
                                                                             : W ?!?:PD[

                                                           7LPH? W

Figure 16-20   The CUBIC window growth function is a cubic function of t. It has a concave por-
                     tion in the area where W(t) < Wmax. In this region, CUBIC searches for the saturation
                     point by growing cwnd with decreasing aggressiveness. After Wmax is reached, the
                     growth function becomes convex, where it searches by growing cwnd with increasing
                     aggressiveness.

      penalized relative to regular TCP. More specifically, the window size of standard
      TCP in terms of the elapsed time t, Wtcp (t), is given by

                                                      t (1 − β )
                                     Wtcp (t ) = 3                 + Wmaxβ
                                                     RTT ( 1 + β )

      So if cwnd is less than Wtcp (t) when an ACK arrives during congestion avoidance,
      CUBIC sets cwnd = Wtcp (t). This ensures TCP friendliness in common low- to mod-
      erate-speed networks, where CUBIC would otherwise be disadvantaged.
           As mentioned earlier, CUBIC has been the default congestion control algorithm
      for Linux kernels since 2.6.18. Since kernel version 2.6.13, however, Linux supports
      pluggable congestion avoidance modules [P07], allowing the user to pick which algo-
      rithm to use. The variable net.ipv4.tcp_congestion_control contains the
      current default congestion control algorithm (default: cubic). The variable net.
      ipv4.tcp_available_congestion_control contains the congestion control
      algorithms loaded on the system (in general, additional ones can be loaded as
      kernel modules). The variable net.ipv4.tcp_allowed_congestion_con-
      trol contains those algorithms permitted for use by applications (either selected
      specifically or by default). The default supports CUBIC and Reno.
                                       Section 16.9 Delay-Based Congestion Control     777

16.9 Delay-Based Congestion Control
      The approaches to congestion control we have seen so far are usually triggered by
      packet loss, detected using some combination of ACKs or SACKs, ECN (if avail-
      able), and expiration of a retransmission timer. ECN (see Section 16.11) allows a
      sending TCP to be informed about congestion prior to the need for the network
      to drop packets, but this requires participation from routers within the network
      that may not be available. However, even without ECN it is still possible to try to
      determine from a host whether congestion is about to occur within the network.
      One clue that congestion may be forming is an increase in measured RTT as the
      sender injects more packets into the network. We saw this situation in Figure 16-8,
      where additional packets were being queued rather than delivered, contributing
      to a higher measured RTT (until packets were ultimately discarded). Several con-
      gestion control techniques depend on this observation. They are called delay-based
      congestion control algorithms, as opposed to the loss-based congestion control
      algorithms we have seen so far.

16.9.1 Vegas
      In 1994, TCP Vegas was introduced [BP95]. It was the first delay-based congestion
      control approach for TCP published and tested by the community of TCP devel-
      opers. Vegas operates by estimating the amount of data it expects to transfer in a
      certain amount of time and comparing this with the amount of data it is actually
      able to transfer. If the requisite amount of data is not transferred, it is likely to
      be held up in a router queue along the path. If this condition persists, the Vegas
      sender slows down. This is in contrast to the standard TCP approach, which forces
      a packet drop to occur in order to determine the point at which the network is
      congested.
          While in its congestion avoidance phase, during each RTT, Vegas measures
      the amount of data transferred and divides this number by the minimum delay
      observed across the connection. It maintains two thresholds, α and β (where α
      < β). When the difference in expected throughput (window size divided by the
      smallest RTT observed) versus achieved throughput is less than α, the conges-
      tion window is increased; when it is greater than β, the congestion window is
      decreased. Otherwise, it is left as is. All changes to the congestion window are
      linear, meaning the scheme is an additive increase/additive decrease (AIAD) conges-
      tion control scheme.
          The authors describe α and β in terms of buffer utilization at a bottleneck link.
      The smallest values of interest are 1 for α and 3 for β. The reasoning behind these
      values is as follows: At least one packet buffer should be occupied in the network
      path (i.e., at the queue in the router incident with the minimum-bandwidth link
      on the path) to keep the network busy. If extra bandwidth becomes available, occu-
      pying two additional buffers (up to 3, the value for α) obviates the need to wait
      an extra RTT in order to inject more, which would be required if Vegas tried to

      maintain only one buffer full. Furthermore, having the region (β–α) as the oper-
      ating range leaves some room for minor changes in throughput without causing
      an immediate change in the window, a form of damping that aims to reduce rate
      oscillations.
           With a slight modification, this approach can also be applied to the slow start
      period. Here, increasing cwnd by 1 for each good ACK is allowed only every other
      RTT. For those RTTs when it is not increased, a measurement is made to ensure
      that throughput is increasing. If not, the sender switches to the Vegas congestion
      avoidance scheme.
           Under certain circumstances, Vegas can be “fooled” into believing that the
      forward-direction delay is higher than it really is. This happens when there is
      significant congestion in the reverse direction (recall that the paths in the two
      directions of a TCP connection may be different and have different states of con-
      gestion). In such cases, packets (ACKs) returning to the sending TCP are delayed,
      even though the sender is not really contributing to the (reverse-path) congestion.
      This causes Vegas to reduce the congestion window even though such an adjust-
      ment is not really necessary. This is a potential pitfall for most techniques based
      on measuring RTT as a basis for congestion control decisions. Indeed, significant
      traffic in the reverse direction can cause the ACK clock (Figure 16-1) to be signifi-
      cantly perturbed [M92].
           Vegas is fair relative to other Vegas TCPs sharing the same path because each
      pushes the network to hold only a minimal amount of data. However, Vegas and
      standard TCP flows do not share paths equally. A standard TCP sender tends
      to fill queues in the network, whereas Vegas tends to keep them nearly empty.
      Consequently, as the standard sender injects more packets, the Vegas sender sees
      increased delay and slows down. Ultimately, this leads to an unfair bias in favor
      of the standard TCP. Vegas is supported by Linux but not enabled by default. For
      kernels prior to 2.6.13, the Boolean sysctl variable net.ipv4.tcp_vegas_
      cong_avoid determines whether it is used (default 0). The variables net.ipv4.
      tcp_vegas_alpha (default 2) and net.ipv4.tcp_vegas_beta (default
      6) correspond to the alpha and beta described previously but are expressed in
      half-packet units (i.e., 6 corresponds to 3 packets). The variable net.ipv4.
      tcp_vegas_gamma (default 2) configures how many half-packets Vegas should
      attempt to keep outstanding during slow start. For kernels after 2.6.13, Vegas must
      be loaded as a separate kernel module and enabled by setting net.ipv4.tcp_
      congestion_control to vegas.

16.9.2 FAST
      FAST TCP was developed with particular attention to operations in high-speed
      environments with large bandwidth-delay products [WJLH06]. Similar to Vegas
      in spirit, it adjusts the window based on the difference between an expected
      throughput rate and an experienced rate. It differs from Vegas by adjusting the
      window based not only on the window size, but also on the difference between
                                       Section 16.9 Delay-Based Congestion Control    779

      the current and expected performance. It updates the sending rate every other
      RTT using a rate-pacing technique. If the measured delay is significantly below
      a threshold, the window is updated aggressively followed by a period when the
      increase is less aggressive. When the delay increases, the reverse takes place. FAST
      differs from the other approaches we have discussed because it is the subject of
      several patents and is being commercialized independently. It has received some-
      what less scrutiny from the research community, but an independent evaluation
      [S09] has shown it to have good stability and fairness properties.

16.9.3 TCP Westwood and Westwood+
      TCP Westwood (TCPW) and TCP Westwood+ (TCPW+) aim at handling large band-
      width-delay-product paths by modifying a conventional TCP NewReno sender.
      TCPW+ is a correction to the original TCPW algorithm, so we will just refer to
      either as TCPW. In TCPW, the sender’s eligible rate estimate (ERE) is an estimate of
      the bandwidth available on the connection. It is continuously computed in a fash-
      ion somewhat similar to Vegas (based upon the difference between an expected
      and an achieved rate), but with a variable measurement interval for the rates
      based on the dynamics of ACK arrivals. When congestion is low, the measurement
      interval is small, and vice versa. When a packet loss is detected, instead of reduc-
      ing cwnd by half, TCPW computes an estimated BDP (ERE times the minimum
      RTT observed) and uses this as the new value for ssthresh. Agile probing [WYSG05]
      adaptively and repeatedly sets ssthresh when a connection would otherwise oper-
      ate in slow start. This causes cwnd to grow exponentially in cases where ssthresh
      has been increased (by initiating slow start). Westwood can be enabled in Linux
      kernels after 2.6.13 by loading a TCPW module and setting net.ipv4.tcp_con-
      gestion_control to westwood.

16.9.4 Compound TCP
      Starting with Windows Vista, it is possible to choose which congestion control
      procedure (“provider”) TCP should use, in a way similar to Linux’s pluggable
      congestion avoidance modules. One such option (but not the default, except for
      Windows Server 2008) is called Compound TCP (CTCP) [TSZS06]. CTCP makes
      window adjustments based upon packet loss, but also based on measured delays.
      In some sense it is a combination of standard TCP and Vegas, but with the scal-
      ability features of HSTCP.
           The authors begin by recounting a number of results shown in the Vegas and
      FAST research that suggest that delay-based congestion control schemes tend to
      have better utilization, less self-induced packet loss, faster convergence (to the
      correct operating point), plus better RTT fairness and stabilization. However, as
      mentioned previously, delay-based approaches tend to lose bandwidth when com-
      peting with loss-based congestion control approaches. CTCP attempts to address
      this situation by combining a delay-based approach with a loss-based approach.

      To do this, CTCP introduces a new window control variable called dwnd (the
      “delay window”). The usable window W then becomes

                                 W = min(cwnd + dwnd, awnd)

      The handling of cwnd is similar to that of standard TCP, but the addition of dwnd
      may allow additional packets to be sent if the delay conditions are appropriate.
      When ACKs arrive during congestion avoidance, cwnd is updated as follows:

                                cwnd = cwnd + 1/(cwnd + dwnd)

           The management of dwnd is based on Vegas and is nonzero only during con-
      gestion avoidance (CTCP uses conventional slow start). As a connection operates,
      the minimum RTT measured is maintained in the variable baseRTT. Then, the dif-
      ference in expected data outstanding versus the actual amount, diff, is computed
      as follows: diff = W*(1 - (baseRTT/RTT)), where RTT is the estimated (smoothed)
      RTT estimate. The value of diff estimates the number of packets (or bytes) queued
      in the network. CTCP, like most delay-based schemes, attempts to keep diff at a
      certain threshold, called γ, in order to ensure that the network remains utilized
      but not congested. Given this goal, the control process for dwnd is then expressed
      as follows:

                                  dwnd(t) + (α * win(t)k – 1)+, if diff < γ
                   dwnd(t + 1) =
                                 {     (dwnd(t) – ζ * diff)+, if diff ≥ γ
                                 (win(t) * (1 – β) – cwnd/2)+, if loss detected

      where (x)+ means max(x, 0). Note that dwnd can never be negative. Rather, it may
      be zero, in which case CTCP behaves like standard TCP.
           In the first case, where the network may be underutilized, CTCP grows dwnd
      according to the polynomial α * win(t) k. This is a form of binomial increase and
      accounts for the way CTCP can be made more aggressive (similar to HSTCP) when
      the buffer occupancy is estimated to be less than γ. In the second case, where the
      buffer occupancy appears to be growing beyond the desired threshold γ, the con-
      stant ζ dictates how quickly the delay-based component should be reduced (but
      recall that dwnd is always added to cwnd). This is what contributes to CTCP’s RTT
      and TCP fairness. When loss is detected, dwnd has its own multiplicative decrease
      factor β applied.
           As can be seen, CTCP can be tuned using the parameters k, α, β, γ, and ζ. The
      value of k affects the level of aggressiveness. A value of about 0.8 was desired to
      be similar to HSTCP, but 0.75 was chosen for implementation reasons. The values
      of α and β affect smoothness and responsiveness. The default values are 0.125 and
      0.5, respectively. For γ, the authors suggest a default value of 30 packets based on
      empirical evaluation. If this value is too small, there may not be enough packets
                                                        Section 16.10 Buffer Bloat   781

     outstanding to obtain good delay measurements. Conversely, values that are too
     large could result in undesirable persistent congestion.
          CTCP is relatively new, so further experimentation and evaluation will no
     doubt be performed to see how well and fairly it competes with standard TCP,
     and how well it is able to adapt to significant changes in available bandwidth. In a
     simulation study, the author of [W08] noted that CTCP can perform poorly when
     network buffers are small (i.e., smaller than γ). They also suggest that CTCP can
     fall victim to some of the problems with Vegas, including rerouting (adapting to
     new paths with different delays) and persistent congestion. Finally, they observe
     that if many CTCP flows, each trying to keep γ packets in flight, share the same
     bottleneck link, performance can be poor.
          As mentioned previously, CTCP is not enabled by default on most versions of
     Windows. However, the following command can be used to select CTCP as the
     congestion provider:

     C:\> netsh interface tcp set global congestionprovider=ctcp

     It can be disabled by selecting a different provider (or none). CTCP has also been
     ported to Linux as a pluggable congestion avoidance module but is not included
     by default.

16.10 Buffer Bloat
     Although memory has traditionally been expensive (and remains so for high-
     end routers), it is now commonplace to find commodity networking equipment
     that contains a significant amount of memory, potentially multiple megabytes of
     packet buffers. Perhaps ironically, this large amount of memory (as compared to
     traditional networking devices) can actually lead to degraded performance for
     protocols such as TCP. This problem has been termed buffer bloat [G11][DHGS07].
     It relates to high amounts of latency introduced by queuing delay, primarily at the
     uplink side of residential gateways and access points in homes and small offices.
     The standard TCP congestion control algorithms, which tend to keep buffers full
     at bottleneck links, do not operate well when a large amount of buffering occurs
     between the sender and receiver because the congestion indicator (a packet drop)
     takes a long time to be delivered to a sender.
          In [KWNP10], the authors find that upload bandwidth in the United States
     over cable and DSL ranges from about 256Kb/s to 4Mb/s. They also inferred buf-
     fer sizing on commodity routers in the range from 16KB to 256KB. Figure 16-21
     shows how latency relates to data rate for several buffer sizes to help provide a
     perspective on these findings.
          In this figure, the log-log graph displays the amount of latency experienced
     by data required to queue for various buffer sizes (1KB–2MB). Residential Internet
     upload bandwidth rates (typically 250Kb/s to 10Mb/s) can lead to latencies in the

Figure 16-21   The log-log plot shows the latency due to queuing delay experienced by data in fully
                     congested queues of various sizes. When large buffers remain full (“buffer bloat”),
                     interactive applications can experience unacceptable latencies in the multiple-second
                     range.

      multiple-second range if buffers are sized to be a few hundred kilobytes or more.
      Interactive applications generally require one-way delays to be below 150ms to
      provide a good quality of experience to users [G114]. Thus, if buffers remain filled
      to capacity because of one or more large competing uploads (e.g., BitTorrent file
      sharing), interactive applications can be adversely affected.
           Buffer bloat is not a problem in all networking equipment. Indeed, the primary
      concern appears to be in overbuffered end-user access devices. There are mul-
      tiple potential ways to deal with the issue, including protocol modifications (e.g.,
      delay-based congestion control such as Vegas, but it may be negatively affected by
      high jitter [DHGS07]), dynamic buffer sizing at the access devices (suggested in
      [KWNP10]), or a combination of the two. We next turn to a combination approach
      that may help the buffer bloat problem but also has a number of other benefits.

16.11 Active Queue Management and ECN
      The discussion of TCP’s congestion response so far has assumed that the only way
      a TCP infers that congestion is happening is observation of packet drops. In par-
      ticular, routers (the things that are mostly likely to become congested) do not ordi-
      narily help inform the TCP at each host that congestion is imminent. Instead, they
      simply drop arriving packets when no more buffer space is available (called “drop
      tail”) and send packets that have already arrived in a first-in-first-out (FIFO) man-
      ner. When Internet routers are passive like this (that is, they simply discard packets
                             Section 16.11 Active Queue Management and ECN         783

when overloaded and provide no feedback regarding their congestion state), there
is little a TCP can do other than react after the fact. If, however, these routers had
a way to more actively manage their queues (i.e., by using a more sophisticated
scheduling and buffer management policy than FIFO/drop tail), perhaps the situ-
ation could be improved. If they could also signal their congestion state to TCP
endpoints, so much the better.
      Routers that apply scheduling and buffer management policies other than
FIFO/drop tail are usually said to be active, and the corresponding methods they
use to manage their queues are called active queue management (AQM) mechanisms.
The authors of [RFC2309] provide a discussion of the potential benefits of AQM.
Although AQM can be useful independently, it becomes more useful when rout-
ers and switches implementing AQM have a common method for conveying their
status to the end systems. For TCP, this is described in [RFC3168] and extended
with additional security in an experimental specification [RFC3540]. These RFCs
describe Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN), which is a way for routers to
mark packets (by ensuring both of the ECN bits in the IP header are set) to indicate
the onset of congestion.
      Random Early Detection (RED) gateways [FJ93] are one mechanism suggested
as being capable of detecting the onset of congestion and controlling the mark-
ing of packets. These gateways implement a queue management discipline that
measures the average queue occupancy over time. If the occupancy exceeds the
minimum (called minthresh) and is less than the maximum (called maxthresh), a
packet is marked with an increasing probability. If the average queue occupancy
exceeds maxthresh, packets are marked with a configurable maximum probability
(called MaxP), which could be 1.0. RED can also be configured to drop packets
instead of marking them.

    Note
    The RED algorithm is the basis for a number of variants (e.g., Cisco’s WRED,
    which uses different RED instances based on IP DSCP or precedence values)
    that are supported on many routers and switches.

    When received by a TCP, a congestion mark indicates that the packet has passed
through a congested router. Of course, it is the sender (rather than the receiver) that
really needs this information in order to react by slowing down. Thus, the receiver
echoes this indication back to the sender in a series of ACK packets.
    The ECN mechanism operates partially at the IP layer and so is potentially
applicable to transport protocols other than TCP, although most of the work on
ECN has been with TCP, and it is what we discuss here. When an ECN-capable
router experiencing persistent congestion receives an IP packet, it looks in the
IP header for an ECN-Capable Transport (ECT) indication (currently defined as
either of the two ECN bits in the IP header being set). If set, the transport protocol
responsible for sending the packet understands ECN. At this point, the router sets

      a Congestion Experienced indication in the IP header (by setting both ECN bits to 1)
      and forwards the datagram. Routers are discouraged from setting a CE indication
      when congestion does not appear to be persistent (e.g., upon a single recent packet
      drop due to queue overrun) because the transport protocol is supposed to react
      given even a single CE indication.
           The TCP receiver observing an incoming data packet with a CE set is obliged
      to return this indication to the sender (there is an experimental extension to add
      ECN to SYN + ACK segments as well [RFC5562]). Because the receiver normally
      returns information to the sender by using (unreliable) ACK packets, there is a
      significant chance that the congestion indicator could be lost. For this reason, TCP
      implements a small reliability-enhancing protocol for carrying the indication back
      to the sender. Upon receiving an incoming packet with CE set, the TCP receiver sets
      the ECN-Echo bit field in each ACK packet it sends until receiving a CWR bit field
      set to 1 from the TCP sender in a subsequent data packet. The CWR bit field being
      set indicates that the congestion window (i.e., sending rate) has been reduced.

          Note
          Although RED and ECN have been known for nearly two decades, they have not
          seen widespread Internet deployment. A variety of reasons have been asserted
          as to why (e.g., difficulty in setting RED parameters, a perception of limited ben-
          efits). In 2005, a “reexamination” of ECN [K05] pointed out that using ECN on
          only data packets limits its benefits substantially. An experimental extension
          [RFC5562] defines the use of ECN in SYN + ACK packets with the possibility of
          greatly increasing the utility of ECN for certain workloads (e.g., Web traffic).

          A sending TCP receiving an ECN-Echo indicator in an ACK reacts the same
      way it would when detecting a single packet drop by adjusting cwnd, and it also
      arranges to set the CWR bit field in a subsequent data packet. The prescribed con-
      gestion response of the fast retransmit/recovery algorithms is invoked (of course,
      without the packet retransmission), causing the TCP to slow down prior to suffer-
      ing packet drops. Note that the TCP should not overreach; in particular, it should
      not react more than once for the same window of data. Doing so would overly
      penalize an ECN TCP relative to others.
          In Windows Vista and later, ECN needs to be enabled to be used:

      C:\> netsh int tcp set global ecncapability=enabled

           In Linux, ECN is enabled if the Boolean sysctl variable net.ipv4.tcp_ecn
      is nonzero. The default varies based on which Linux distribution is used, with
      off being most common. On Mac OS 10.5 and later, the variables net.inet.tcp.
      ecn_initiate_out and net.inet.tcp.ecn_negotiate_in control whether
      ECN is enabled for outgoing traffic and for incoming traffic with ECN flags set,
      respectively. Of course, without cooperation from routers or switches, the utility
                            Section 16.12 Attacks Involving TCP Congestion Control          785

     of ECN is limited in any case. Only time will tell if the vision for AQM will ever be
     fully realized in the global Internet.

         Note
         RED and ECN have been used successfully in a radically different operating envi-
         ronment from that for which they were designed. Microsoft and Stanford have
         developed Data Center TCP (DCTCP) [A10], which uses RED implemented in
         layer 2 switches with simplified parameters to mark packets when instantaneous
         congestion is experienced. They also modify the TCP receiver behavior to set
         ECN-Echo in ACKs only when the last received packet contains a CE mark. They
         report a 90% reduction in buffer occupancy for comparable TCP throughput,
         allowing a tenfold increase in background traffic to be supported.

16.12 Attacks Involving TCP Congestion Control
     We have seen already how TCP can be attacked by generating packets that cause
     TCP’s connection state machine to terminate the connection. TCP can also be
     attacked (or at least induced to behave in peculiar ways) when operating in the
     ESTABLISHED state. Most attacks on TCP congestion control attempt to force a
     TCP to send faster or slower than it would under ordinary circumstances.
          Perhaps the earliest attack involves the fabrication of ICMPv4 Source Quench
     messages. When these are delivered to a host running TCP, any connection to the
     IP address contained in the offending datagram inside the ICMP message slows
     down. While this may have been a vulnerability some years back, using Source
     Quench messages for congestion control has been deprecated for use by routers
     since about 1995 (via [RFC1812], Section 5.3.6). On the other hand, for end hosts,
     [RFC1122] stated that a TCP must react to a Source Quench by slowing down.
     Combining these two facts, the simplest solution is to block ICMP Source Quench
     traffic at the router or host, and this is now common.
          A more sophisticated and more recent set of attacks have been considered
     by looking at misbehaving receivers [SCWA99]. The authors describe three types of
     attacks that can cause a TCP sender to inject data at a rate faster than intended.
     Such attacks could be used, for example, to cause a Web client to have an unfair
     advantage over competing clients. The attacks are named ACK division, DupACK
     spoofing, and Optimistic ACKing and are implemented in a TCP variant the authors
     (jokingly) call “TCP Daytona.”
          ACK division operates by producing more than one ACK for the range of
     bytes being acknowledged. Because the TCP congestion control typically operates
     based on the arrival of ACK packets (rather than the ACK field contained in the
     ACK itself), a sending TCP can be induced to increase cwnd faster than it would
     otherwise. This problem can be mitigated by basing the congestion control com-
     putations on the amount of data acknowledged rather than the arrival of a packet,
     as is done with ABC.

           DupACK spoofing causes a sender to increase its congestion window during
      fast recovery. Recall from the previous discussion that during standard fast recov-
      ery, cwnd is incremented for each duplicate ACK received. The attack involves cre-
      ating extra duplicate ACKs that cause this to happen more quickly than intended.
      This attack is more difficult to defend against, because there is no clean way to
      map received duplicate ACKs to the segments they acknowledge (a nonce, an asso-
      ciated value that changes with time, which we discuss in Chapter 18, would solve
      this problem). While the Timestamps option relates to this problem, it is an option
      and can be disabled on a per-connection basis. The best approach to addressing
      this problem appears to be modification of the sender side to limit the amount of
      outstanding data during recovery.
           Optimistic ACKing involves producing ACKs for segments that have not yet
      arrived. Because TCP’s congestion control computations are based on end-to-end
      RTTs, ACKing data that has not yet arrived causes the sender to react faster than
      it would because it is fooled into believing the actual RTT is smaller. Furthermore,
      there is little penalty for doing this, as a sender typically ignores ACKs for data it
      has not yet sent. While this approach does not preserve data reliability at the TCP
      layer as the other attacks do (i.e., ACKed data could still be lost), it is frequently
      the case (e.g., in HTTP/1.1) that missing data can be reconstructed by an applica-
      tion- or session-layer protocol. The authors describe a cumulative nonce that can
      address this problem and a way to alter the sizes of sent segments over time to
      better match up ACKs with sent segments. When the ACKs do not correspond,
      the sender can take action.
           The problems described for misbehaving receivers have also received atten-
      tion with respect to ECN by some of the same authors. Recall that with AQM using
      ECN, the TCP receiver returns the ECN indication to the sender in an ACK. The
      sender is then supposed to respond by slowing down. If the receiver fails to return
      the ECN indications to the sender (or routers in the network clear the indicators),
      the sender would never be informed of congestion and would not slow down. In
      [RFC3540], the authors describe an experimental way to use the ECT bit field of
      the ECN field (2 bits) of an IP packet as a form of nonce. The sender places a ran-
      dom binary value in the field, and the receiver returns a 1-bit sum (an XOR opera-
      tion) of the values of this field over time. When generating an ACK, the receiver
      places the sum bit 7 of the TCP header (currently reserved as zero). A misbehaving
      receiver has a 50/50 chance of guessing the sum. Because each packet represents
      an independent trial and a successful misbehaving receiver must have every sum
      correct, its chance of doing so is 1/2k for k packets (vanishingly small for a connec-
      tion of any reasonable duration).

16.13 Summary
      TCP was designed as the primary reliable transport protocol for the Internet.
      Although its initial design included a flow control capability, used to cause a
                                                     Section 16.13 Summary       787

sender to slow down when a receiver could not keep up, no provision was made
initially for preventing the sender from overwhelming the network in between. In
the late 1980s, the slow start and congestion avoidance algorithms were developed
to regulate a TCP sender’s aggressiveness so as to avoid losing packets because
of congestion in the network. These algorithms depend on using an implicit sig-
nal, packet loss, and an indicator of congestion. They are triggered when loss is
detected, either by the fast retransmit algorithm or by retransmission timeouts.
     Slow start and congestion avoidance regulate a sender’s operation by introduc-
ing a congestion window at the sender. This is used in conjunction with the con-
ventional window (based on window advertisements provided by the receiver). A
standard TCP limits its window to the minimum of the two. Slow start grows the
value of the congestion window exponentially with time, and congestion avoid-
ance grows it about linearly with time. Only one of the two algorithms is in opera-
tion at any one time, and this decision is made by comparing the current value
of the congestion window to the slow start threshold: if the congestion window
exceeds the threshold, congestion avoidance takes control; otherwise, slow start
is used. Slow start is used initially when TCP establishes its connection and after
restart conditions due to timeouts. It can also be used when a connection has gone
idle for a significant amount of time. The slow start threshold is adjusted dynami-
cally during the course of the connection.
     Congestion control has been a significant focus of the networking research
community over the years. After more experience was gained with TCP and its
slow start and congestion avoidance procedures, a number of improvements have
been suggested, implemented, and standardized. By keeping track of when TCP
is recovering from a collection of lost packets, the NewReno variant of TCP avoids
some of the stalls that can occur with Reno variants when multiple packets are
dropped in a single window of data. SACK TCP can improve upon NewReno’s
behavior by permitting the sender to intelligently repair more than one packet
drop per RTT. With SACK TCP, careful accounting must be established to ensure
that the sender is not overly aggressive with respect to other TCPs with which it
may be sharing an Internet path.
     Some of the more recent changes to TCP congestion management include rate
halving, congestion window validation and moderation, and “undo” procedures.
The rate-halving algorithm causes the congestion window to reduce gradually
after detected loss events instead of reducing it immediately. Congestion window
validation tries to ensure that the congestion window is not overly large if a send-
ing application has been idle or unable to send for some time. Congestion window
moderation limits the size of a burst in response to the receipt of a single ACK. The
“undo” procedures, such as the Eifel Response Algorithm, undo congestion win-
dow modifications if the packet loss signal is deemed to be spurious, a condition
detectable using a number of techniques. In such cases, the negative impact on
performance by reducing the congestion window is minimized by restoring the
congestion state to its condition prior to the reduction of the congestion window.

           After significant experience with TCP, it was observed that the congestion
      avoidance procedure can take a long time to find and exploit additional band-
      width that becomes available. As a result, numerous proposals for “bandwidth-
      scalable” TCP variants have been made. One of the better-known versions (within
      the IETF) is HSTCP, which allows the congestion window to grow much more
      aggressively in operating regimes where few packets are dropped and windows
      are large, as compared with conventional TCP. Subsequent suggestions have
      included FAST and CTCP, which base their window growth procedures on packet
      loss and latency measures. Widely deployed in Linux, the BIC-TCP and CUBIC
      algorithms use growth functions that are convex in some portions and concave in
      others. This supports small window changes during the saturation point, leading
      to enhanced stability at the possible cost of somewhat sluggish response to new
      available bandwidth (but still faster than standard TCP).
           A significant change to the operation of TCP and Internet routers has been
      proposed with the specification of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN), which
      would allow TCP to detect the onset of congestion before a packet loss is experi-
      enced. Although simulations and research results have shown this to be desirable,
      it requires a moderate change to TCP implementations and a significant change to
      the way Internet routers operate. The extent to which this capability is deployed
      remains to be seen.
           Although TCP provides the most widely used method for reliably moving
      data on the Internet, it does not implement much in the way of its own security. It
      is generally vulnerable to packet-forging attacks that can cause disruptions of con-
      nections; an attacker need only have a good guess at a viable (in-window) sequence
      number to launch such attacks. In addition, modification of the ACK stream (or
      ECN bits, if they are supported) can induce a sender to behave in ways that are
      unfair to other TCP connections. Furthermore, nothing physically prevents an
      overly aggressive sender from simply violating all congestion control rules.
           Combining all of the various algorithms and techniques developed for TCP
      into a single TCP implementation is not an easy task (Linux 2.6.38 TCP/IPv4 is
      about 20,000 lines of C code), and analyzing traces of a real-world TCP in action
      can be time-consuming. Tools such as tcpdump, Wireshark, and tcptrace make
      this job considerably easier. Because of its dynamic adaptation to the performance
      of the network, understanding TCP’s behavior is most easily accomplished with
      visualization techniques based on time-series plots, such as those used in this
      chapter.

16.14 References
      [A10] M. Alizadeh et al., “Data Center TCP (DCTCP),” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
      Aug./Sept. 2010.
      [ASA00] A. Aggarwal, S. Savage, and T. Anderson, “Understanding the Perfor-
      mance of TCP Pacing,” Proc. INFOCOM, Mar. 2004.
                                                     Section 16.14 References       789

[BP95] L. Brakmo and L. Peterson, “TCP Vegas: End to End Congestion Avoid-
ance on a Global Internet,” IEEE JSAC, 13(8), Oct. 1995.
[DHGS07] M. Dischinger, A. Haeberlen, K. Gummadi, and S. Saroiu, “Character-
izing Residential Broadband Networks,” Proc. ACM IMC, Oct. 2007.
[F91] S. Floyd, “Connections with Multiple Congested Gateways in Packet-
Switched Networks, Part 1: One-Way Traffic,” ACM Computer Communication
Review, 21, 1991.
[FF96] S. Floyd and K. Fall, “Simulation-Based Comparisons of Tahoe, Reno, and
SACK TCP,” ACM Computer Communications Review, July 1996.
[FHPW00] S. Floyd, M. Handley, J. Padhye, and J. Widmer, “Equation-Based Con-
gestion Control for Unicast Applications,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 2000.
[FJ93] S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, “Random Early Detection Gateways for Conges-
tion Avoidance,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 1(4), Aug. 1993.
[G11] J. Gettys, “Bufferbloat: Dark Buffers in the Internet,” Internet Computing,
May/June 2011.
[G114] International Telecommunication Union Recommendation G.114, “One-
Way Transmission Time,” May 2003.
[H96] J. Hoe, “Improving the Start-up Behavior of a Congestion Control Scheme
for TCP,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 1996.
[HRX08] S. Ha, I. Rhee, and L. Xu, “CUBIC: A New TCP-Friendly High-Speed
TCP Variant,” http://netsrv.csc.ncsu.edu/export/cubic_a_new_tcp_2008.pdf
[J88] V. Jacobson, “Congestion Avoidance and Control,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
Aug. 1988. This paper was later updated in 1992 to include M. Karels as coauthor.
The update is available at http://www-nrg.ee.lbl.gov/papers/congavoid.pdf
[J90] V. Jacobson, “Modified TCP Congestion Avoidance Algorithm,” posting
to the end2end-interest group mailing list, Apr. 1990, available at
ftp://ftp.ee.lbl.gov/email/vanj.90apr30.txt
[K05] A. Kuzmanovic, “The Power of Explicit Congestion Notification,” Proc.
ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 2005.
[KWNP10] C. Kreibich, N. Weaver, B. Nechaev, and V. Paxson, “Netalyzr: Illu-
minating Edge Network Neutrality, Security and Performance,” Proc. ACM IMC,
Nov. 2010.
[LARTC] http://lartc.org
[M92] J. Mogul, “Observing TCP Dynamics in Real Networks,” Proc. ACM SIG-
COMM, Aug. 1992.
[MM05] M. Mathis, personal communication, Sept. 2005.

      [MM96] M. Mathis and J. Mahdavi, “Forward Acknowledgment: Refining TCP
      Congestion Control,” Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 1996.
      [NB08] J. Nievelt and V. Bhanu, “Developing TCP Chimney Drivers for Windows
      7,” presentation at Microsoft Windows Drivers Developer Conference, 2008.
      [NS2] http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns (also see NS3 at http://www.nsnam.org)
      [P07] http://lwn.net/Articles/128681
      [PSCRH] M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, and J. Semke, “TCP Rate Halving,”
      http://www.psc.edu/networking/projects/rate-halving
      [RFC1122] R. Braden, ed., “Requirements for Internet Hosts—Communication
      Layers,” Internet RFC 1122/STD 0003, Oct. 1989.
      [RFC1812] F. Baker, ed., “Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers,” Internet RFC
      1812, June 1995.
      [RFC2018] M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd, and A. Romanow, “TCP Selective
      Acknowledgment Options,” Internet RFC 2018, Oct. 1996.
      [RFC2140] J. Touch, “TCP Control Block Interdependence,” Internet RFC 2140,
      Apr. 1997.
      [RFC2309] B. Braden et al., “Recommendations on Queue Management and Con-
      gestion Avoidance in the Internet,” Internet RFC 2309 (informational), Apr. 1998.
      [RFC2861] M. Handley, J. Padhye, and S. Floyd, “TCP Congestion Window Vali-
      dation,” Internet RFC 2861 (experimental), June 2000.
      [RFC3042] M. Allman, H. Balakrishnan, and S. Floyd, “Enhancing TCP’s Loss
      Recovery Using Limited Transmit,” Internet RFC 3042, Jan. 2001.
      [RFC3124] H. Balakrishnan and S. Seshan, “The Congestion Manager,” Internet
      RFC 3124, June 2001.
      [RFC3168] K. Ramakrishnan, S. Floyd, and D. Black, “The Addition of Explicit
      Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP,” Internet RFC 3168, Sept. 2001.
      [RFC3465] M. Allman, “TCP Congestion Control with Appropriate Byte Count-
      ing (ABC),” Internet RFC 3465 (experimental), Feb. 2003.
      [RFC3517] E. Blanton, M. Allman, K. Fall, and L. Wang, “A Conservative Selec-
      tive Acknowledgment (SACK)-Based Loss Recovery Algorithm for TCP,” Internet
      RFC 3517, Apr. 2003.
      [RFC3540] N. Spring, D. Wetherall, and D. Ely, “Robust Explicit Congestion Noti-
      fication (ECN) Signaling with Nonces,” Internet RFC 3540 (experimental), June
      2003.
                                                       Section 16.14 References        791

[RFC3649] S. Floyd, “HighSpeed TCP for Large Congestion Windows,” Internet
RFC 3649 (experimental), Dec. 2003.
[RFC3742] S. Floyd, “Limited Slow-Start for TCP with Large Congestion Win-
dows,” Internet RFC 3742 (experimental), Mar. 2004.
[RFC3782] S. Floyd, T. Henderson, and A. Gurtov, “The NewReno Modification to
TCP’s Fast Recovery Algorithm,” Internet RFC 3782, Apr. 2004.
[RFC4015] R. Ludwig and A. Gurtov, “The Eifel Response Algorithm for TCP,”
Internet RFC 4015, Feb. 2005.
[RFC5348] S. Floyd, M. Handley, J. Padhye, and J. Widmer, “TCP Friendly Rate
Control (TFRC): Protocol Specification,” Internet RFC 5348, Sept. 2008.
[RFC5562] A. Kuzmanovic, A. Mondal, S. Floyd, and K. Ramakrishnan, “Adding
Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Capability to TCP’s SYN/ACK Packets,”
Internet RFC 5562 (experimental), June 2009.
[RFC5681] M. Allman, V. Paxson, and E. Blanton, “TCP Congestion Control,”
Internet RFC 5681, Sept. 2009.
[RFC5690] S. Floyd, A. Arcia, D. Ros, and J. Iyengar, “Adding Acknowledgement
Congestion Control to TCP,” Internet RFC 5690 (informational), Feb. 2010.
[RFC6077] D. Papadimitriou, ed., M. Welzl, M. Sharf, and B. Briscoe, “Open
Research Issues in Internet Congestion Control,” Internet RFC 6077 (informa-
tional), Feb. 2011.
[S09] B. Sonkoly, Fairness and Stability Analysis of High Speed Transport Protocols,
Ph.D. Thesis, Budapest University of Technology and Economics, 2009.
[SCWA99] S. Savage, N. Cardwell, D. Wetherall, and T. Anderson, “TCP Con-
gestion Control with a Misbehaving Receiver,” ACM Computer Communication
Review, Apr. 1999.
[SK02] P. Sarolahti and A. Kuznetsov, “Congestion Control in Linux TCP,” Proc.
Usenix Freenix Track, June 2002.
[TCPTRACE] http://jarok.cs.ohiou.edu/software/tcptrace/index.html
[TSZS06] K. Tan, J. Song, Q. Zhang, and M. Sridharan, “A Compound TCP
Approach for High-Speed and Long-Distance Networks,” Proc. INFOCOM, Apr.
2006.
[W08] X. Wu, “A Simulation Study of Compound TCP,” http://www.comp.nus
.edu.sg/~wuxiucha/research/reactive/publication/ctcp_study.pdf
[WJLH06] D. Wei, C. Jin, S. Low, and S. Hegde, “FAST TCP: Motivation, Architec-
ture, Algorithms, Performance,” IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking, Mar. 2006.
[WQOS] http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/network/bb530836.aspx

      [WYSG05] R. Wang, K. Yamada, M. Sanadidi, and M. Gerla, “TCP with Sender-
      Side Intelligence to Handle Dynamic, Large, Leaky Pipes,” IEEE JSAC, 23(2), Feb.
      2005.
      [XHR04] L. Xu, K. Harfoush, and I. Rhee, “Binary Increase Congestion Control
      for Fast Long-Distance Networks,” Proc. INFOCOM, Mar. 2004.
