       17

       TCP Keepalive

17.1   Introduction
       Many newcomers to TCP/IP are surprised to learn that no data whatsoever flows
       across an idle TCP connection. That is, if neither process at the ends of a TCP con-
       nection is sending data to the other, nothing is exchanged between the two TCP
       endpoints. There is no polling, for example, as you might find with other network-
       ing protocols. This means that we can start a client process that establishes a TCP
       connection with a server and walk away for hours, days, weeks, or months, and
       the connection should remain up. In theory, intermediate routers can crash and
       reboot, data lines may go down and back up, but as long as neither host at the
       ends of the connection reboots (or changes its IP address), the connection remains
       established. This is how TCP/IP was designed.

           Note
           The previous statement assumes that neither application—neither the client nor
           the server—has application-level timers to detect inactivity, causing either appli-
           cation to terminate. It also assumes that no intermediate router is keeping state
           about the connection (such as a NAT box) that is required for proper operation
           that it might delete because of inactivity or lose because of system failure. In
           today’s Internet, these are big assumptions.

            Under some circumstances, it is useful for a client or server to become aware
       of the termination or loss of connection with its peer. In other circumstances, it is
       desirable to keep a minimal amount of data flowing over a connection, even if the
       applications do not have any to exchange. TCP keepalive provides a capability use-
       ful for both cases. Keepalive is a method for TCP to probe its peer without affect-
       ing the content of the data stream. It is driven by a keepalive timer. When the timer
       fires, a keepalive probe (keepalive for short) is sent, and the peer receiving the probe
       responds with an ACK.

          Note
          Keepalives are not part of the TCP specification. The Host Requirements RFC
          [RFC1122] says that this is because they could (1) cause perfectly good con-
          nections to break during transient Internet failures, (2) consume unnecessary
          bandwidth, and (3) cost money for an Internet path that charges for packets. Nev-
          ertheless, most implementations provide the keepalive capability.

            TCP keepalive is a controversial feature. Many feel that polling of the other
      end has no place in TCP and should be done by the application, if desired. On
      the other hand, if many applications require such functionality, it is convenient
      to place it in TCP so that its implementation can be shared. The keepalive is an
      optionally enabled feature that can cause an otherwise good connection between
      two processes to be terminated because of a temporary loss of connectivity in the
      network joining the two end systems. For example, if the keepalive probes are sent
      during the time that an intermediate router has crashed and is rebooting, TCP
      incorrectly thinks its peer host has crashed.
            The keepalive feature was originally intended for server applications that
      might tie up resources on behalf of a client and want to know if the client host
      crashes or goes away. Using TCP keepalive to detect dead clients is most useful for
      servers that expect to have a relatively short-duration dialogue with a noninterac-
      tive client (e.g., Web servers, POP and IMAP e-mail servers). Servers implement-
      ing more interactive-style services that last for a long time (e.g., remote login such
      as ssh and Windows Remote Desktop) might wish to avoid using keepalives.
            A common example showing the utility of the keepalive feature nowadays is
      when a user uses the ssh (secure shell) remote login program to log in to a remote
      host through a NAT router. If the user were to establish the connection, do some
      work, then just power off the computer at the end of the day, without logging off,
      a half-open connection would be left. In Chapter 13 we showed that sending data
      across a half-open connection causes a reset to be returned, but that was from the
      server end, where the client was sending the data. If the client disappears, leaving
      the half-open connection on the server’s end, and the server is waiting for some
      data from the client, the server will wait forever. The keepalive feature is intended
      to detect these half-open connections from the server side.
            Another reason for using keepalives is somewhat the reverse. If the user does
      not power off the computer but instead leaves a connection open all night (and
      wishes to continue using it the next day), the connection goes idle for many hours.
      In Chapter 7 we discussed how most NAT routers include a timeout mechanism
      that flushes the state of a connection after some period of inactivity. If the NAT
      timeout is less than the several hours before the user returns to use the login ses-
      sion, and the NAT is not smart enough to probe the end station to make sure it is
      still active, or the NAT crashes, the connection is terminated. To avoid this common
      problem, ssh can be configured to use TCP keepalives. ssh also has the ability to
      use application-managed keepalives, and the two behave differently, especially with
      respect to their security properties. (Please see Section 17.3 for more on this.)

17.2 Description
     Either end of a TCP connection may request keepalives, which are turned off by
     default, for their respective direction of the connection. A keepalive can be set
     for one side, both sides, or neither side. There are several configurable param-
     eters that control the operation of keepalives. If there is no activity on the connec-
     tion for some period of time (called the keepalive time), the side(s) with keepalive
     enabled sends a keepalive probe to its peer(s). If no response is received, the probe
     is repeated periodically with a period set by the keepalive interval until a number of
     probes equal to the number keepalive probes is reached. If this happens, the peer’s
     system is determined to be unreachable and the connection is terminated.
           A keepalive probe is an empty (or 1-byte) segment with sequence number
     equal to one less than the largest ACK number seen from the peer so far. Because
     this sequence number has already been ACKed by the receiving TCP, the arriving
     segment does no harm, but it elicits an ACK that is used to determine whether the
     connection is still operating. Neither the probe nor its ACK contains any new data
     (it is “garbage” data), and neither is retransmitted by TCP if lost. [RFC1122] dictates
     that because of this fact, the lack of response for a single keepalive probe should
     not be considered sufficient evidence that the connection has stopped operating.
     This is the reason for the keepalive probes parameter setting mentioned previously.
     Note that some (mostly older) TCP implementations do not respond to keepalives
     lacking the “garbage” byte of data.
           Anytime it is operating, a TCP using keepalives may find its peer in one of
     four states:

         1. The peer host is still up and running and reachable. The peer’s TCP
            responds normally and the requestor knows that the other end is still up.
            The requestor’s TCP resets the keepalive timer for later (equal to the value
            of the keepalive time). If there is application traffic across the connection
            before the next timer expires, the timer is reset back to the value of keepalive
            time.
         2. The peer’s host has crashed and is either down or in the process of reboot-
            ing. In either case, its TCP is not responding. The requestor does not receive
            a response to its probe, and it times out after a time specified by the keepalive
            interval. The requestor sends a total of keepalive probes of these probes, kee-
            palive interval time apart, and if it does not receive a response, the requestor
            considers the peer’s host as down and terminates the connection.
         3. The client’s host has crashed and rebooted. In this case, the server receives a
            response to its keepalive probe, but the response is a reset segment, causing
            the requestor to terminate the connection.
         4. The peer’s host is up and running but is unreachable from the requestor for
            some reason (e.g., the network cannot deliver traffic and may or may not

             inform the peers of this fact using ICMP). This is effectively the same as
             state 2, because TCP cannot distinguish between the two. All TCP can tell
             is that no replies are received to its probes.

           The requestor does not have to worry about the peer’s host being shut down
      gracefully and then rebooting (as opposed to crashing). When the system is shut
      down by an operator, all application processes are terminated (i.e., the peer’s pro-
      cess), which causes the peer’s TCP to send a FIN on the connection. Receiving the
      FIN would cause the requestor’s TCP to report an end-of-file to the requestor’s
      process, allowing the requestor to detect this scenario and exit.
           In the first state the requestor’s application has no idea that keepalive probes
      are taking place (except that it chose to enable keepalives in the first place). Every-
      thing is handled at the TCP layer. It is transparent to the application until one
      of states 2, 3, or 4 is determined. In these three cases, an error is returned to the
      requestor’s application by its TCP. (Normally the requestor has issued a read from
      the network, waiting for data from the peer. If the keepalive feature returns an
      error, it is returned to the requestor as the return value from the read.) In sce-
      nario 2 the error is something like “Connection timed out,” and in scenario 3 we
      expect “Connection reset by peer.” The fourth scenario may look as if the connec-
      tion timed out, or may cause another error to be returned, depending on whether
      an ICMP error related to the connection is received and how it is processed (see
      Chapter 8). We look at all four scenarios in the next section.
           The values of the variables keepalive time, keepalive interval, and keepalive probes
      can usually be changed. Some systems allow these changes on a per-connection
      basis, while others allow them to be set only system-wide (or both in some cases).
      In Linux, these values are available as sysctl variables with the names net.ipv4
      .tcp_keepalive_time, net.ipv4.tcp_keepalive_intvl, and net.ipv4
      .tcp_keepalive_probes, respectively. The defaults are 7200 (seconds, or 2
      hours), 75 (seconds), and 9 (probes).
           In FreeBSD and Mac OS X, the first two values are also available as sysctl
      variables called net.inet.tcp.keepidle and net.inet.tcp.keepintvl,
      with default values 7,200,000 (milliseconds, or 2 hours) and 75,000 (milliseconds,
      or 75s), respectively. These systems also have a Boolean variable called net.inet
      .tcp.always_keepalive. If this value is enabled, all TCP connections have the
      keepalive function enabled, even if the application did not request it. In these sys-
      tems, the number of probes is a fixed default value: 8 (FreeBSD) or 9 (Mac OS X).
           In Windows, these values are available for modification via registry entries
      under the system key:

      HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\Tcpip\Parameters

         The value KeepAliveTime defaults to 7,200,000ms (2 hours); KeepAlive-
      Interval defaults to 1000ms (1s). If there is no response to ten keepalive probes,
      Windows terminates the connection.

          Note that [RFC1122] places certain restrictions on the use of keepalives. In
      particular, the keepalive time must be configurable and must not default to less
      than 2 hours. In addition, keepalives must not be enabled unless an application
      requests one (although this behavior is violated if the net.inet.tcp.always_
      keepalive variable is set). Linux does not provide a native facility for adding
      keepalives to applications that do not request it, but a special library can be pre-
      loaded (i.e., loaded prior to ordinary shared libraries) to get this effect [LKA].

17.2.1 Keepalive Examples
      We shall now go through states 2, 3, and 4 from the previous section, to see the
      packets exchanged using the keepalive mechanism. The operation in state 1 will
      be illustrated in the course of looking at the others.

      17.2.1.1 Other End Crashes
      Let us see what happens when the server host crashes and does not reboot. To
      simulate this we will do the following steps:

          1. Using the regedit program on a Windows client, modify the registry key,
             and set KeepAliveTime to 7000ms (7s). This may require the system to be
             rebooted to accept the new value.
          2. Establish an ssh connection between the Windows client and a Linux
             server using an option that enables TCP keepalives.
          3. Verify that data can go across the connection.
          4. Watch the client’s TCP send keepalive packets every 7s, and see them
             acknowledged by the server’s TCP.
          5. Disconnect the network cable from the server, and leave it disconnected
             until the example is complete. This makes the client think the server host
             has crashed.
          6. We expect the client to send ten keepalive probes, 1s apart, before declaring
             the connection dead.

          Here is the interactive output on the client:

      C:\> ssh -o TCPKeepAlive=yes 10.0.1.1
      (password prompt and login continues)
      Write failed: Connection reset by peer (about 15 seconds after disconnect)

          Figure 17-1 shows the results using Wireshark. In this example, the connec-
      tion has already been established. The Wireshark output begins with a keepalive
      (packet 1) that is not identified as such. At this point, Wireshark has not processed
      enough packets to determine that the one sequence number in packet 1 is below

Figure 17-1   TCP keepalives are generated every 7s after the connection becomes idle. Each contains a below-
              window sequence number that is ACKed by the peer. A cable disconnection after 1 minute causes
              subsequent keepalives to not be ACKed. The client tries ten times before giving up and terminat-
              ing the connection. The termination is signaled to the server by the final reset segment (which the
              server cannot hear). This example also illustrates the use of DSACKs at the server and a spurious
              retransmission caused by the client delaying ACKs.

         the receiver’s left window edge and is therefore a keepalive. Packet 2 contains an
         ACK number that allows Wireshark to process the sequence numbers in subse-
         quent packets appropriately.
              Most of this connection consists of keepalives and corresponding ACKs. Pack-
         ets 1, 3, 5, 7, 14, 16, 18, 20, and 22–31 are all keepalives. Packets 2, 4, 6, 8, 15, 17,
         19, and 21 are the corresponding ACKs. Keepalives are sent periodically every 7s

provided they are ACKed. When no ACK is returned for a keepalive, the sender
switches to a 1s interval for sending keepalives, according to the default value
of KeepAliveInterval. This starts with packet 23 at time 62.120. The sender
produces ten unacknowledged keepalives in total (packets 22–31). After that, it
terminates the connection, which results in the final reset segment (packet 32)
that is never received by the disconnected receiver. The user receives the following
output when the connection terminates:

Write failed:    Connection reset by peer

This is a clear indication that the connection has terminated, but it is not entirely
accurate. It was really the sender that terminated the connection, but it did so
based on the lack of response from the receiver.
     Apart from the use of keepalive segments, there are some other interesting
features of this connection we will mention briefly. First, the server uses DSACKs
(see Chapter 14). Each ACK contains the sequence number range of the previously
received in-window segment. Next, a small bit of data is exchanged at time 26.09.
The data represents a single key press. It is sent to the server, ACKed by the server,
and echoed back. The data is encrypted, causing the packets containing data to be
48 bytes in user data size (see Chapter 18).
     Interestingly, the echoed character is sent twice. We can see that packet 11,
which contains the echoed character is not ACKed immediately. Recall from
Chapter 14 that Linux uses an RTO of at least 200ms. Here we see that the Linux
server retransmits the echoed character 200ms later, which produces an immedi-
ate response from the client. Because this test was performed on an uncongested
LAN, it is highly unlikely that segment 11 was dropped. Instead, it appears that
Linux produced a spurious retransmission due to the client delaying ACKs. This
is a similar sort of hazard we saw when exploring the poor interaction between
the Nagle algorithm and delayed ACKs we discussed in Chapter 15. Here, the
dynamic results in an unnecessary delay of about 200ms.

17.2.1.2 Other End Crashes and Reboots
In this example we will see what happens when the peer crashes and reboots. The
initial scenario is the same as the previous one, except this time we set KeepAl-
iveTime to 120,000 (2 minutes). We establish a connection and then wait just over
2 minutes to allow a keepalive message to be sent and ACKed. Then we discon-
nect the server from the network, reboot it, and then reconnect it. We expect the
next keepalive probe to generate a reset from the server, because the server now
knows nothing about this connection. Figure 17-2 presents the trace as displayed
by Wireshark.
     In this example, the connection has been established and small amounts of
data are exchanged starting at seconds 0.00 and 3.46. Then the connection goes
idle. After 2 minutes have elapsed (the keepalive time), the client sends the first
keepalive probe at time 123.47, containing the “garbage” byte below the receiver’s

Figure 17-2 The server has rebooted between keepalives sent by the client. The last keepalive elicits a reset
            segment because the server no longer knows anything about the connection.

         left window edge. It is acknowledged, and the server is disconnected, rebooted,
         and reconnected. At time 243.47, 120s later, the client sends its second keepalive
         probe. Although this reaches the server, the server no longer has any knowledge
         about the connection and responds with a reset segment (packet 18). This informs
         the client that the connection is no longer active, and the user is provided the same
         “Connection reset by peer” error message we saw before.

         17.2.1.3 Other End Is Unreachable
         In this case, the server has not crashed but becomes unreachable during the inter-
         val when the keepalive probes are sent. An intermediate router may have crashed,
         a phone line may be temporarily out of order, or something similar. To simulate
         this example we will use our sock program with the keepalive option set to

          establish a connection to a Web server. We will use a Mac OS X client and an LDAP
          server (port 389) running on ldap.mit.edu. After shortening the client’s keepalive
          time (for convenience) and opening the connection, we disconnect the network to
          see the effects. Here are the command lines and output at the client:

          Mac# sysctl -w net.inet.tcp.keepidle=75000
          Mac% sock –K ldap.mit.edu 389
          recv error: Operation timed out     about 14 minutes later

               The trace is displayed using Wireshark (see Figure 17-3).

Figure 17-3 The WAN connection is taken down after the first keepalive probe is acknowledged. Another
            probe is sent every 75s. After nine keepalives are sent without a response, the connection is ter-
            minated and the client sends a reset to its peer. For the client, the situation is very similar to when
            the server crashes, as illustrated in Figure 17-1.

               In this figure we can see the entire connection. After the initial three-way
          handshake, the connection remains idle and a keepalive is sent and acknowledged
          at about time 75 (packet 4). This first keepalive is triggered by the value of the net
          .inet.tcp.keepidle variable. Shortly thereafter, the network is severed. Neither
          end of the connection produces data, so the next event is another keepalive sent by
          the client at time 150 (75s later, the value of the net.inet.tcp.keepintvl vari-
          able). This pattern repeats with packets 7–14, with no ACKs present, even though
          the server is up and running. Finally, the client gives up 75s after its ninth unac-
          knowledged keepalive probe. The connection termination is indicated to the server
          by a reset segment at the end (packet 15). Of course, the server is unable to receive
          this packet because the network is not operating.
               When a client TCP using keepalives is unable to communicate across the
          network with its peer, as this example shows, it retries some number of times
          before giving up. This is essentially the same behavior we saw when the other

      end crashed. In most cases, the sending TCP cannot tell the difference. There are
      some exceptions, such as when ICMP indicates that the destination has become
      unreachable or otherwise unavailable because of problems in the network, but
      these conditions are relatively rare because ICMP is often blocked. As a result,
      mechanisms such as TCP keepalive (or similar mechanisms implemented by
      applications) are used to detect disconnection periods.

17.3 Attacks Involving TCP Keepalives
      As we mentioned before, ssh (version 2) has an application-level form of keep-
      alive called server alive messages and client alive messages. These are different from
      TCP keepalive messages because they are sent over an encrypted channel at the
      application layer and contain data. TCP keepalives contain no user-level data, so
      the use of encryption is limited at best. The consequence is that TCP keepalives
      may be spoofed. When TCP keepalives are spoofed, the victim can be coerced into
      keeping resources allocated for a period longer than intended.
          Although it may be a relatively minor concern, TCP keepalives are driven off a
      timer based on the various configuration parameters discussed earlier, and not off
      the dynamically adjusted retransmission timer used to retransmit segments with
      data. A passive observer could notice the existence of keepalives and their inter-
      arrival times to conceivably learn information about the configuration parameters
      (possibly identifying the type of sending system, called fingerprinting) or about the
      network topology (i.e., whether downstream routers are forwarding traffic or not).
      These issues could be of concern in some environments.

17.4 Summary
      As we said earlier, the keepalive feature has been somewhat controversial. Proto-
      col experts continue to debate whether it belongs in the transport layer or should
      be handled entirely by the application. All popular TCP implementations now
      include the keepalive feature, which applications may optionally use to establish
      a “heartbeat” of traffic moving across a connection. Doing so can help a server by
      allowing it to detect nonresponsive clients and can help clients by keeping con-
      nections active (e.g., to keep NAT state active) even if no application-layer data is
      flowing.
           Keepalives operate by sending a probe packet (usually containing a “garbage”
      byte, although zero-length probes are also possible) across a connection after the
      connection has been idle for some relatively long period of time, often 2 hours.
      Four different scenarios can occur: the other end is still there, the other end has
      crashed, the other end has crashed and rebooted, or the other end is currently
      unreachable. We saw each of these scenarios with an example.
                                                        Section 17.5 References   803

          In the first two keepalive examples that we examined, had keepalives not
     been used, and without any application-level timer or activity, TCP would never
     have known that the other end had crashed (or crashed and rebooted). In the final
     example, however, nothing was wrong with the other end; the connection was
     temporarily down. We must be aware of this limitation when using keepalives
     and consider whether or not such behavior is desired.
          Attacks against the keepalive mechanism include causing a system to keep
     resources allocated longer than intended and possibly learning some otherwise
     hidden information about the end systems (although such information may be
     of limited use to an attacker). In addition, by default TCP does not use its own
     encryption, so keepalives and keepalive ACKs can be spoofed, whereas applica-
     tion-level keepalives that employ encryption (e.g., ssh) cannot.

17.5 References
     [LKA] http://libkeepalive.sourceforge.net
     [RFC1122] R. Braden, ed., “Requirements for Internet Hosts,” Internet RFC 1122,
     Oct. 1989.
This page intentionally left blank
