     18

     Security: EAP, IPsec, TLS,
     DNSSEC, and DKIM

18.1 Introduction
     In this chapter we will take a look at several forms of security used with TCP/IP.
     Security is a very broad and interesting topic, and covering it comprehensively is
     far beyond the scope of this book. Consequently, we will be interested to know
     about the various types of security threats on the Internet, and we will delve into
     some detail on those security mechanisms aimed at countering them that are
     applicable to the operation of various protocols such as IP, TCP, and the important
     e-mail and DNS application protocols.
          Although our partitioning is not really formal, security threats can be bro-
     ken down into attacks that target implementation problems by trying to subvert
     processes into running code that was not intended, trying to get users to run pro-
     grams that do bad things, and using network protocols in compliant but unau-
     thorized ways. We have already seen forms of these attacks in other chapters. For
     example, one of the earliest worms (self-propagating software) on the Internet used
     a buffer overflow that overwrites the server process’s memory. Doing so allows a cli-
     ent program to inject software into a server that ultimately runs this injected code.
     The injected code then performs the same action, thereby causing the program to
     self-propagate. Naturally, such code could perform more malicious activities than
     simply self-propagation.
          The various types of attacks and techniques can be combined, and compli-
     cated software and security analysis tools have been developed as the value of the
     information on the Internet has increased. A variety of texts, including [MSK09],
     discuss the tools and techniques in more detail. Today, essentially any software
     executed by a user or as a user against the user’s intentions is known by the gen-
     eral term malware, short for “malicious software.” Entire industries have been

      developed to both create and reduce the effects of malware. Malware can be deliv-
      ered in e-mail messages or attachments (e.g., in spam), picked up while visiting
      a Web site (drive-by attacks), or acquired when using portable media such as por-
      table USB drives.
           In some cases, malware is used to take control of a large number of computers
      in the Internet (botnets). Botnets are controlled by individuals or organizations (bot
      herders) and can be used on a wide scale for a number of purposes such as send-
      ing spam, compromising other computers, exfiltrating information from the com-
      promised system (e.g., credit card and bank account information, and the user’s
      logged keystrokes), and launching DoS attacks by sending a large aggregate vol-
      ume of Internet traffic to one or more victims. Botnets are now commonly offered
      as a service on a rental basis—a client can hire a bot herder to perform one or more
      nefarious tasks. One common task is to generate e-mails in hopes of inducing the
      recipient(s) to visit a particular Web site or purchase a particular product (phish-
      ing). When a specific victim is targeted in this way, the activity is usually called
      spear phishing.
           Our interest is in understanding how secure communication protocols on the
      Internet work. Ironically, perhaps, many worms or viruses implement secure com-
      munication protocols. In most cases, we will see how the types of protocols we
      have already studied such as IP, TCP, e-mail, and DNS have been augmented with
      security extensions (sometimes in the form of additional protocols) to enhance
      security. We need to be somewhat precise in defining what “security” means in
      terms of a communication protocol, in order to understand if the techniques avail-
      able to us are sufficient to provide our desired level of protection. Therefore, we
      shall begin by studying the properties of information protection considered desir-
      able in the field of information security.

18.2 Basic Principles of Information Security
      There are three primary properties of information, whether in a computer net-
      work or not, that may be desirable from an information security point of view:
      confidentiality, integrity, and availability (the CIA triad) [L01], summarized here:

          • Confidentiality means that information is made known only to its intended
            users (which could include processing systems).
          • Integrity means that information has not been modified in an unauthor-
            ized way before it is delivered.
          • Availability means that information is available when needed.

           These are core properties of information, yet there are other properties we
      may also desire, including authentication, nonrepudiation, and auditability. Authen-
      tication means that a particular identified party or principal is not impersonating
                                        Section 18.3 Threats to Network Communication               807

     another principal. Nonrepudiation means that if some action is performed by a
     principal (e.g., agreeing to the terms of a contract), this fact can be proven later (i.e.,
     cannot successfully be denied). Auditability means that some sort of trustworthy
     log or accounting describing how information has been used is available. Such
     logs are often important for forensic (i.e., legal and prosecuritorial) purposes.
          These principles are applicable to information in physical (e.g., printed) form,
     for which mechanisms such as safes, secured facilities, and guards have been used
     for thousands of years to enforce controlled sharing, storage, and dissemination.
     When information is to be moved through an unsecured environment, additional
     techniques are required. To see why, let us examine the types of threats to which
     information can be exposed when it travels through an unsecured communica-
     tion channel.

18.3 Threats to Network Communication
     When considering the design and operation of network protocols, ensuring that
     information has the desired properties of integrity, availability, and confidentiality
     can be quite a challenge because of the wide range of possible attacks that can be
     carried out in an otherwise uncontrolled network such as the Internet. Attacks can
     generally be categorized as either passive or active [VK83]. Identifying the category
     is useful because different techniques are required to provide security depending
     on the particular category. Passive attacks are mounted by monitoring or eaves-
     dropping on the contents of network traffic, and if not handled they can lead to
     unauthorized release of information (loss of confidentiality). Active attacks can
     cause modification of information (with possible loss of integrity) or denial of ser-
     vice (loss of availability). Logically, such attacks are carried out by an “intruder” or
     adversary. This is often depicted using the scenario shown in Figure 18-1.

                                               Eve
                                                                           Mallory

            Alice                                                                             Bob

Figure 18-1   The principals, Alice and Bob, attempt to communicate securely, but Eve may eavesdrop
                   and Mallory may modify messages in transit.

              The figure depicts the principals, Alice and Bob, trying to communicate. How-
          ever, there are two attackers, Eve and Mallory. Eve (eavesdropper) is only able to
          monitor the traffic exchanged between Alice and Bob and thus can carry out only
          passive attacks. Mallory (malicious attacker) can store, modify, and replay traffic
          passing between Alice and Bob, so she can carry out active and passive attacks.
          Table 18-1 summarizes the major categories of passive and active attacks that Alice
          and Bob may face.

Table 18-1 Attacks on communication are broadly classified as passive or active. Passive attacks are ordinarily
           more difficult to detect, and active attacks are ordinarily more difficult to prevent.

                    Passive                                                 Active
Type                     Threats                 Type                           Threats
Eavesdropping            Confidentiality         Message stream                 Authenticity, integrity
                                                 modification
Traffic analysis         Confidentiality         Denial of service (DoS)        Availability
                                                 Spurious association           Authenticity

               From an attacker’s perspective, Table 18-1 gives a quick summary of the pas-
          sive attacks available to Eve and the active (and passive) attacks available to Mal-
          lory. Eve is able to eavesdrop (listen in on, also called capture or sniff) and perform
          traffic analysis on the traffic passing between Alice and Bob. Capturing the traffic
          could lead to compromise of confidentiality, as sensitive data may be available to
          Eve without Alice or Bob knowing. In addition, traffic analysis can determine the
          features of the traffic, such as its size and when it is sent, and possibly identify the
          parties to a communication. This information, although it does not reveal the exact
          contents of the communication, could also lead to disclosure of sensitive informa-
          tion and could be used to mount more powerful active attacks in the future.
               While the passive attacks are essentially impossible for Alice or Bob to detect,
          Mallory is capable of performing more easily noticed active attacks. These include
          message stream modification (MSM), denial-of-service (DoS), and spurious associa-
          tion attacks. MSM attacks (including so-called called man-in-the-middle or MITM
          attacks) are a broad category and include any way traffic is modified in transit,
          including deletion, reordering, and content modification. DoS might include dele-
          tion of traffic, or generation of such large volumes of traffic so as to overwhelm
          Alice, Bob, or the communication channel connecting them. Spurious associations
          include masquerading (Mallory pretends to be Bob or Alice) and replay, whereby
          Alice or Bob’s earlier (authentic) communications are replayed later, from Mal-
          lory’s memory.
               Two major methods are available to prevent the passive and active attacks
          we have just described. One method would be to ensure through physical secu-
          rity that only trusted parties have access to the communication infrastructure

      connecting Alice and Bob. This approach is used in limited circumstances but is
      effectively impractical for any network spanning a large geographical distance. Of
      course, if the communication channel is wireless, securing it using only physical
      methods is effectively impossible. Given these considerations, some mechanism is
      needed to allow information to pass through unsecured communication channels
      in such a way that adversaries like Eve and Mallory are, for the most part at least,
      thwarted. This mechanism is cryptography. With effective and careful use of cryp-
      tography, passive attacks are rendered ineffective, and active attacks are made
      detectable (and to some degree preventable).

18.4 Basic Cryptography and Security Mechanisms
      Cryptography evolved from the desire to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and
      authenticity of information carried through unsecured communication channels.
      Such a capability is clearly of significant importance in protecting confidential
      information such as military orders, intelligence, and recipes for creating espe-
      cially dangerous or valuable materials. The use of cryptography, at least in a prim-
      itive form, dates back to at least 3500 BCE. The earliest systems were usually codes.
      Codes involve substitutions of groups of words, phrases, or sentences with groups
      of numbers or letters as given in a codebook. Codebooks needed to be kept secret
      in order to keep communications private, so distributing them required consider-
      able care.
           More advanced systems used ciphers, in which both substitution and rear-
      rangement are used. Several codes were used in the Middle Ages, and by the
      late 1800s large code and cipher systems were commonly use for diplomatic and
      military communications. By the early twentieth century, cryptography was well
      established but would not take its major leap forward until World War II. Dur-
      ing this period, electromechanical cryptographic machines such as the German
      ENIGMA and Lorenz machines posed a challenge to Allied cryptanalysts (code
      breakers). One of the first digital computers, Colossus, was developed by the
      British to decipher Lorenz-enciphered messages. A functioning Colossus Mark
      2 machine was created in 2007, after a 14-year effort, by Tony Sale of the National
      Museum of Computing at Bletchley Park, UK [TNMOC].

18.4.1 Cryptosystems
      While the historical basis for cryptography is primarily for preserving confiden-
      tiality, other desirable properties such as integrity and authentication can also
      be achieved using cryptographic and related mathematical techniques. To help
      understand the basics, Figure 18-2 illustrates how the two most important types of
      cryptographic algorithms, called symmetric key and public (asymmetric) key ciphers,
      work.

                                  .H\                                      .H\

                              6\PPHWULF?                               6\PPHWULF?
        &OHDUWH[W             (QFU\SWLRQ?                              'HFU\SWLRQ?             &OHDUWH[W
                              $OJRULWKP           &LSKHUWH[W           $OJRULWKP

                                        6\PPHWULF?.H\?&U\SWRV\VWHP

                         5HFHLYHU¶V?3XEOLF?.H\                   5HFHLYHU¶V?3ULYDWH?.H\

                              $V\PPHWULF?                              $V\PPHWULF?
        &OHDUWH[W             (QFU\SWLRQ?                              'HFU\SWLRQ?             &OHDUWH[W
                               $OJRULWKP          &LSKHUWH[W            $OJRULWKP

                         $V\PPHWULF? 3XEOLF?.H\ ?&U\SWRV\VWHP
Figure 18-2   The unencrypted (cleartext) message is passed through an encryption algorithm to
                    produce an encrypted (ciphertext) message. In a symmetric cryptosystem, the same
                    (secret) key is used for encryption and decryption. In an asymmetric or public key
                    cryptosystem, confidentiality is achieved by using the recipient’s public key for encryp-
                    tion and private (secret) key for decryption.

           This figure shows the high-level operation of symmetric and asymmetric key
      cryptography. In each case, a cleartext message is processed by an encryption algo-
      rithm to produce ciphertext (scrambled text). The key is a particular sequence of
      bits used to drive the encryption algorithm or cipher. With different keys, the same
      input produces different outputs. Combining the algorithms with supporting pro-
      tocols and operating methods forms a cryptosystem. In a symmetric cryptosystem,
      the encryption and decryption keys are typically identical, as are the encryption
      and decryption algorithms. In an asymmetric cryptosystem, each principal is gen-
      erally provided with a pair of keys consisting of one public and one private key.
      The public key is intended to be known to any party that might want to send a
      message to the key pair’s owner. The public and private keys are mathematically
      related and are themselves outputs of a key generation algorithm. One of the major
      benefits of asymmetric key cryptosystems is that secret key material does not have
      to be securely distributed to every party that wishes to communicate.

     Without knowing the symmetric key (in a symmetric cryptosystem) or the
private key (in a public key cryptosystem), it is (believed to be) effectively impossi-
ble for any third party that intercepts the ciphertext to produce the corresponding
cleartext. This provides the basis for confidentiality. For the symmetric key cryp-
tosystem, it also provides a degree of authentication, because only a party holding
the key is able to produce a useful ciphertext that can be decrypted to something
sensible. A receiver can decrypt the ciphertext, look for a portion of the resulting
cleartext to contain a particular agreed-upon value, and conclude that the sender
holds the appropriate key and is therefore authentic. Furthermore, most encryp-
tion algorithms work in such a way that if messages are modified in transit, they
are unable to produce useful cleartext upon decryption. Thus, symmetric cryp-
tosystems provide a measure of both authentication and integrity protection for
messages, but this approach alone is weak. Instead, special forms of checksums
are usually coupled with symmetric cryptography to ensure integrity. We discuss
these later, after the cryptographic preliminaries.
     A symmetric encryption algorithm is usually classified as either a block cipher
or a stream cipher. Block ciphers perform operations on a fixed number of bits (e.g.,
64 or 128) at a time, and stream ciphers operate continuously on however many bits
(or bytes) are provided as input. For years, the most popular symmetric encryption
algorithm was the Data Encryption Standard (DES), a block cipher that uses 64-bit
blocks and 56-bit keys. Eventually, the use of 56-bit keys was felt to be insecure,
and many applications turned to triple-DES (also denoted 3DES or TDES—apply-
ing DES three times with two or three different keys to each block of data). Today,
DES and 3DES have been largely phased out in favor of the Advanced Encryption
Standard (AES) [FIPS197], also known occasionally by its original name the Rijn-
dael algorithm (pronounced “rain-dahl”), in deference to its Belgian cryptographer
inventors Vincent Rijmen and Joan Daemen. Different variants of AES provide key
lengths of 128, 192, and 256 bits and are usually written with the corresponding
extension (i.e., AES-128, AES-192, and AES-256).
     Asymmetric cryptosystems have some additional interesting properties
beyond those of symmetric key cryptosystems. Assuming we have Alice as sender
and Bob as intended recipient, any third party is assumed to know Bob’s public
key and can therefore send him a secret message—only Bob is able to decrypt it
because only Bob knows the private key corresponding to his public key. How-
ever, Bob has no real assurance that the message is authentic, because any party
can create a message and send it to Bob, encrypted in Bob’s public key. Fortunately,
public key cryptosystems also provide another function when used in reverse:
authentication of the sender. In this case, Alice can encrypt a message using her
private key and send it to Bob (or anyone else). Using Alice’s public key (known to
all), anyone can verify that the message was authored by Alice and has not been
modified. However, it is not confidential because everyone has access to Alice’s
public key. To achieve authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality, Alice can encrypt
a message using her private key and encrypt the result using Bob’s public key. The
result is a message that is reliably authored by Alice and is also confidential to
Bob. This process is illustrated in Figure 18-3.

                         6HQGHU¶V?3ULYDWH?.H\

                                                         1RW?&RQILGHQWLDO²&DQ?%H?
                                                            5HDG?E\?$Q\RQH
                             $V\PPHWULF?
                                                      6LJQHG
        0HVVDJH              (QFU\SWLRQ?
                                                     0HVVDJH
                              $OJRULWKP

                                                            $V\PPHWULF?              6LJQHG?DQG?3ULYDWH?
                        5HFHLYHU¶V?3XEOLF?.H\               (QFU\SWLRQ?                  0HVVDJH
                                                             $OJRULWKP

                             $V\PPHWULF?
                                                      3ULYDWH
        0HVVDJH              (QFU\SWLRQ?
                                                     0HVVDJH
                              $OJRULWKP
                                                           1RW?$XWKHQWLFDWHG²&RXOG?
                                                          +DYH?%HHQ?6HQW?E\?$Q\RQH

                      $V\PPHWULF? 3XEOLF?.H\ ?&U\SWRV\VWHP
Figure 18-3   The asymmetric cryptosystem can be used for confidentiality (encryption), authentica-
                     tion (digital signatures or signing), or both. When used for both, it produces a signed
                     output that is confidential to the sender and the receiver. Public keys, as their name
                     suggests, are not kept secret.

            When public key cryptography is used in “reverse” like this, it provides a
       digital signature. Digital signatures are important consequences of public key cryp-
       tography and can be used to help ensure authenticity and nonrepudiation. Only a
       party possessing Alice’s private key is able to author messages or carry out trans-
       actions as Alice.
            In a hybrid cryptosystem, elements of both public key and symmetric key
       cryptography are used. Most often, public key operations are used to exchange a
       randomly generated confidential (symmetric) session key, which is used to encrypt
       traffic for a single transaction using a symmetric algorithm. The reason for doing
       so is performance—symmetric key operations are less computationally intensive
       than public key operations. Most systems today are of the hybrid type: public key
       cryptography is used to establish keys used for symmetric encryption of indi-
       vidual sessions.

18.4.2 Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman (RSA) Public Key Cryptography
       We have seen how public key cryptography can be used for both digital signatures
       and confidentiality. The most common approach is called RSA in deference to its
       authors’ names, Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman [RSA78]. The security of this sys-
       tem hinges on the difficulty of factoring large numbers into constituent primes.

       To initialize RSA, two large prime numbers p and q are generated, which usually
       involves checking a number of large odd numbers that are randomly generated
       until two primes are found. The product of these primes n = pq is called the modu-
       lus. The length of n, p, and q is usually measured in bits, with n often being 1024
       bits and the others being about 512, although larger sizes such as 2048 are now rec-
       ommended. The value Φ(v) is known in number theory as the Euler totient of the
       integer v. It gives the number of positive integers less than v that are also coprime
       to v (i.e., whose greatest common divisor is 1). Because of the way n is constructed
       for RSA, Φ(n) = (q - 1)(p - 1).
            Using the defnition for Φ(n), we can choose the RSA public exponent (called
       e for “encryption”) and derive a private exponent (called d for “decryption”) as
       multiplicative inverses using the relation d = e-1 (mod Φ(n)). In practice, e is often
       some value with a fairly small population count (i.e., has a small number of 1 bits)
       such as 65,537 (10000000000000001 binary), for faster computations. To form an
       encrypted ciphertext c from a cleartext message m, the value c = me (mod n) is com-
       puted. To form the value m from c, decryption is performed: m = cd (mod n). An
       RSA public key consists of the public exponent e and modulus n. The correspond-
       ing private key consists of the private exponent d and the modulus n.
            As suggested earlier, public key algorithms such as RSA can also be used to
       produce digital signatures by essentially running RSA “in reverse.” To create an
       RSA signature of a message m, the value s = md (mod n) can be produced as a
       signed version of m. Anyone receiving the value s can apply the public exponent
       e to produce m = se (mod n), which provides the basis for verifying that whatever
       produced the value s was in possession of the private value d (otherwise the value
       m produced would not be sensible).
            The security of RSA is based on the difficulty of factoring large numbers. In
       the context of RSA and our scenario of Figure 18-1, Eve is able to obtain n and e but
       does not know p, q, or Φ(n). If she could determine any of these last three values,
       it would be trivial to determine d using the relation we have described. However,
       doing so appears to involve factoring n, and factoring numbers of 1000 or more bits
       is currently believed to be out of reach for even the best factorization algorithms.
       Indeed, factoring semiprimes (numbers that are a product of two primes) appears
       to represent the most difficult case for such algorithms.

18.4.3 Diffie-Hellman-Merkle Key Agreement (aka Diffie-Hellman or DH)
       A common requirement in security protocols is to have two parties agree on a
       common set of secret bits that can be used as a symmetric key. Doing so in a net-
       work that may contain eavesdroppers (such as Eve) is a challenge, because it is not
       immediately obvious how to have two principals (such as Alice and Bob) agree
       on a common secret number without Eve knowing. The Diffie-Hellman-Merkle Key
       Agreement protocol (more commonly called simply Diffie-Hellman or DH) provides
       a method for accomplishing this task, based on the use of finite field arithmetic

       [DH76].1 DH techniques are used in many of the Internet-related security proto-
       cols [RFC2631] and are closely related to the RSA approach for public key cryptog-
       raphy. We shall have a brief look at how they work.
              With the same cast of characters (Alice, Bob, etc.), let us assume that all parties
       are aware of two integers p and g. Let p be a (large) prime number and g < p be a
       primitive root mod p. With these assumptions, every integer in the group Z p = {1,
       ..., p - 1} can be generated by raising g to some power. Said another way, for every
       n, there exists some k for which gk ≡ n (mod p). Finding the value (or values) of k
       given g, n, and p (called the discrete log problem) is considered to be difficult, result-
       ing in the belief that DH is secure. Finding the value of n given g, k, and p is easy,
       resulting in the approach being practical.
              For Alice and Bob to establish a shared secret key, they can use the following
       protocol: Alice chooses a secret random number a and computes A = ga (mod p),
       which she sends to Bob. Bob chooses a secret random number b and computes B =
       gb (mod p), which he sends to Alice. Alice and Bob arrive at the same shared secret
       K = gab (mod p). Alice computes this value this way:

                                       K = Ba (mod p) = gba (mod p)

       and Bob computes it this way:

                                       K = Ab (mod p) = gab (mod p)

           Given that gba is equal to gab (because Z p is so-called power associative and we
       assumed all parties are aware of the group Z p being used), both Alice and Bob
       know K. Note that Eve has access only to g, p, A, and B so cannot determine K
       without solving the discrete log problem [MW99]. However, this basic protocol
       is vulnerable to an attack from Mallory. Mallory can pretend to be Bob when
       communicating with Alice and vice versa by supplying her own A and B values.
       However, the basic DH protocol can be extended to protect from this man-in-the-
       middle attack if the public values for A and B are authenticated [DOW92]. The
       classic approach, called the Station-to-Station protocol (STS), involves Alice and Bob
       signing their public values.

18.4.4 Signcryption and Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)
       When using RSA, additional security is provided with larger numbers. However,
       the basic mathematical operations required by RSA (e.g., exponentiation) can be
       computationally intensive and scale as the numbers grow. Reducing the effort of
       combining digital signatures and encryption for confidentiality, a class of sign-
       cryption schemes [Z97] (also called authenticated encryption) provides both features

       1. The technique was described in a then-classified reference in 1973 by C. Cocks, “A Note on ‘Non-
          Secret Encryption.’” See http://www.cesg.gov.uk/publications/media/notense.pdf.

       at a cost less than the sum of the two if computed separately. However, even
       greater efficiency can sometimes be achieved by changing the mathematical basis
       for public key cryptography.
           In a continuing search for security with greater efficiency and performance,
       researchers have explored other public key cryptosystems beyond RSA. An alter-
       native based on the difficulty of finding the discrete logarithm of an elliptic curve
       element has emerged, known as elliptic curve cryptography (ECC, not to be con-
       fused with error-correcting code) [M85][K87][RFC5753]. For equivalent security,
       ECC offers the benefit of using keys that are considerably smaller than those of
       RSA (e.g., by about a factor of 6 for a 1024-bit RSA modulus). This leads to sim-
       pler and faster implementations, issues of considerable practical concern. ECC has
       been standardized for use in many of the applications where RSA still retains
       dominance, but adoption has remained somewhat sluggish because of patents on
       ECC technology held by the Certicom Corporation. (The RSA algorithm was also
       patented, but patent protection lapsed in the year 2000.)

18.4.5 Key Derivation and Perfect Forward Secrecy (PFS)
       In communication scenarios where multiple messages are to be exchanged, it is
       common to establish a short-term session key to perform symmetric encryption.
       The session key is ordinarily a random number (see the following section) gener-
       ated by a function called a key derivation function (KDF), based on some input such
       as a master key or a previous session key. If a session key is compromised, any of
       the data encrypted with the key is subject to compromise. However, it is common
       practice to change keys (rekey) multiple times during an extended communication
       session. A scheme in which the compromise of one session key keeps future com-
       munications secure is said to have perfect forward secrecy (PFS). Usually, schemes
       that provide PFS require additional key exchanges or verifications that introduce
       overhead. One example is the STS protocol for DH mentioned earlier.

18.4.6 Pseudorandom Numbers, Generators, and Function Families
       In cryptography, random numbers are often used as initial input values to cryp-
       tographic functions, or for generating keys that are difficult to guess. Given that
       computers are not very random by nature, obtaining true random numbers is
       somewhat difficult. The numbers used in most computers for simulating random-
       ness are called pseudorandom numbers. Such numbers are not usually truly random
       but instead exhibit a number of statistical properties that suggest that they are
       (e.g., when many of them are generated, they tend to be uniformly distributed
       across some range).
            Pseudorandom numbers are produced by an algorithm or device known as a
       pseudorandom number generator (PRNG) or pseudorandom generator (PRG), depending
       on the author. Simple PRNGs are deterministic. That is, they have a small amount
       of internal state initialized by a seed value. Once the internal state is known, the

      sequence of PNs can be determined. For example, the common Linear Congruential
      Generator (LCG) algorithm produces random-appearing values that are entirely
      predictable if the input parameters are known or guessed. Consequently, LCGs
      are perfectly fine for use in certain programs (e.g., games that simulate random
      events) but insufficient for cryptographic purposes.
          A pseudorandom function family (PRF) is a family of functions that appear to
      be algorithmically indistinguishable (by polynomial time algorithms) from truly
      random functions [GGM86]. A PRF is a stronger concept than a PRG, as a PRG can
      be created from a PRF. PRFs are the basis for cryptographically strong (or secure)
      pseudorandom number generators, called CSPRNGs. CSPRNGs are necessary in
      cryptographic applications for several purposes, including session key generation,
      for which a sufficient amount of randomness must be guaranteed [RFC4086].

18.4.7 Nonces and Salt
      A cryptographic nonce is a number that is used once (or for one transaction) in a
      cryptographic protocol. Most commonly, a nonce is a random or pseudorandom
      number that is used in authentication protocols to ensure freshness. Freshness is
      the (desirable) property that a message or operation has taken place in the very
      recent past. For example, in a challenge-response protocol, a server may provide a
      requesting client with a nonce, and the client may need to respond with authenti-
      cation material as well as a copy of the nonce (or perhaps an encrypted copy of the
      nonce) within a certain period of time. This helps to avoid replay attacks, because
      old authentication exchanges that are replayed to the server would not contain the
      correct nonce value.
           A salt or salt value, used in the cryptographic context, is a random or pseudo-
      random number used to frustrate brute-force attacks on secrets. Brute-force attacks
      usually involve repeatedly guessing a password, passphrase, key, or equivalent
      secret value and checking to see if the guess was correct. Salts work by frustrat-
      ing the checking portion of a brute-force attack. The best-known example is the
      way passwords used to be handled in the UNIX system. Users’ passwords were
      encrypted and stored in a password file that all users could read. When logging
      in, each user would provide a password that was used to double encrypt a fixed
      value. The result was then compared against the user’s entry in the password file.
      A match indicated that a correct password was provided.
           At the time, the encryption method (DES) was well known and there was
      concern that a hardware-based dictionary attack would be possible whereby many
      words from a dictionary were encrypted with DES ahead of time (forming a rain-
      bow table) and compared against the password file. A pseudorandom 12-bit salt
      was added to perturb the DES algorithm in one of 4096 (nonstandard) ways for
      each password in an effort to thwart this attack. Ultimately, the 12-bit salt was
      determined to be insufficient with improved computers (that could guess more
      values) and was expanded.

18.4.8 Cryptographic Hash Functions and Message Digests
      In most of the protocols we have studied, including Ethernet, IP, ICMP, UDP, and
      TCP, we have seen the use of a frame check sequence (FCS, either a checksum or
      a CRC) to determine whether a PDU has likely been delivered without bit errors.
      Such mathematical functions tend to trade off the likelihood of detecting random
      errors against the amount of overhead required to carry the FCS value. When
      considering security, however, we are interested in ensuring message integrity
      not only against random, infrequent errors, but also against intentional message
      stream modification attacks. We are worried about Mallory modifying messages
      as they travel through the network. Ordinary FCS functions are not sufficient for
      this purpose.
           A checksum or FCS can be used to verify message integrity against an adver-
      sary like Mallory if properly constructed using special functions. Such functions
      are called cryptographic hash functions and often resemble portions of encryption
      algorithms. The output of a cryptographic hash function H, when provided a mes-
      sage M, is called the digest or fingerprint of the message, H(M). A message digest
      is a type of strong FCS that is easy to compute and has the following important
      properties:

          • Preimage resistance: Given H(M), it should be difficult to determine M if
            not already known.
          • Second preimage resistance: Given H(M1), it should be difficult to deter-
            mine an M2 ≠ M1 such that H(M1) = H(M2).
          • Collision resistance: It should be difficult to find any pair M1, M2 where
            H(M1) = H(M2) when M2 ≠ M1.

          If a hash function has all of these properties, then if two messages have the
      same cryptographic hash value, they are, with negligible doubt, the same mes-
      sage. The two most common cryptographic hash algorithms are at present the
      Message Digest Algorithm 5 (MD5, [RFC1321]), which produces a 128-bit (16-byte)
      digest, and the Secure Hash Algorithm 1 (SHA-1), which produces a 160-bit (20-byte)
      digest. More recently, a family of functions based on SHA called SHA-2 [RFC6234]
      produce digests with lengths of 224, 256, 384, or 512 bits (28, 32, 48, and 64 bytes,
      respectively). Others are under development.

          Notes
          Cryptographic hash functions are often based on a compression function f, which
          takes an input of length L and produces a collision-resistant but deterministic
          output of size less than L. The Merkle-Damgård construction, which essentially
          breaks an arbitrarily long input into blocks of length L, pads them, passes them to
          f, and combines the results, produces a cryptographic hash function capable of
          taking a long input and producing an output with collision resistance.

               MD5 had been in widespread use with Internet protocols until it was reported
          broken in 2005 (i.e., two different 128-byte sequences were shown to have the
          same MD5 value) [WY05]. SHA-1 was used as an alternative, but it was also
          thought to possibly have weaknesses, so a SHA-2 family of algorithms was devel-
          oped. Given SHA-2’s similarity to SHA-1, there is concern that it, too, may have
          weaknesses. In December 2010, the National Institute of Standards and Technol-
          ogy (NIST) in the United States announced that five algorithms had been selected
          as final candidates for a new “SHA-3” cryptographic hash algorithm [CHP]. The
          selection of the final winning algorithm is scheduled for sometime after spring
          2012.

18.4.9 Message Authentication Codes (MACs, HMAC, CMAC, and GMAC)
      A message authentication code (unfortunately abbreviated MAC or sometimes
      MIC but unrelated to the link-layer MAC addresses we discussed in Chapter 3)
      can be used to ensure message integrity and authentication. MACs are usually
      based on keyed cryptographic hash functions. Such functions are like message
      digest algorithms (see Section 18.4.8) but require a private key to produce or verify
      the integrity of a message and may also be used to verify (authenticate) the mes-
      sage’s sender.
          MACs require resistance to various forms of forgery. For a given keyed hash
      function H(M,K) taking input message M and key K, resistance to selective forgery
      means that it is difficult for an adversary not knowing K to form H(M,K) given a
      specific M. H(M,K) is resistant to existential forgery if it is difficult for an adversary
      lacking K to find any previously unknown valid combination of M and H(M,K).
      Note that MACs do not provide exactly the same features as digital signatures. For
      example, they cannot be a solid basis for nonrepudiation because the secret key is
      known to more than one party.
          A standard MAC that uses cryptographic hash functions in a particular way
      is called the keyed-hash message authentication code (HMAC) [FIPS198][RFC2104].
      The HMAC “algorithm” uses a generic cryptographic hash algorithm, say H(M).
      To form a t-byte HMAC on message M with key K using H (called HMAC-H), we
      use the following definition:

                    HMAC-H (K, M) t = Λt (H((K ⊕ opad)||H((K ⊕ ipad)||M)))

          In this definition, opad (outer pad) is an array containing the value 0x5C
      repeated |K| times, and ipad (inner pad) is an array containing the value 0x36
      repeated |K| times. ⊕ is the vector XOR operator, and || is the concatenation oper-
      ator. Normally the HMAC output is intended to be a certain number t of bytes in
      length, so the operator Λt (M) takes the left-most t bytes of M.
          The careful reader will observe that the definition of HMAC is a hash around
      another hash, of the form H(K1 || H(K2 || M)) using keys K1 and K2. This structure
      resists so-called extension attacks in which a selected pad value can be combined

       (e.g., by Mallory) with an intercepted message and digest value to form a new,
       valid message and digest value (not sent by Alice). The values of ipad and opad are
       not critical but tend to produce K1 and K2 values with few bits in common (i.e.,
       they have a large hamming distance). Certain extension attacks have been shown to
       be effective against naively constructed MACs such as those of the form H(K ||
       M) or H(M || K) but ineffective against the HMAC construct (or NMAC construct
       [BCK96], of which HMAC is a derivative)[B06].
            More recently, other forms of MACs have been standardized, called the cipher-
       based MAC (CMAC) [FIPS800-38B] and GMAC [NIST800-38D]. Instead of using a
       cryptographic hash function such as HMAC, these use a block cipher such as AES
       or 3DES. CMAC is envisioned for use in environments where it is more convenient
       or efficient to use a block cipher in place of a hash function. Details of CMAC
       using AES-128, called AES-CMAC, are provided in [RFC4493]. In essence, it works
       by encrypting a message block using AES-128 with a key K, taking the result and
       XORing it with the subsequent block, encrypting the result, and repeating the pro-
       cess until no more message blocks remain, with the output value being the result
       of the final encryption operation. If the final message block’s length is an even
       multiple of the algorithm’s block size, one subkey, derived from K using a special
       subkey-generating algorithm [IK03], is used in performing the final encryption.
       If not, the final message block is first padded and a second subkey, also generated
       from K, is used to perform the final encryption. GMAC uses a special mode of
       AES called Galois/Counter Mode (GCM). It also uses a keyed hash function (called
       GHASH, which is not a cryptographic hash function). We will see more about
       cryptographic operating modes in the next section.

18.4.10 Cryptographic Suites and Cipher Suites
       At this point we have seen mechanisms to ensure confidentiality, authenticity, and
       integrity of information sent across an unsecured communication network. There
       are other capabilities (e.g., nonrepudiation) that can also be achieved by selecting
       the appropriate mathematical or cryptographic techniques. The combination of
       techniques used in a particular system, especially those we see used with Internet
       protocols, are called a cryptographic suite or sometimes a cipher suite, although the
       first term is more accurate. A cryptographic suite defines not only an enciphering
       (encryption) algorithm but may also include a particular MAC algorithm, PRF,
       key agreement algorithm, signature algorithm, and associated key lengths and
       parameters.
            Many cryptographic suites are defined for use with the security protocols
       we shall discuss. Usually, an encryption algorithm is specified by its name and
       description, how many bits are used for its keys (often a multiple of 128 bits), along
       with its operating mode. Encryption algorithms that have been standardized for
       use with Internet protocols include AES, 3DES, NULL [RFC2410], and CAMEL-
       LIA [RFC3713]. The NULL encryption algorithm does not modify the input and is
       used in certain circumstances where confidentiality is not required.

           The operating mode of an encryption algorithm, especially a block cipher,
      describes how to use the encryption function for a single block repeatedly (e.g.,
      in a cascade) to encrypt or decrypt an entire message with a single key. Common
      modes today include cipher block chaining (CBC) and counter (CTR) mode, although
      many others have been defined. When performing encryption using CBC mode,
      a cleartext block to be encrypted is first XORed with the previous ciphertext block
      (the first block is XORed with a random initialization vector or IV). Encrypting in
      CTR mode involves first creating a value combining a nonce (or IV) and a counter
      that increments with each successive block to be encrypted. The combination is
      then encrypted, the output is XORed with a cleartext block to produce a ciphertext
      block, and the process repeats for successive blocks. In effect, this approach uses a
      block cipher to produce a keystream. A keystream is a sequence of (random-appear-
      ing) bits that are combined (e.g., XORed) with cleartext bits to produce a cipher-
      text. Doing so essentially converts a block cipher into a stream cipher because no
      explicit padding of the input is required.
           CBC requires a serial process for encryption and a partly serial process for
      decryption, whereas counter mode algorithms allow more efficient fully paral-
      lel encryption and decryption implementations. Consequently, counter mode is
      gaining popularity. In addition, variants of CTR mode (e.g., counter mode with
      CBC-MAC (CCM), Galois Counter Mode, or GCM) can be used for authenticated
      encryption [RFC4309], and possibly to authenticate (but not encrypt) additional
      data (called authenticated encryption with associated data or AEAD) [RFC5116]. When
      authenticated encryption algorithms are used, separate MACs are generally not
      necessary. In the degenerate case of an AEAD algorithm operating on data that
      does not require confidentiality, a form of MAC is effectively produced (e.g.,
      GMAC). When an encryption algorithm is specified as part of a cryptographic
      suite, its name usually includes the mode, and the key length is often implied. For
      example, ENCR_AES_CTR refers to AES-128 used in CTR mode.
           When a PRF is included in the definition of a cryptographic suite, it is usu-
      ally based on a cryptographic hash algorithm family such as SHA-2 [RFC6234] or
      a cryptographic MAC such as CMAC [RFC4434][RFC4615]. Constructions of this
      type generally include the name of the function serving as the basis. For example,
      the algorithm AES-CMAC-PRF-128 refers to a PRF constructed using a CMAC
      based on AES-128. It is also written as PRF_AES128_CMAC. The algorithm PRF_
      HMAC_SHA1 refers to a PRF based on HMAC-SHA1.
           Key agreement parameters, when included with an Internet cryptographic
      suite definition, refer to DH group definitions, as no other key agreement pro-
      tocol is in widespread use. When DH key agreement is used in generating keys
      for a particular encryption algorithm, care must be taken to ensure that the keys
      produced are of sufficient length (strength) to avoid compromising the security
      of the encryption algorithm. Consequently, more than 16 groups for use with DH
      in different contexts have been standardized [RFC5114]. The first 5 have become
      known as the “Oakley Groups” because they were specified by the Oakley pro-
      tocol [RFC2409], an early component of IPsec that has since been deprecated. The

     modular exponential or MODP groups are based on exponentiation and modular
     arithmetic. The elliptic curve groups modulo a prime or ECP groups [RFC5903] are
     based on curves over the Galois field GF(P) for a prime P, and the elliptic curve
     groups modulo a power of two or EC2N are based on curves over the field GF(2N) for
     some N.
          A signature algorithm is sometimes included in the definition of a crypto-
     graphic suite. It may be used for signing a variety of values including data, MACs,
     and DH values. The most common is to use RSA to sign a hashed value for some
     block of data, although the digital signature standard (written as DSS or DSA to indi-
     cate the digital signature algorithm) [FIPS186-3] is also used in some circumstances.
     With the advent of ECC, signatures based on elliptic curves (e.g., ECDSA [X9.62-
     2005]) are also now supported in many systems.
          The concept of a cryptographic suite evolved in the context of Internet secu-
     rity protocols because of a need for modularity and decoupled evolution. As com-
     putational power has improved, older cryptographic algorithms and smaller key
     lengths have fallen victim to various forms of brute-force attacks. In some cases,
     more sophisticated attacks have revealed flaws that necessitate the replacement of
     the underlying mathematical and cryptographic methods, but the basic protocol
     machinery is otherwise sound. As a result, the choice of a cryptographic suite can
     now be made separately from the communication protocol details and depends
     on factors such as convenience, performance, and security. Protocols tend to make
     use of the components of a cryptographic suite in a standard way, so an appro-
     priate cryptographic suite can be “snapped in” when deemed appropriate. It is
     now common practice in protocol design to “outsource” the security processing
     to a separately defined set of cryptographic suites that have been analyzed by a
     large community with the necessary cryptographic and mathematical expertise.
     Although the ability to “snap in” a new cipher suite is appealing, it can still take
     years to standardize on acceptable suites and get them deployed. For interoper-
     ability, each participant in a communication exchange must usually employ the
     same suite. This can be a significant hurdle when cipher suites may be imple-
     mented in a wide range of software and hardware systems.

18.5 Certificates, Certificate Authorities (CAs), and PKIs
     The tools provided by cryptography and related mathematics, including digital
     signatures and enciphering algorithms, provide a sound basis for constructing
     secure systems, but a great deal of additional work is required to create an entire
     system from these parts. Among the items of particular concern are the construc-
     tion of secure protocols that use cryptographic methods in safe ways, and how
     keys are created, exchanged, and revoked (called key management). Key manage-
     ment remains one of the greatest challenges in deploying cryptographic systems
     on a widespread basis across multiple administrative domains.

            One of the challenges with public key cryptosystems is to determine the cor-
       rect public key for a principal or identity. In our running example, if Alice were to
       send her public key to Bob, Mallory could modify it in transit to be her own public
       key, and Bob (called the relying party here) might unknowingly be using Mallory’s
       key, thinking it is Alice’s. This would allow Mallory to effectively masquerade as
       Alice. To address this problem, a public key certificate is used to bind an identity to
       a particular public key using a digital signature. At first glance, this presents a
       certain “chicken-egg” problem: How can a public key become signed if the digital
       signature itself requires a reliable public key? There are two ways this is accom-
       plished today.
            One model, called a web of trust, involves having a certificate (identity/key
       binding) endorsed by a collection of existing users (called endorsers). An endorser
       signs a certificate and distributes the signed certificate. The more endorsers for
       a certificate over time, the more reliable it is likely to be. An entity checking a
       certificate might require some number of endorsers or possibly some particular
       endorsers to trust the certificate. The web of trust model is decentralized and
       “grassroots” in nature, with no central authority. This has mixed consequences.
       Having no central authority suggests that the scheme will not collapse because
       of a single point of failure, but it also means that a new entrant may experience
       some delay in getting its key endorsed to a degree sufficient to be trusted by a
       significant number of users. Some groups hold “key signing parties” to hasten
       this process. The web of trust model was first described as part of the Pretty Good
       Privacy (PGP) encryption system for electronic mail [NAZ00], which has evolved
       to support a standard encoding format called OpenPGP, defined by [RFC4880].
            A more formal approach, which has the added benefit of being provably
       secure under certain theoretical assumptions in exchange for more dependence
       on a centralized authority, involves the use of a public key infrastructure (PKI). A
       PKI is a service responsible for creating, revoking, distributing, and updating key
       pairs and certificates. It operates with a collection of certificate authorities (CAs). A
       CA is an entity and service set up to manage and attest to the bindings between
       identities and their corresponding public keys. There are several hundred com-
       mercial CAs. A CA usually employs a hierarchical signing scheme. This means that
       a public key may be signed using a parent key which is in turn signed by a grand-
       parent key, and so on. Ultimately a CA has one or more root certificates upon which
       many subordinate certificates depend for trust. An entity that is authoritative for
       certificates and keys (e.g., a CA) is called a trust anchor, although this term is also
       used to describe the certificates or other cryptographic material associated with
       such entities [RFC6024], which we discuss next.

18.5.1 Public Key Certificates, Certificate Authorities, and X.509
       While several types of certificates have been used in the past, the one of most inter-
       est to us is based on an Internet profile of the ITU-T X.509 standard [RFC5280]. In
       addition, any particular certificate may be stored and exchanged in a number of

file or encoding formats. The most common ones include DER, PEM (a Base64
encoded version of DER), PKCS#7 (P7B), and PKCS#12 (PFX). We also saw the use
of PKCS#1 [RFC3447] in Chapter 8. Today, Internet PKI-related standards tend to
use the cryptographic message syntax [RFC5652], which is based on PKCS#7 version
1.5. In the following example, we use an X.509 certificate in PEM format, which is
the default format for many Internet applications and has the added advantage of
being easily displayed as ASCII.
     Certificates are primarily used in identifying four types of entities on the
Internet: individuals, servers, software publishers, and CAs. One popular com-
mercial CA, Verisign, assigns a “class” to each certificate, in the range 1 through
5. Class 1 certificates are intended for individuals, class 2 for organizations, class
3 for servers and software signing, class 4 for online transactions between com-
panies, and class 5 for private organizations and governments. Certificate classes
are primarily a convenience for grouping and naming types of certificates and for
defining different security policies associated with them. Generally speaking, a
higher class number is supposed to indicate more rigorous controls on the process
required to validate an identity (called identity proofing) prior to issuing the associ-
ated certificate.
     This still does not totally solve the chicken-egg PKI bootstrapping problem
mentioned before. In practice, systems requiring public key operations have root
certificates for popular CAs installed at configuration time (e.g., Microsoft Inter-
net Explorer, Mozilla’s Firefox, and Google’s Chrome are all capable of accessing
a preconfigured database of root certificates). To see how this works, we can use
a command that gives information about certificates. The openssl command,
available for most common platforms including Linux and Windows, allows us to
see the certificates for a Web site (some lines are wrapped for clarity):

Linux% CDIR=`openssl version –d | awk ’{print $2}’`
Linux% openssl s_client –CApath $CDIR \
                 –connect www.digicert.com:443 > digicert.out 2>1
^C (to interrupt)

    The first command determines where the local system stores its preconfig-
ured CA certificates. This is usually a directory that varies by system. In this case,
the name of the directory is stored in the shell variable CDIR. We next make a con-
nection to the HTTPS port (443) on the www.digicert.com server and redirect
the output to the digicert.out file. The openssl command2 takes care to print
the entity identified by each of the certificates, and at what depth they are in the
certificate hierarchy relative to the root (depth 0 is the server’s certificate, so the
depth numbers are counted bottom to top). It also checks the certificates against
the stored CA certificates to see if they verify properly. In this case, they do, as
indicated by “verify return” having value 0 (ok).

2. Note that a similar command unique to Windows called certutil is available with Windows
   2003 Server and the Windows Server 2003 Administration Tools Pack.

      Linux% grep ”return code” digicert.out
          Verify return code: 0 (ok)

          The file digicert.out contains not only a trace of the connection to the
      server but also a copy of the server’s certificate. To get the certificate into a more
      usable form, we can extract the certificate data, convert it, and place the result into
      a PEM-encoded certificate file:

      Linux% openssl x509 –in digicert.out –out digicert.pem

           Given the certificate in PEM format, we can now use a variety of openssl
      functions to manipulate and inspect it. At the highest level, the certificate includes
      some data to be signed (called the “TBSCertificate”) followed by a signature algo-
      rithm identifier and signature value. To see the server certificate, we can use the
      following command (some lines are wrapped or removed for clarity):

      Linux% openssl x509 –in digicert.pem –text
      Certificate:
          Data:
              Version: 3 (0x2)
              Serial Number:
                   02:c7:1f:e0:1d:70:41:4b:8b:a7:e2:9e:5e:58:42:b9
              Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
              Issuer: C=US, O=DigiCert Inc, OU=www.digicert.com,
                       CN=DigiCert High Assurance EV CA-1
              Validity
                   Not Before: Oct 6 00:00:00 2010 GMT
                   Not After : Oct 9 23:59:59 2012 GMT
              Subject: 2.5.4.15=V1.0, Clause 5.(b)/
                        1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3=us/
                        1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2=Utah/
                        serialNumber=5299537-0142,
                        C=US, ST=Utah, L=Lindon, O=DigiCert, Inc.,
                        CN=www.digicert.com
              Subject Public Key Info:
                   Public Key Algorithm: rsaEncryption
                   RSA Public Key: (2048 bit)
                       Modulus (2048 bit):
                           00:d1:76:0b:1e:4e:96:d2:08:c1:b8:75:bd:20:9c:
                           66:7f:42:6b:54:8b:7f:7a:4a:f8:3e:df:70:68:1f:
                           ...
                           25:7b:40:e9:e3:cc:a2:0d:95:29:f4:08:ed:50:16:
                           52:11:6f:de:a0:bb:34:bc:8b:b5:60:c1:ab:e4:78:
                           75:9f
                       Exponent: 65537 (0x10001)
              X509v3 extensions:
                   X509v3 Authority Key Identifier:
                       keyid:4C:58:CB:25:F0:41:4F:52:F4:
                       28:C8:81:43:9B:A6:A8:A0:E6:92:E5

             X509v3 Subject Key Identifier:
                 4F:E0:97:FF:C1:AE:06:53:03:19:F7:
                 0A:37:4B:9F:F0:13:E2:88:D8
             X509v3 Subject Alternative Name:
                 DNS:www.digicert.com, DNS:content.digicert.com
             Authority Information Access:
                 OCSP - URI:http://ocsp.digicert.com
                 CA Issuers - URI:
                    http://www.digicert.com/CACerts/
                    DigiCertHighAssuranceEVCA-1.crt
             Netscape Cert Type:
                 SSL Client, SSL Server
             X509v3 Key Usage: critical
                 Digital Signature, Key Encipherment
             X509v3 Basic Constraints: critical
                 CA:FALSE
             X509v3 CRL Distribution Points:
                 URI:http://crl3.digicert.com/ev2009a.crl
                 URI:http://crl4.digicert.com/ev2009a.crl
             X509v3 Certificate Policies:
                 Policy: 2.16.840.1.114412.2.1
                   CPS: http://www.digicert.com/ssl-cps-repository.htm
                   User Notice:
                     Explicit Text:

            X509v3 Extended Key Usage:
                TLS Web Server Authentication,
                TLS Web Client Authentication
    Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
        e1:e6:dd:0e:23:5f:08:9a:63:63:c7:a1:f3:95:f0:ca:7e:3c:
        57:81:2c:2a:19:2b:24:fe:e4:26:bd:91:27:7c:11:50:35:e7:
        ...
        fd:64:6f:97:8b:15:fb:d1:7a:f7:67:80:da:da:41:d8:e3:f9:
        e4:bd:92:97
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
MIIHLTCCBhWgAwIBAgIQAscf4B1wQUuLp+KeXlhCuTANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQUFADBp
MQswCQYDVQQGEwJVUzEVMBMGA1UEChMMRGlnaUNlcnQgSW5jMRkwFwYDVQQLExB3
...
8+qQ0wF/xY9rHM0+eIqy3da4AFhfW4sAmyafs7hcEMjUAkS6Yb0qIw8ud/1kb5eL
FfvRevdngNraQdjj+eS9kpc=
-----END CERTIFICATE-----

     Looking at the command’s output, we see a decoded version of the certificate
followed by an ASCII (PEM) representation of the certificate (between the BEGIN
CERTIFICATE and END CERTIFICATE indicators). The decoded certificate shows
a data portion and a signature portion. Within the data portion is some metadata
including a Version field, indicating the particular X.509 certificate type (3, the
most recent, is encoded using hex value 0x02), a Serial Number of the particular cer-
tificate, a number assigned by the CA unique to each certificate, and a Validity field
that gives the time during which the certificate should be treated as legitimate,

      starting with the Not Before subfield and ending with the Not After subfield. The
      certificate metadata also indicates which signature algorithm is used to sign the
      data portion. In this case, it is signed by computing a hash using SHA-1 and sign-
      ing the result using RSA. The signature itself appears at the end of the certificate.
           The Issuer field indicates the distinguished name (jargon from the ITU-T X.500
      standard) of the entity that issued the certificate and may have these special sub-
      fields (based on X.501): C (country), L (locale or city), O (organization), OU (orga-
      nizational unit), ST (state or province), CN (common name). Other subfields have
      also been defined. In this case, we can see that an extended validation (EV) [CABF09]
      CA certificate has been used to sign the server’s certificate.
           EV certificates represent an industry response to certain phishing attacks
      involving malicious Web sites that were issued certificates without rigorous iden-
      tity proofing. Issuing of an EV certificate takes place only under an agreed-upon
      set of stringent criteria, and a user visiting a Web site using EV certificates and a
      modern browser typically sees a green title bar and CA information to indicate the
      enhanced level of rigor. One of the requirements for EV certificates placed upon
      each CA is to provide a certification practice statement (CPS), which outlines the
      practices used in issuing certificates. Considerations for authors of CPSs (and cer-
      tificate policies or CPs that apply on a per-certificate basis) are given in [RFC5280].
      Note that although EV certificates may provide higher assurance (e.g., for some
      Web sites), most users do not pay careful attention to the cues provided by Web
      browsers that reveal this fact [BOPSW09].
           The Subject field identifies the entity this certificate is about, and the owner
      of the public key contained in the subsequent Subject Public Key Info field. In this
      example, the Subject field is a somewhat complex structure like the Issuer field
      and contains multiple object IDs (OIDs) [ITUOID]. Most are decoded with names
      (e.g., O, C, ST, L, CN), but some are not because the particular version of openssl
      that printed the output did not understand them. The OID 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.3
      is also called jurisdictionOfIncorporationCountryName, and 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.60.2.1.2
      is called jurisdictionOfIncorporationStateOrProvinceName, both with obvious
      meanings. The OID 2.5.4.15 is businessCategory (see [CABF09] for details). Note
      that the CN subfield tends to be an important one when identifying subjects and
      issuers for certificates used on the Internet. For this certificate, it gives the cor-
      rect matching name for the server (along with any names included in the Subject
      Alternative Name (SAN) extension). Nonmatching names or URLs (e.g., https://
      digicert.com instead of https://www.digicert.com) referring to the same
      server, when accessed, result in an error. Note that CN is not really the field for
      holding a DNS name; SANs are intended for this purpose.
           When a certificate needs to be validated, a recursive process works up the
      certificate hierarchy to a root CA certificate by matching the issuer distinguished
      name in one certificate with the subject name in another. In this case, the certificate
      was issued by DigiCert High Assurance EV CA-1 (the issuer’s CN subfield).
      Assuming all certificates are current in their validity periods and are being used
      in appropriate ways, some parent certificate (immediate parent, grandparent, etc.,

but usually a root CA certificate) to the Subject field of the certificate we are evalu-
ating must be trusted for validation to be successful.
     The Subject Public Key Info field gives the algorithm and public key belonging
to the entity specified in the Subject field. In this case, the public key is an RSA
public key with a 2048-bit modulus and public exponent of 65537. The subject is
in possession of the matching RSA private key (modulus plus private exponent)
that is paired to the public key. If the private key is compromised, or if the public
key needs to be changed for other reasons, the public and private keys must be
regenerated and a new certificate issued. The old certificate is then revoked (see
Section 18.5.2).
     Version 3 X.509 certificates may include zero or more extensions. Extensions
are either critical or noncritical, and some are required by the Internet profile in
[RFC5280]. If critical, an extension must be processed and found acceptable by
the relying party’s (CPS jargon) policy. Noncritical extensions are processed if
supported but do not otherwise cause errors. In the present example, there are
ten X.509v3 extensions. Although many extensions have been defined, those we
shall discuss tend to fall into two informal categories. The first category includes
information about the subject and how the certificate in question can be used.
The second category relates to items describing the issuer and may include key
identification and URIs indicating locations of additional information related to
the issuing CA that is not included elsewhere. The certificate in our example is an
end entity (not CA) certificate. CA certificates often have somewhat different exten-
sions or values for their extensions.
     The Basic Constraints extension, a critical extension, indicates whether the cer-
tificate is a CA certificate. In this case it is not, so it cannot be used for signing
other certificates. A certificate indicating that it is a CA certificate may be used in
a certificate validation chain at a location other than a leaf. This is common for root
CA certificates or for other certificate-signing certificates (“intermediate” certifi-
cates, such as the DigiCert High Assurance EV CA-1 certificate referenced
in this example).
     The Subject Key Identifier extension identifies the public key in the certificate.
It allows different keys owned by the same subject to be differentiated. The Key
Usage extension, a critical extension, determines the valid usage for the key. Pos-
sible usages include digital signature, nonrepudiation (content commitment), key
encipherment, data encipherment, key agreement, certificate signing, CRL signing
(see Section 18.5.2), encipher only, and decipher only. Because server certificates of
this kind are primarily used for identifying the two endpoints of a connection and
encrypting a session key (see Section 18.9), the possible usages may be somewhat
limited, as in this case. The Extended Key Usage extension, which may be critical or
noncritical, may provide further restrictions on the key use. Possible values of this
extension when used in the Internet profile include the following: TLS client and
server authentication, signing of downloadable code, e-mail protection (nonrepu-
diation and key agreement or encipherment), various IPsec operating modes (see
Section 18.8), and timestamping. The SAN extension allows a single certificate to be

       used for multiple purposes (e.g., for multiple Web sites with distinct DNS names).
       This alleviates the need to have a separate certificate for each Web site, which can
       significantly reduce cost and administrative burden. In this case, the certificate can
       be used for either of the DNS names www.digicert.com or content.digicert.
       com (but not digicert.com, as mentioned before). The Netscape Cert Type exten-
       sion is now deprecated but was used to indicate key usage to Netscape software.
            The remaining extensions in our example certificate relate to the manage-
       ment and status of the certificate and its issuing CA. The CRL Distribution Points
       (CDP) extension gives a list of URLs for finding the CA’s certificate revocation list
       (CRL), a list of revoked certificates used to determine if a certificate in a valida-
       tion chain has been revoked (see Section 18.5.2). The Certificate Policies (CP) exten-
       sion includes certificate policies applicable to the certificate [RFC5280]. In this
       example, the CP extension contains a policy with two qualifiers. The Policy value of
       2.16.840.1.114412.2.1 indicates that the certificate complies with an EV policy. The
       CPS qualifier gives a pointer to the URI where the particular applicable CPS for
       the policy may be found. The User Notice qualifier may contain text intended to be
       displayed to a relying party. In this case it contains the following string:

           Any use of this Certificate constitutes acceptance of the DigiCert EV CPS and the
           Relying Party Agreement which limit liability and are incorporated herein by
           reference.

            The Authority Key Identifier identifies the public key corresponding to the pri-
       vate key used to sign the certificate. It is useful when an issuer has multiple pri-
       vate keys used for generating signatures. The Authority Information Access (AIA)
       extension indicates where information may be retrieved from the CA. In this case,
       it indicates a URI used to determine if the certificate has been revoked using an
       online query protocol (see Section 18.5.2). It also indicates the list of CA issuers,
       which includes a URL containing the CA certificate responsible for signing the
       example server certificate.
            Following the extensions, the certificate contains the signature portion. It con-
       tains the identification of the signature algorithm (SHA-1 with RSA here), which
       must match the Signature Algorithm field we encountered earlier. In this case, the
       signature itself is a 256-byte value, corresponding to the 2048-bit modulus used
       for this use of RSA.

18.5.2 Validating and Revoking Certificates
       We have already encountered the idea that a certificate may have to be revoked
       and possibly replaced with a freshly issued certificate. Within the IETF, [RFC5280]
       defines the use of X.509 version 3 certificates with X.509 version 2 CRLs for the
       Internet. This brings up the question of how a certificate is revoked and how this
       fact is made known to relying parties that need to know that the certificates on
       which they depend are no longer trustworthy.

     To validate a certificate, a validation or certification path must be established that
includes a set of validated certificates, usually up to some trust anchor (e.g., root
certificate) that is already known to the relying party. One of the key steps involves
determining if one or more of the certificates in a chain have been revoked. If so,
the path validation fails. We saw some of this in Section 8.5.5.
     There are several reasons why a certificate may need to be revoked, such as
when a certificate’s subject (or issuer) changes affiliations or name. When a certifi-
cate is revoked, it may no longer be used. The challenge is to ensure that entities
that wish to use a certificate become aware if it has been revoked. In the Internet,
there are two primary ways this is accomplished: CRLs and the Online Certifi-
cate Status Protocol (OCSP) [RFC2560]. When the CRL Distribution Point extension
includes an HTTP or FTP URI scheme, as it does in the preceding example, the
complete URL gives the name of a file encoded in DER format containing an X.509
CRL. In our example, we can retrieve the CRL corresponding to the certificate
using the following command:

Linux% wget http://crl3.digicert.com/ev2009a.crl

and print it out as follows:

Linux% openssl crl –inform der –in ev2009a.crl –text
Certificate Revocation List (CRL):
        Version 2 (0x1)
        Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
        Issuer: /C=US/O=DigiCert Inc/OU=www.digicert.com/
                CN=DigiCert High Assurance EV CA-1
        Last Update: Jan 2 06:20:13 2011 GMT
        Next Update: Jan 9 06:20:00 2011 GMT
        CRL extensions:
            X509v3 Authority Key Identifier:
                keyid:4C:58:CB:25:F0:41:4F:52:F4:
                28:C8:81:43:9B:A6:A8:A0:E6:92:E5

            X509v3 CRL Number:
                732Revoked Certificates:
    Serial Number: 0119BF8D1A24460EBE59355A11AD7B1C
        Revocation Date: Jul 29 19:25:40 2009 GMT
        CRL entry extensions:
            X509v3 CRL Reason Code:
                Unspecified
    ...
    Serial Number: 0D2ED685A9A828A21067D1826C5015A9
        Revocation Date: Dec 17 17:18:40 2010 GMT
        CRL entry extensions:
            X509v3 CRL Reason Code:
                Superseded
    Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
        d4:a3:50:07:1b:b8:17:ff:e2:83:3d:b9:6a:3e:22:8d:e4:22:
        40:12:0b:cf:26:d9:16:99:b1:96:5a:86:ea:3e:8a:3f:f9:39:
        ...

              c7:e0:92:f6:66:72:7e:a4:f0:fd:16:d4:ec:2f:10:35:ea:2d:
              45:06:19:4b
      -----BEGIN X509 CRL-----
      MIIHeDCCBmACAQEwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQAwaTELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMxFTATBgNV
      BAoTDERpZ2lDZXJ0IEluYzEZMBcGA1UECxMQd3d3LmRpZ2ljZXJ0LmNvbTEoMCYG
      ...
      hzcRf+ITVZ76LtHdzWDDPFujPyqPzMnkbGqGVsve9Gd4NcQiozOyoCDvaLezgO69
      EYmMayk9zXFSaBVdEZ5Tgekrj0fFnsfgkvZmcn6k8P0W1OwvEDXqLUUGGUs=
      -----END X509 CRL-----

           Here we can see the format of an X.509 v2 CRL. The format is very similar
      to that of a certificate, and the entire message is signed by a CA as certificates
      are. This is useful because CRLs can be distributed like certificates: using oth-
      erwise untrusted communication channels and servers. In comparison with a
      certificate, the validity period is replaced by a list of the previous and next CRL
      updates. There is no subject and no public key but instead a list of serial numbers
      for revoked certificates plus the time and reason for revocation. There may also be
      CRL extensions that are unique to CRLs. In this example, the Authority Key Identi-
      fier extension gives a number identifying the key used by the CA in signing the
      CRL. The CRL Number extension gives the sequence number of the CRL. Other
      values are given in [RFC5280].
           The other primary method for determining if a certificate has been revoked
      is OCSP. OCSP is an application-level request/response protocol usually oper-
      ated over HTTP (i.e., using the HTTP protocol with TCP/IP on TCP port 80). An
      OCSP request includes information identifying a particular certificate, plus some
      optional extensions. A response indicates whether the certificate is not revoked,
      unknown, or revoked. An error may be returned if the request cannot be parsed
      or otherwise acted upon. The key used for signing the OCSP response need not
      necessarily match the key used to sign the original certificate. This is possible if
      the issuer included a Key Usage extension indicating an alternate OCSP provider.
           To see an OCSP request/response exchange, we can execute the following
      commands once we have obtained the appropriate Class 1 certificate in the file
      DigiCertHighAssuranceEVCA-1.pem (not shown). In the following example,
      some lines are wrapped for clarity:

      Linux% CERT=DigiCertHighAssuranceEVCA-1.pem
      Linux% openssl ocsp –issuer $CERT –cert digicert.pem \
      -url http://ocsp.digicert.com –VAfile $CERT –no_nonce –text
      OCSP Request Data:
          Version: 1 (0x0)
          Requestor List:
              Certificate ID:
                Hash Algorithm: sha1
                Issuer Name Hash: B8A299F09D061DD5C1588F76CC89FF57092B94DD
                Issuer Key Hash: 4C58CB25F0414F52F428C881439BA6A8A0E692E5
                Serial Number: 02C71FE01D70414B8BA7E29E5E5842B9

       OCSP Response Data:
           OCSP Response Status: successful (0x0)
           Response Type: Basic OCSP Response
           Version: 1 (0x0)
           Responder Id: 4C58CB25F0414F52F428C881439BA6A8A0E692E5
           Produced At: Jan 2 08:03:24 2011 GMT
           Responses:
           Certificate ID:
             Hash Algorithm: sha1
             Issuer Name Hash: B8A299F09D061DD5C1588F76CC89FF57092B94DD
             Issuer Key Hash: 4C58CB25F0414F52F428C881439BA6A8A0E692E5
             Serial Number: 02C71FE01D70414B8BA7E29E5E5842B9
           Cert Status: good
           This Update: Jan 2 08:03:24 2011 GMT
           Next Update: Jan 9 08:18:24 2011 GMT

       Response verify OK
       digicert.pem: good
             This Update: Jan      2 08:03:24 2011 GMT
             Next Update: Jan      9 08:18:24 2011 GMT

            As we can see, the OCSP transaction has indicated that the certificate is good.
       The request included the identification of a hash algorithm (SHA-1), a hash of the
       issuer name, a number identifying the issuer’s key (the same as the Key ID exten-
       sion in the certificate), plus the certificate’s serial number. The responder, identi-
       fied by the responder ID, identifies itself and signs the response. The response
       includes the hashes and numbers from the request, as well as the certificate status
       of “good” (i.e., not revoked). The OCSP protocol alleviates the client from having
       to download the latest CRL to check but still requires the client to form and verify
       the entire certification path. In some cases, this can be a considerable burden for
       the client.
            To help address the burden of certificate chain formation and validation
       imposed on client systems, the Server-Based Certificate Validation Protocol (SCVP)
       has been defined in [RFC5055] but is not widely used. With SCVP, formulation of
       a certification path (called delegated path discovery or DPD) and, optionally, valida-
       tion (called delegated path validation or DPV) of it can be offloaded to a server. Vali-
       dation is offloaded only to a trusted server. Not only does this provide a method
       to reduce the load on clients, but it also offers a method for helping to ensure that
       a common validation policy is used consistently throughout an enterprise.

18.5.3 Attribute Certificates
       In addition to public key certificates (PKCs) used to bind names to public keys,
       X.509 defines another type of certificate called an attribute certificate (AC). ACs are
       similar in structure to PKCs but lack a public key. They are used to indicate other
       information, including authorization information that may have a lifetime differ-
       ent from (e.g., shorter than) a corresponding PKC [RFC5755]. ACs contain other
       structures similar to PKCs, including extensions and AC policies.

18.6 TCP/IP Security Protocols and Layering
      We have seen that cryptography provides a basis for building communication sys-
      tems that have a number of desirable security properties. Protocols involving cryp-
      tography can (and do) exist at a number of different layers in the protocol stack.
      Consistent with our understanding of the OSI reference model we discussed in
      Chapter 1, we now see that encryption, and thus various forms of strong security,
      can be supported at essentially every layer.
           As we might expect, security services at the link layer protect information
      only as it flows across a single communication hop, security at the network layer
      protects information flowing between hosts, security at the transport layer pro-
      tects process-to-process communication, and security at the application layer pro-
      tects information manipulated by applications. It is also possible to protect the
      data manipulated by applications independently of the communication layers
      (e.g., files can be encrypted and sent as e-mail attachments). Figure 18-4 illustrates
      the most common security protocols used in conjunction with TCP/IP.

        /D\HU               /D\HU
       1XPEHU               1DPH                                          ([DPSOHV

                        $SSOLFDWLRQ              '166(&??'.,0??($3??'LDPHWHU??5$',86??66+??.HUEHURV??,3VHF? ,.(

                         7UDQVSRUW                                      7/6??'7/6??3$1$

                         1HWZRUN                                          ,3VHF? (63

                            /LQN                       ?????; ($3R/ ???????$( 0$&6HF ????????L?:3$???($3

Figure 18-4   Security protocols exist at essentially every OSI stack layer, plus some “in-between” lay-
                    ers. Selecting the appropriate protocols for the threats to be addressed requires atten-
                    tion to detail.

          In Figure 18-4, we can see that there are many security protocols, and the ones
      we care about at any given time depend on what scope of functionality we require.
      We shall discuss most of the protocols in Figure 18-4 in what follows, with par-
      ticular emphasis on IPsec (machine-to-machine security at layer 3), TLS (Trans-
      port Layer Security designed for supporting applications), and DNSSEC. TLS and
      IPsec are the most prevalent, as TLS is used with all secure Web communications
      (HTTPS) and IPsec is used with most network-layer security, including VPNs.

     DNSSEC, which secures the DNS (see Chapter 11), is being introduced slowly, but
     the perceived demand is significant. Security of the DNS will help to limit DNS
     hijacking attacks, in which client systems are redirected to bogus DNS servers that
     supply incorrect information. Two of the fairly popular protocols we do not dis-
     cuss in detail are Kerberos [RFC4120]—a trusted third-party authentication sys-
     tem now used in Windows enterprise environments—and SSH [RFC4251]—the
     secure shell remote login and tunneling protocol used most often with UNIX-like
     systems. These protocols tend to be used among computers running particular
     operating systems, although this is by no means required. We have elected to use
     the detailed protocol descriptions in this chapter to cover the protocols that we
     believe will apply to an even broader Internet audience over time.
          Although virtually every modern networking technology has some associ-
     ated security approach, we shall move up the layers in the OSI stack from the bot-
     tom, starting with the link layer. We have already seen (see Chapter 3) that some of
     the link-layer protocols have their own security mechanisms (e.g., 802.11-2007 has
     WPA2 included in the specification, based on the earlier 802.11i specification). We
     shall be especially concerned with protocols that apply to more than one specific
     type of link layer network.

18.7 Network Access Control: 802.1X, 802.1AE, EAP, and PANA
     Network Access Control (NAC) refers to methods used to authorize or deny network
     communications to particular systems or users. Defined by the IEEE, the 802.1X
     Port-Based Network Access Control (PNAC) standard is commonly used with TCP/
     IP networks to support LAN security in enterprises, for both wired and wireless
     networks. The purpose of PNAC is to provide access to a network (e.g., intranet or
     the Internet) only if a system and/or its user has been authenticated based on the
     system’s network attachment point. Used in conjunction with the IETF standard
     Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) [RFC3748], 802.1X is sometimes called
     EAP over LAN (EAPoL), although the 802.1X standard covers more than just the
     EAPoL packet format.
          The most common variant of 802.1X is based on the standard as published in
     2004, however, [802.1X-2010] includes compatibility with 802.1AE (IEEE standard
     LAN encryption called MACSec) and 802.1AR (X.509 certificates for secure device
     identities). It also includes a somewhat complex MACSec key agreement protocol
     called MKA that we do not discuss further. In 802.1X, a system being authenti-
     cated implements a function known as a supplicant. The supplicant interacts with
     an authenticator and a backend authentication server to perform authentication and
     gain network access. VLANs (see Chapter 3) are often used in helping to enforce
     the access control decisions made by 802.1X.
          EAP can be used with multiple link-layer technologies and supports multiple
     methods for implementing authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA). EAP
     does not perform encryption itself, so it must be used in conjunction with some
     other cryptographically strong protocol to be secure. When used with link-layer

         encryption such as WPA2 on wireless networks or 802.1AE on wired networks,
         802.1X is relatively secure. EAP uses the same concepts of supplicant and authen-
         tication server as does 802.1X, but with different terminology (EAP uses the terms
         peer, authenticator, and AAA server although even in EAP-related literature backend
         authentication server is sometimes used). An example setup is shown in Figure 18-5.

                                           ($3
                                                                     $XWKHQWLFDWLRQ?
   :LUHOHVV?3HHU                       3DVV?7KURXJK
                                                              $XWKRUL]DWLRQ??DQG?$FFRXQWLQJ?
    6XSSOLFDQW
                                                                       $$$ ?6HUYHU
                                 
                                 L          'LDPHWHU?RU
                                             5$',86

                       $XWKHQWLFDWRU
                                                  &RUS?9/$1                                    ,QWHUQHW
  :LUHG?3HHU
                               ;
  6XSSOLFDQW              ($3R/

                                                               ,QWUDQHW
                                                5HPHGLDWLRQ     6HUYHU
                            5HPHGLDWLRQ?*XHVW     9/$1
                                6HUYHU

Figure 18-5    EAP, supported by 802.11i and 802.1X, allows for a peer (supplicant) to be authenticated by an
               authenticator that is separate from an AAA server. The authenticator can operate in “pass-
               through” mode in which it does little more than forward EAP packets. It can also participate
               more directly in the EAP protocol. The pass-through mode allows authenticators to avoid having
               to implement a large number of authentication methods.

             In this figure we see a hypothetical enterprise network including wired and
         wireless peers, a protected network that includes the AAA server and another
         intranet server on a particular VLAN, and an unauthenticated or “remediation”
         VLAN. The authenticator’s job is to interact with unauthenticated peers and the
         AAA server (via AAA protocols such as RADIUS [RFC2865][RFC3162] or Diameter
         [RFC3588]) to determine if each peer should be granted access to the protected net-
         work. If so, this can be accomplished in several ways. The most common approach is
         to make a VLAN mapping adjustment so that the authenticated peer is assigned to
         the protected VLAN or to another VLAN that provides connectivity to the protected
         VLAN using a router (layer 3). An authenticator may use VLAN trunking (IEEE
         802.1AX link aggregation; see Chapter 3) and may be capable of assigning VLAN
         tags based on port number or forwarding VLAN tagged frames sent by the peer.

                Note
                In some EAP deployments, the authenticator is used without an AAA server, and
                the authenticator must evaluate the peer’s credentials on its own. When refer-
                ring to the location where authentication is determined, the term EAP server is
                used in the EAP literature. Generally, the EAP server is the AAA server (backend
                authentication server) when the authenticator acts in pass-through mode and is
                the authenticator otherwise.

    In 802.1X, the protocol between the supplicant and the authenticator is divided
into a lower and upper sublayer. The lower layer is called the port access control
protocol (PACP). The higher layer is ordinarily some variant of EAP. For use with
802.1AR, the variant is called EAP-TLS [RFC5216]. PACP uses EAPoL frames for
communication, even if EAP authentication is not used (e.g., when MKA is used).
EAPoL frames use an Ethertype field value of 0x888E (see Chapter 3).
    Moving to IETF standards, EAP is not a single protocol but rather a frame-
work for achieving authentication using a combination of other protocols, some of
which we discuss throughout the chapter, including TLS and IKEv2. The baseline
EAP packet format is shown in Figure 18-6.

                                                                                       

                  &RGH             ,GHQWLILHU                    /HQJWK

                      'DWD

Figure 18-6   The EAP header includes a Code field for demultiplexing packet types (Request,
              Response, Success, Failure, Initiate, Finish). The Identifier helps match requests to
              responses. For request and response messages, the first data byte is a Type field.

     The EAP packet format is simple. In Figure 18-6, the Code field contains one
of six EAP packet types: Request (1), Response (2), Success (3), Failure (4), Initiate
(5), and Finish (6). The last two are defined by the EAP Re-authentication Protocol
(see Section 18.7.2); the official field values are maintained by the IANA [IEAP].
The Identifier field contains a number chosen by the sender and is used to match
requests with replies. The Length field gives the number of bytes in the EAP mes-
sage, including the Code, Identifier, and Length fields. Requests and responses are
used to perform identification and authentication with the peer, ultimately result-
ing in a Success or Failure indication. The protocol is capable of carrying an infor-
mative message so that human users can be given some instructions about what
to do if their system is unable to authenticate. It is a reliable protocol that runs on
a lower-layer protocol that is assumed to preserve order but is not assumed to be
reliable. EAP itself does not implement other features such as congestion or flow
control but may use protocols that do.
     The typical EAP exchange starts with the authenticator sending a Request
message to the peer. The peer responds with a Response message. Both messages
use the same format, as shown in Figure 18-6. An overview of the exchange is
shown in Figure 18-7.
     The primary purpose of the Request and Response messages is to exchange
whatever information is required to allow an authentication method to succeed.
Numerous methods are defined within [RFC3748], and several are defined in
other standards. The particular method being used is encoded in the Type field of

                                 3HHU               $XWKHQWLFDWRU              $$$?6HUYHU
                             6XSSOLFDQW                                  %DFNHQG?$XWKHQWLFDWLRQ?6HUYHU
                                                 HVW
                                            5HTX
                                              7\SH
                                            5HVS
                                                 RQV
                                             7\SH H
                                                                   3DVV
                                                                         7KUR
                                                 LRQDO                         XJK
                                            $GGLW VWV             'LDP
                                               T X H                   HWHU?5
                                             5H                      0HVV     $ ',8
                                            $GGLW                         DJHV 6?
           'HSHQGV?RQ?                            LR
                                           5HVS QDO
          $XWKHQWLFDWLRQ?                       RQVH
                                                     V
             0HWKRG                                               'LDP
         H?J???0'??&KDOOHQJH??                                        HWHU?5
               ($3?7/6                                               0HVV $',86?
                                                                         DJHV
                                                                                   6
                                                                              $',8
                                                                   LD P HWHU?5 HV
                                                                 '           DJ
                                                                       0HVV

                                                 HVV
                                             6XFF

                                          'DWD?([FKDQJH

Figure 18-7    The baseline EAP messages carry authentication material between the peer and the
                     authenticator. In many deployments, the authenticator is a relatively simple device that
                     acts in a “pass-through” mode. In such cases, most of the protocol processing takes
                     place on the peer and AAA server. IETF standard AAA-specific protocols such as
                     RADIUS or Diameter may be used to encapsulate EAP messages carried between the
                     AAA server and authenticator.

      Request and Response messages using values of 4 or greater. Other special Type
      field values include Identity (1), Notification (2), Nak (“Legacy Nak”) (3), and an
      Expanded Type extension (254). The Identity type is used by an authenticator
      to ask the peer its identifying information and provide a method for the peer to
      respond. The Notification type is used to display a message or notification to a
      user or log file (not for errors, but for notifications). When a peer does not support
      a method requested by the authenticator, it replies with a negative ACK (either a
      Legacy Nak or an Extended Nak). Extended Naks include a vector of implemented
      authentication methods not present in Legacy Naks.
           EAP is a layered architecture that supports its own multiplexing and demulti-
      plexing. Conceptually, it consists of four layers: the lower layer (for which there are
      multiple protocols), EAP layer, EAP peer/authenticator layer, and EAP methods

         layer (for which there are many methods). The lower layer is responsible for trans-
         porting EAP frames in order. Perhaps ironically, some of the protocols used to
         transport EAP are actually higher-layer protocols, many of which we have dis-
         cussed already. Examples of EAP “lower-layer” protocols include 802.1X, 802.11
         (802.11i) (see Chapter 3), UDP with L2TP (see Chapter 3), UDP with IKEv2 (see
         Section 18.8.1), and TCP (see Chapters 12–17). Figure 18-8 shows how the layers are
         implemented in conjunction with a pass-through authenticator. A pass-through
         server would be the opposite but is not supported by RADIUS or Diameter.

                                                                                                                         ($3?0HWKRG
             ($3?0HWKRG??            ($3?0HWKRG??
                                                                                                                              

                                                          ($3?3HHU?
                          ($3?3HHU?/D\HU                                              ($3?$XWK????????????????????????    ($3?$XWK
                                                           /D\HU

                            ($3?/D\HU                                 ????????????????($3?/D\HU                           ($3?/D\HU

           /RZHU?/D\HU?    /RZHU?/D\HU?    /RZHU?/D\HU?
                                                           /RZHU?/D\HU??                 $$$?3URWRFRO                    $$$?3URWRFRO
                                                

                             3HHU                                3DVV?7KURXJK?                                            $$$
                                                                 $XWKHQWLFDWRU                                           6HUYHU

Figure 18.8      The EAP stack and implementation model. In the pass-through mode, the peer and
                          AAA server are responsible for implementing the EAP authentication methods. The
                          authenticator need only implement EAP message processing, the authenticator process-
                          ing, and enough of an AAA protocol (e.g., RADIUS, Diameter) to exchange information
                          with the AAA server.

              In the “EAP stack” depicted in Figure 18-8, the EAP layer implements reliabil-
         ity and duplicate elimination. It also performs demultiplexing based on the code
         value in EAP packets. The peer/authenticator layer is responsible for implementing
         the peer and/or authenticator protocol messages, based on demultiplexing of the
         Code field. The EAP methods layer consists of all the specific methods to be used for
         authentication, including any required protocol operations to handle large mes-
         sages. This is necessary because the rest of the EAP protocol does not implement
         fragmentation and some methods may require large messages (e.g., containing
         certificates or certificate chains).

18.7.1   EAP Methods and Key Derivation
         Given its architecture, many EAP authentication and encapsulation methods are
         available for use (more than 50). Some are specified by IETF standards, and others
         have evolved separately (e.g., from Cisco or Microsoft). Some of the more common

      methods include TTLS [RFC5281], TLS [RFC5216], FAST [RFC4851], LEAP (Cisco
      proprietary), PEAP (EAP over TLS, Cisco proprietary), IKEv2 (experimental)
      [RFC5106], and MD5. Of these, only MD5 is specified in [RFC3748], but it is no
      longer recommended for use. Unfortunately, the complexity does not end when
      specifying one of these methods alone. Within each method there are sometimes
      different options for cryptographic suites or identity verification. With PEAP, for
      example, some versions of Microsoft Windows support MSCHAPv2 and TLS.
           The reasons for having so many options are partly historical. As security and
      operational experience have evolved over time, some methods were found to be
      too insecure or insufficiently flexible. Some authentication methods require an
      operating PKI that can provide client certificates (e.g., EAP-TLS), while others (e.g.,
      PEAP, TTLS) do not require such infrastructure. Older protocols (e.g., LEAP) were
      designed at a time when other standards such as 802.11 (incorporating 802.11i)
      were not yet mature. Consequently, depending on the particular environment,
      various combinations of smart cards or tokens, passwords, or certificates may be
      required to use EAP.
           The purpose of the EAP methods is to establish authentication, and possibly
      authorization for network access. In some cases (e.g., EAP-TLS), the methods pro-
      vide bidirectional authentication, whereby each end acts as both an authenticator
      and a peer. The type of authentication provided by a method is often a conse-
      quence of the cryptographic primitives it employs.
           Some methods provide more than authentication. Those that provide key deri-
      vation are able to agree upon and export keys in a key hierarchy [RFC5247] and
      must provide for mutual authentication between the EAP peer and EAP server.
      The master session key (MSK, also called AAA-key) is used in deriving other keys
      using a KDF, either at an EAP peer or authenticator. MSKs are at least 64 bytes in
      length and are typically used to derive transient session keys (TSKs) that are used to
      enforce access control between a peer and an authenticator, often at lower layers.
      Extended MSKs (EMSKs) are also provided along with MSKs but are made avail-
      able only to the EAP server or peer, not to pass-through authenticators, and are
      used in deriving root keys [RFC5295]. Root keys are keys associated with particular
      usages or domains. A usage-specific root key (USRK) is a key derived from an EMSK
      in the context with a particular usage. A domain-specific root key (DSRK) is a key
      derived from an EMSK for use in a particular domain (i.e., collection of systems).
      Child keys derived from a DSRK are known as domain-specific usage-specific root
      keys (DSUSRKs).
           During an EAP exchange, multiple peer and server identities may be used,
      and a session identifier is allocated. On completion of an EAP-based authentica-
      tion where key derivation is supported, the MSK, EMSK, peer identifier(s), server
      identifier(s), and a session ID are made available to lower layers. (A now-depre-
      cated initialization vector might also be provided.) Keys generally have an asso-
      ciated lifetime (8 hours is recommended), after which EAP re-authentication is
      required. For an in-depth discussion of EAP’s key management framework and an
      accompanying detailed security analysis, please see [RFC5247].

18.7.2 The EAP Re-authentication Protocol (ERP)
       In cases where EAP authentication has completed successfully, it is often desirable
       to reduce latency if a subsequent authentication exchange is required (e.g., a mobile
       node moves from one access point to another). The EAP Re-authentication Protocol
       (ERP) [RFC5296] provides the ability to do this independent of any particular EAP
       method. EAP peers and servers that support ERP are called ER peers and servers,
       respectively. ERP uses a re-authentication root key (rRK) derived from a DSRK (or
       the EMSK, but [RFC5295] suggests avoiding this) along with a re-authentication
       integrity key (rIK) derived from the rRK used to prove knowledge of the rRK.
            ERP operates in a single round-trip time, which is consistent with its goal
       of reducing re-authentication latency. ERP begins with a full conventional EAP
       exchange, assumed to be in the “home” domain. The MSK generated is distrib-
       uted to the authenticator and peer as usual. However, the rIK and rRK values are
       also determined at this time and shared only between the peer and EAP server.
       These values can be used in the home domain, along with rMSKs generated for
       each authenticator. When the ER peer moves to a different domain, different val-
       ues (DS-rIK and DS-rRK, which are DSUSRKs) are used. The domain of the ER
       server is contained in a TLV area in ERP messages, allowing peers to determine
       the domain of the server with which they are communicating. Details of the pro-
       tocol are given in [RFC5296].

18.7.3 Protocol for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA)
       While combinations of EAP, 802.1X, and PPP have all been used to support authen-
       tication of the client (and network, in some cases), they are not entirely link-inde-
       pendent. EAP tends to be implemented for particular links, 802.1X applies to IEEE
       802 networks, and PPP uses a point-to-point network model. To address this con-
       cern, the Protocol for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA) has been
       defined in [RFC5191], [RFC5193], and [RFC6345] based on requirements set out in
       [RFC4058] and [RFC4016]. It acts as an EAP lower layer, meaning it acts as a “car-
       rier” for EAP information. It uses UDP/IP (port 716) and is therefore applicable to
       more than a single type of link, and it is not limited to a point-to-point network
       model. In effect, PANA allows EAP authentication methods to be used on any
       link-layer technology for determining network access.
            The PANA framework includes three main functional entities: the PANA Cli-
       ent (PaC), PANA Authentication Agent (PAA), and the PANA Relay Element (PRE).
       Normal usage also involves an Authentication Server (AS) and Enforcement Point
       (EP). The AS may be a conventional AAA server accessed using access protocols
       such as RADIUS or Diameter. The PAA is responsible for conveying authentica-
       tion material from a PaC to the AS, and for configuration of the EP when network
       access is approved or revoked. Some of these entities may be colocated. The PaC
       and associated EAP peer are always colocated, as are the EAP authenticator and
       PAA. A PRE can be used to relay communications between a PaC and PAA when
       direct communication is not otherwise possible.

           The PANA protocol consists of a set of request/response messages including
      an extensible set of attribute-value pairs managed by the IANA [IPANA]. The pri-
      mary payloads are EAP messages, sent in UDP/IP datagrams as part of a PANA
      session. There are four phases in a PANA session: authentication/authorization,
      access, re-authentication, and termination. The re-authentication phase is really a
      portion of the access phase wherein the session lifetime is extended by re-execut-
      ing EAP-based authentication. The termination phase is entered either explicitly
      or as the result of the session timing out (either because of lifetime exhaustion
      or failure of liveness detection). PANA sessions are identified by a 32-bit session
      identifier included in each PANA message.
           PANA also provides a form of reliable transport protocol. Each message
      contains a 32-bit sequence number. The sender keeps track of the next sequence
      number to send, and receivers keep track of the next expected sequence number.
      Answers contain the same sequence number as the corresponding request. Ini-
      tial sequence numbers are randomly selected by the sender of the message (i.e.,
      PaC or PAA). PANA also implements time-based retransmission. PANA is a weak
      transport protocol—it operates in a stop-and-wait fashion, does not use an adap-
      tive retransmission timer, and cannot perform repacketization. It does, however,
      perform exponential backoff on its retransmission timer when faced with multiple
      packet losses.

18.8 Layer 3 IP Security (IPsec)
      IPsec is an architecture and collection of standards that provide data source
      authentication, integrity, confidentiality, and access control at the network layer
      for IPv4 and IPv6 [RFC4301], including Mobile IPv6 [RFC4877]. It also provides
      a way to exchange cryptographic keys between two communicating parties, a
      recommended set of cryptographic suites, and a method for signaling the use of
      compression. Each communicating party may be an individual host or a security
      gateway (SG) that provides a boundary between a protected and an unprotected
      portion of a network. Thus, IPsec can be used in applications such as remote
      access to a corporate LAN (forming a VPN), to interconnect different portions of
      an enterprise securely across the open Internet, or to secure the communications
      of hosts or routers acting as hosts when exchanging routing information. When
      choosing a security approach for newly developed protocols, IPsec is sometimes
      selected [RFC5406].
           Figure 18-9 indicates the types of deployments that can be accomplished using
      IPsec. A host implementation of IPsec may be integrated within the IP stack itself
      or may act as a driver sitting “below” the rest of the network stack (called the
      “Bump in the Stack” or BITS implementation). Alternatively, it may reside inside
      an inline SG, which is sometimes called the “Bump in the Wire” or BITW imple-
      mentation approach. For BITW implementations, both host and SG functionality
      is generally required, as the device typically needs to be managed remotely. This

           is similar to the reasons we see applications and transport protocols implemented
           in routers that would otherwise be pure layer 3 devices (see Chapter 1). IPsec can
           support multicast communications, but we focus first on the simpler and more
           common unicast case.

                                      1DWLYH?,3VHF?,PSOHPHQWDWLRQ

                                                                                               8QSURWHFWHG?1HWZRUN
                                             7UDQ
                                                                                                  H?J???,QWHUQHW
    ³%XPS?LQ?WKH?:LUH´? %,7:                     VSRUW
                                                       0RG
      ,3VHF?,PSOHPHQWDWLRQ                                  H?6H
                                                                 FXULW\
                                                                        $VV
                                                                             RFLDWL
                                                                                       RQ? 6
                                                                                            $
        6HFXULW\?*DWHZD\?                7XQQHO?0RGHO?6HFXULW\?$VVRFLDWLRQ? 6$                               ³%XPS?LQ?WKH?6WDFN´? %,76
               6*                                                                                              ,3VHF?,PSOHPHQWDWLRQ
                                         7XQQ
                                             HO?0R
                                                    GH?6
                                                         HFXUL
                                                              W\?$V
               3URWHFWHG?1HWZRUN                                   VRFLD
                                                                          WLRQ?
                                                                                  6$

                                                                                                                1RQ?,3VHF?+RVW
         1RQ?,3VHF?+RVW
                                                                       6HFXULW\?*DWHZD\? 6*

Figure 18-9     IPsec is applicable to securing host-to-host communications, host-to-gateway communications,
                and gateway-to-gateway communications. It also supports multicast distribution and mobility.

                The operation of IPsec can be divided into the establishment phase, where
           key material is exchanged and a security association (SA) is built, followed by the
           data exchange phase, where different types of encapsulation schemes, called the
           Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP), may be used
           in different modes such as tunnel mode or transport mode to protect the flow of IP
           datagrams. Each of these IPsec components uses a cryptographic suite, and IPsec
           is designed to support a wide range of suites. A complete IPsec implementation
           includes the SA establishment protocol, AH (optionally), ESP, and a collection of
           appropriate cryptographic suites, configuration information, and setup tools. An
           overview that summarizes the evolution and current specifications for all IPsec
           components is given in [RFC6071].
                Although an IPsec implementation may be present in a system (it is required
           to be present for IPv6 implementations), IPsec operates only selectively on certain
           packets based on policies set by administrators. The policies are contained in a
           security policy database (SPD), logically resident with each IPsec implementation.
           IPsec also requires two additional databases called the security association database
           (SAD) and peer authorization database (PAD). These are consulted when determin-
           ing how packets are to be handled, as illustrated in Figure 18-10.
                Taking the (somewhat simplified) SG of Figure 18-10 as an example, particular
           fields of an arriving packet (traffic selectors) are inspected to determine whether

                            ,QSXW
                           3DFNHW

                                                                                                    0DQDJHPHQW       0DQDJHPHQW
                        6HOHFW?3DFNHW?                                                               ,QWHUIDFH        3URWRFROV
                           )LHOGV
                                          6HFXULW\?$VVRFLDWLRQ?'DWDEDVH 6HFXULW\?3ROLF\?'DWDEDVH
                                                      6$'                         63'

                         6$?.QRZQ"              6HW?8S?1HZ
                                         1R     6$? ,I?'LUHFWHG
      ,3VHF                                                           3HHU?$XWKRUL]DWLRQ?'DWDEDVH                ,3VHF
                               <HV                                               3$'
      %RXQGDU\                                                                                                   %RXQGDU\
                                                   'LVSDWFK          3527(&7            3URWHFW
                                                 $SSURSULDWHO\                         (63?RU?$+

                                                                  ',6&$5'

                                                %<3$66                                  3527(&7
                                                 2XWSXW                                  2XWSXW

Figure 18-10     In a security gateway, IPsec packet processing takes place at layer 3 in a logical entity separating
                 a protected and an unprotected network. The security policy database dictates the disposition of
                 packets: bypass, discard, or protect. Protection generally involves applying or validating integ-
                 rity protection or encryption. An administrator configures the SPD to achieve desired security
                 goals.

          the arriving packet is using IPsec and has a preexisting SA. If so, processing is
          relatively simple and usually involves applying either ESP or AH, as described
          in Sections 18.8.2 and 18.8.3. If not, the SPD is used to determine what type of SA
          should be established, if any, and the SAD is populated to contain information on
          the new SA. If a new SA needs to be established, the simplest way is using some
          automated key establishment protocol. Although IPsec mandates the support of
          manual keying, where keys are simply typed in by hand, this method does not
          scale well and is error-prone. Therefore, it is expected that normally a key estab-
          lishment protocol is used in establishing SAs. For IPsec, the most recent version of
          this protocol is what we explore next.

18.8.1 Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol
          The first step in using IPsec is to establish an SA. An SA is a simplex (one-direction)
          authenticated association established between two communicating parties, or
          between a sender and multiple receivers if IPsec is supporting multicast. Most
          frequently, communication is bidirectional between two parties, so a pair of SAs is
          required to use IPsec effectively. A special protocol called the Internet Key Exchange

(IKE) is used to accomplish this task automatically. The current version of the pro-
tocol is called IKEv2 [RFC5996]. We will refer to it simply as IKE. Note that IKE is
one of the more complicated pieces of IPsec, so once we understand it, the rest is
comparatively straightforward. Note, however, that we will discuss only the major
points of how IKE operates as a protocol. For particular details, such as the myriad
cryptographic suites and configuration parameters supported, the reader should
consult [RFC5996] directly.
     To establish an SA, IKE begins with a simple request/response message pair
that includes a request to establish the following parameters: an encryption algo-
rithm, an integrity protection algorithm, a Diffie-Hellman group, and a PRF that
gives a random-appearing output given any input bit string. In IKE, a PRF is used
for generation of session keys. IKE first establishes an SA for itself (called an IKE_
SA) and can subsequently establish SAs for either AH or ESP (called CHILD_SAs).
IKE is also capable of negotiating the use of IP Payload Compression (IPComp)
[RFC3173] with each CHILD_SA, because applying compression at other layers
after performing encryption is ineffective. We discuss the details of AH and ESP
in Sections 18.8.2 and 18.8.3.
     IKE operates using pairs of messages called exchanges that are sent between
an initiator and a responder. The first two exchanges, called IKE_SA_INIT and
IKE_AUTH, establish an IKE_SA and a single CHILD_SA. Subsequently, CREATE_
CHILD_SA exchanges, used to establish additional CHILD_SAs, and INFORMA-
TIONAL exchanges, used to initiate changes in or gather status information about
an SA, may occur. In most cases, a single IKE_SA_INIT and IKE_AUTH exchange
(a total of four messages) is sufficient. Messages used in an exchange contain pay-
loads identified by type numbers that identify the type of information carried in
each payload. Multiple payloads per message are common, and some long mes-
sages may require IP fragmentation.
     IKE messages are sent encapsulated in UDP using port number 500 or 4500.
However, because IKE traffic may pass through a NAT where the port number is
rewritten, an IKE receiver should be prepared to receive traffic originating from
any port. Port 4500 is reserved for UDP-encapsulated ESP and IKE [RFC3948]. IKE
messages appearing on port 4500 are required to have their initial 4 data bytes set
to 0 (the “non-ESP marker”) to differentiate them from other (i.e., ESP or WESP)
messages.
     IKE initiators perform timer-based retransmissions when IKE messages
appear to have been lost. Responders perform retransmissions only when trig-
gered by an incoming request. An exponentially increasing retransmission timer
is used for retransmissions, but the total number of retransmissions is left unspec-
ified. Both initiators and responders keep track of their last transmitted messages
and corresponding sequence numbers. Sequence numbers are used to match
requests with responses, and to identify message retransmissions. This makes
IKE a window-based protocol with a maximum window size given by a responder
that is initialized when an SA is first set up but can be increased later. The maxi-
mum window size limits the total number of outstanding requests.

          18.8.1.1 IKEv2 Message Formats
          IKE messages contain a header followed by zero or more IKE payloads. The header
          structure is shown in Figure 18-11.

                                                                                                                                    

                                                         ,.(B6$?,QLWLDWRU¶V?63,? ???ELWV
 8VHG?DV?D
 &RQQHFWLRQ
  ,GHQWLILHU
                                                        ,.(B6$?5HVSRQGHU¶V?63,? ???ELWV

                                            0DM?9HUVLRQ 0LQ?9HUVLRQ
                     1H[W?3D\ORDG? ??ELWV                                    ([FKDQJH?7\SH? ??ELWV             )ODJV? ??ELWV
                                                 ELWV          ??ELWV

                                                              0HVVDJH?,'? ???ELWV

                                                                /HQJWK? ???ELWV

                                                                                                ;? ?                  ;? ?
                 3D\ORDGV?)ROORZ?WKH?,.(?+HDGHU                                  )ODJV?:RUG
                                                                                                  ELWV
                                                                                                         5 9   ,
                                                                                                                         ELWV

                                                                                           5??5HVSRQVH             ,??,QLWLDWRU

                                                                                                    9??9HUVLRQ
                                                                                      +LJKHU?0DMRU?9HUVLRQ?1XPEHU?6XSSRUWHG

Figure 18-11   The IKE v2 header. All IKE messages contain a header followed by zero or more payloads. IKE
               uses 64-bit SPI values. The Exchange Type gives the purpose of the exchange and the payloads
               that may be expected in the message. The Flags field indicates whether the message was sent
               from an initiator or a responder. The Message ID associates requests with responses and is used
               for detecting replay attacks.

               In the headers of IKE messages, as shown in Figure 18-11, the Security Param-
          eter Index (SPI) is a 64-bit number that identifies a particular IKE_SA (other IPsec
          protocols use a 32-bit SPI value). Both the initiator and the responder have an
          SA for their peer, so each provides the SPI it is using, and this pair of values,
          combined with the IP addresses of the endpoints, can be used to form an effec-
          tive connection identifier. The Next Payload field is discussed later in this section.
          The Major Version and Minor Version fields are set to 2 and 0, respectively, for
          this version of IKE. The major version number is changed when interoperability
          cannot be maintained between versions. The Exchange Type field gives the type
          of exchange of which the message is part: IKE_SA_INIT (34), IKE_AUTH (35),
          CREATE_CHILD_SA (36), INFORMATIONAL (37), and IKE_SESSION_RESUME
          (38; see [RFC5723]). Other values are reserved; the range 240–255 is reserved for
          private use. Three bit fields are defined for the Flags field (bits are labeled right

         to left, starting from 0): I (Initiator, bit 3), V (Version, bit 4), and R (Response, bit 5).
         The I bit field is set by the original initiator and cleared by the recipient for return
         messages. The V bit field indicates that the sender supports a higher major version
         number of the protocol than is currently being used. The R bit field indicates that
         the message is a response to a previous message using the same message ID.
              The Message ID field in IKE acts somewhat like the Sequence Number field in
         TCP (see Figure 12-3 in Chapter 12), except the message ID starts with 0 for the
         initiator and 1 for the responder. The field is incremented by 1 for each subsequent
         transmission, and responses use the same message ID as the requests. The I and
         R bit fields differentiate requests from responses. Message IDs are remembered
         when sent or received. Doing so allows each end to perform replay detection. Old
         message IDs are not processed. Wrapping of the Message ID field (possible, but not
         likely with 4 billion IKE messages) is handled by reinitiating the IKE_SA_INIT
         exchange.
              The other fields (Next Payload and Length) help describe what the IKE message
         contains. Each message contains zero or more payloads, and each payload has its
         own particular structure. The Length field gives the size (in bytes) of the header
         plus all payloads in the message. The Next Payload field gives the type of the fol-
         lowing payload. At present, 16 nontrivial types are defined (value 0 indicates no
         next payload), as shown in Table 18-2. The official current list can be found in
         [IKEPARAMS], which contains all standardized field values for IKEv2.

Table 18-2 IKEv2 payload types. A value of 0 indicates no next payload.

Value     Notation       Purpose                   Value     Notation     Purpose
33        SA             Security association      41        N            Notify
34        KE             Key exchange              42        D            Delete
35        IDi            Identification            43        V            Vendor ID
                         (initiator)
36        IDr            Identification            44        TSi          Traffic selector (initiator)
                         (responder)
37        CERT           Certificate               45        TSr          Traffic selector (responder)
38        CERTREQ        Certificate request       46        SK { }       Encrypted and authenticated
                         (indicates trust                                 (contains other payloads)
                         anchors)
39        AUTH           Authentication            47        CP           Configuration
40        Ni, Nr         Nonces (initiator,        48        EAP          Extensible authentication
                         responder)                                       (EAP)

             The ranges 1–32 and 49–255 are reserved; the range 128–255 is reserved for
         private use. Each IKE payload begins with an IKE generic payload header, shown in
         Figure 18-12.

                                                                                                     

      1H[W?3D\ORDG? ??ELWV   &        5HVHUYHG                     3D\ORDG?/HQJWK? ???ELWV

Figure 18-12   A “generic” IKEv2 payload header. Each payload begins with a header of this form.

               The generic payload header is fixed at 32 bits, and the Next Payload and Payload
          Length fields provide for a “chain” of variable-size payloads (up to 65,535 bytes
          each, including the 4-byte payload header) to be present in a single IKE message.
          Each payload type has its own set of special headers. The C (critical) bit field indi-
          cates that the current payload (not the one identified by the Next Payload field) is
          deemed “critical” for a successful IKE exchange. Receivers of critical payloads that
          do not understand the type code (provided in the previous payload’s Next Payload
          field or in the IKE header’s Next Payload field) must abort the IKE exchange. Note
          that this capability provides the ability to create new payload types that may not
          be understood by all implementations.

          18.8.1.2 The IKE_SA_INIT Exchange
          To get a better idea of how IKE operates, we will start by describing the IKE_SA_
          INIT exchange. It is the first of two exchanges, IKE_SA_INIT and IKE_AUTH,
          constituting the “initial exchanges” of IKE shown in Figure 18-13. The initial
          exchanges were formerly known as Phase 1 in earlier versions of IKE. Other
          exchanges (CREATE_CHILD_SA and INFORMATIONAL) may be initiated by
          either party only after the initial exchanges have completed, and they are always
          secured (encrypted and integrity-protected) based on the parameters established
          using the first two exchanges.
               As shown in Figure 18-13, IKE_SA_INIT negotiates the choice of crypto-
          graphic suite, exchanges nonces, and performs a DH key agreement. It may also
          include additional information, depending on the particular implementation and
          deployment scenario. It begins when the initiator sends an IKE message contain-
          ing its set of supported cryptographic suites, DH information, and nonce using
          three payloads (SA, KE, and Ni). Details of each payload type are given in Section
          3 of [RFC5996], and we discuss some of them in Section 18.8.1.3; note that in some
          implementations additional payloads are also included. A lack of response to this
          message triggers retransmissions at the initiator.
               Upon receiving the first message, the responder becomes aware that an IKE
          transaction is requested by the initiator, the initiator’s supported cryptographic
          suites, and configuration parameters. The responder selects an acceptable crypto-
          graphic suite and expresses this in the SAr1 payload (see Section 18.8.1.3). It also
          provides its portion of the DH key agreement parameters in KEr, its nonce in Nr,
          and an optional request for the initiator’s certificate in the CERTREQ payload.
          CERTREQ payloads include an indication of CAs the responder finds acceptable
          for validating certificates that may be used in subsequent exchanges (i.e., it indi-
          cates the responder’s trust anchors). A message containing the responder’s IKE

                    ,QLWLDWRU?                                                    5HVSRQGHU?
                         L                                                            U
                                               +'5??6
                                                       $L???.(
                                                              L??1L

    ,.(B6$B,1,7
       ([FKDQJH                                                    4@
                                                              (575(
                                               U???.(U??1U??>&
                                              $
                                        +'5??6

                                       +'5??6
                                              .?^,'L?
                                         >,'U?@?$ ?>&(57?@?>&(5
                                                 87+??6
                                                        $L???76 75(4?@
                                                               L??76U`
      ,.(B$87+
       ([FKDQJH                                                             ?76U`
                                                                    U???76L?
                                                             7+??6$
                                                  &( 57?@?$8
                                         .?^,'U??>
                                  +'5??6

Figure 18-13   The IKE_SA_INIT and IKE_AUTH exchange involves payloads used to establish the
               first two security associations (IKE_SA and one CHILD_SA). Certificates and certifi-
               cate request payloads (with trust anchors) may also be included, as may Notification
               and Configuration payloads (not shown).

header and all of these payloads is then sent in response to the initiator, complet-
ing the IKE_SA_INIT exchange. In some implementations, extra payloads (e.g.,
Notify and Configuration payloads; see Section 18.8.1.5) are also included. To bet-
ter understand how IKE_SA_INIT operates, we shall begin by discussing its most
important payloads: SA, KE, Ni, and Nr.

18.8.1.3 Security Association (SA) Payloads and Proposals
SA payloads contain an SPI value and a set of proposals (often one). Proposals are
built using proposal structures that are somewhat complex. Each proposal struc-
ture is numbered and contains an IPsec protocol ID. A protocol ID indicates one
of the following IPsec protocols: IKE, AH, or ESP (see Sections 18.8.2 and 18.8.3).
Multiple proposal structures using the same proposal number are considered
to be part of the same proposal (an “AND” of the specified protocols). Proposal
structures with different proposal numbers are considered different proposals (an
“OR” of the specified protocols).
     Each proposal/protocol structure contains one or more transform structures
that describe algorithms to be used with the specified protocols. Typically, AH
has a single transform (integrity check algorithm), ESP has two (integrity check
and encryption algorithms), and IKE has four (DH group number, PRF, integrity

      check, and encryption algorithms). Combined encryption/integrity algorithms
      (e.g., authenticated encryption algorithms) are expressed solely as encryption
      algorithms with no separate integrity protection specification. A special extended
      sequence number “transform,” which is really just a Boolean value, indicates
      whether sequence numbers used with the SA (i.e., for AH or ESP) should be com-
      puted using 32 or 64 bits.
           If there are multiple transforms of the same type, the proposal is the union of
      the transforms (i.e., any are acceptable). If there are multiple transforms with dif-
      ferent types, the proposal is the intersection. An individual transform may have
      zero or more attributes. These are necessary when a transform can be used in more
      than one way (e.g., a transform capable of processing keys of differing lengths
      would have an associated attribute with the particular key length to be used for
      the proposal). Most transforms do not require attributes, but the relatively com-
      mon AES encryption transform does.

      18.8.1.4 Key Exchange (KE) and Nonce (Ni, Nr) Payloads
           In addition to SA payloads, IKE_SA_INIT messages include a KE (Key
      Exchange) and Nonce payload (written as Ni, Nr, or sometimes No). The KE pay-
      load contains the DH group number and key exchange data representing the
      public numbers used in forming an ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key (initial shared
      secret). The DH group number gives the group in which the public value was
      computed. The Nonce payload contains a recently generated nonce between 16
      and 256 bytes in length. It is used in generating key material to ensure freshness
      and protect against replay attacks.
           Once the DH exchange completes, each side can compute its SKEYSEED value,
      which is used for all subsequent key generation associated with the IKE_SA (unless
      a key-generating EAP method is used for this purpose; see Section 18.8.1.9), a total
      of seven secret values: SK_d, SK_ai, SK_ar, SK_ei, SK_er, SK_pi, and SK_pr. These
      values are computed as follows:

                                 SKEYSEED = prf(Ni | Nr, g^ir)
                       {SK_d|SK_ai|SK_ar|SK_ei|SK_er|SK_pi|SK_pr} =
                              prf+ (SKEYSEED, Ni|Nr|SPIi|SPIr)

          Here, | is the concatenation operator. The cascading PRF function prf+ (K,S) =
      T1 | T2 | ..., where T1 = prf(K, S|0x01), T2 = prf(K, T1|S|0x03), T3 = prf(K, T2|S|0x03),
      T4 = prf(K, T3|S|0x04),... . The value g^ir is the shared secret established during
      the DH exchange. Ni and Nr are nonces (stripped of any payload headers). Note
      that each direction of each SA uses different keys, which explains why so many
      keys are required. The SK_d key is used for deriving keys for CHILD_SAs. The
      SK_a and SK_e keys are for authentication and encryption, respectively. The SK_p
      keys are used in generating AUTH payloads during the IKE_AUTH exchange.

18.8.1.5 Notification (N) and Configuration (CP) Payloads
The N payload is a Notification or Notify payload. Although this type of payload
is not shown in Figure 18-13, we shall see it used in the examples later. It can be
used for conveying error messages and indications of various processing capabili-
ties with most of the IKE exchange types. It contains a variable-length SPI field
and a 16-bit field to indicate the notification type [IKEPARAMS]. Values below
8192 are used for standard errors, and values above 16383 are used for status indi-
cators. For example, when requesting the creation of a transport mode SA instead
of the default tunnel mode, a Notify payload containing the USE_TRANSPORT_
MODE value (16391) is used. If IP compression [RFC3173] is supported, this fact
can be indicated by the IPCOMP_SUPPORTED value (16387). If Robust Header
Compression (ROHC) [RFC5857] is supported, this can be indicated using the
ROHC_ SUPPORTED value (16416), which also includes ROHC parameters used
to establish a so-called ROHCoIPsec SA. A desire to use the “wrapped ESP” mode
(see Section 18.8.3.2) is indicated using the USE_WESP_MODE value (16415). Notify
payloads may contain a variable-length data portion whose content depends on
the notification type.
     A CP or Configuration payload also contains additional information like a
Notify payload but is used primarily for initial system configuration. For example,
obtaining information that might ordinarily be conveyed using DHCP (see Chap-
ter 6) can be carried over IKE using a CP. Configuration payloads are of the fol-
lowing major types: CFG_REQUEST, CFG_REPLY, CFG_SET, and CFG_ACK. CPs
use attribute-value (ATV) pairs that contain a variable-length associated data area.
Some 20 ATV pairs are defined [IKEPARAMS]. Most involve methods to learn
about IPv4 or IPv6 addresses, subnet masks, or DNS server addresses. IPv6 con-
figuration requires special attention because of the way IPv6 ordinarily employs
ICMPv6 for stateless autoconfiguration and Neighbor Discovery (see Chapter 8).
An experimental specification [RFC5739] explores how IKEv2 can be used in con-
figuring an IPv6 node across an IPsec association in a VPN configuration.

18.8.1.6 Algorithm Selection and Application
IKE divides the set of transforms forming a cryptographic suite into four types:
encryption (type 1, used with IKE and ESP), PRF (type 2, used with IKE), integrity
protection (type 3, used with IKE and AH and optional in ESP), and DH group
(type 4, used with IKE and optional in AH and ESP). Although IKE is capable of
negotiating which particular cryptographic suite is to be used for each direction of
an SA, support for a baseline set of algorithms (transforms) is deemed mandatory
for any implementation. In addition, several algorithms have been chosen as rec-
ommended, with the strong possibility that they will be mandatory in the future.
These algorithms are provided in [RFC4307] (see Table 18-3).
    The IANA also keeps an official registry of values [IKEPARAMS], and
although the list here includes the mandatory algorithms at the time of writing,
many other algorithms, groups, and techniques have been proposed and pub-
lished, including options for ECC-based digital signatures (see [RFC4754]).

Table 18-3 Mandatory-to-implement algorithms for use with IKEv2, grouped by type number

                                                                                   Original
                                                                                   Defining RFC/
Purpose               Name                          Number      Status             Reference
IKE Transform         ENCR_3DES                     3           Required           [RFC2451]
Type 1                ENCR_NULL                     11          Optional           [RFC2410]
(encryption)
                      ENCR_AES_CBC                  12          Recommended        [RFC3602]
                      ENCR_AES_CTR                  13          Recommended        [RFC3686]
IKE Transform         PRF_HMAC_MD5                  1           Optional           [RFC2104]
Type 2                PRF_HMAC_SHA1                 2           Required           [RFC2104]
(for PRFs)            PRF_AES128_CBC                4           Recommended        [RFC4434]
IKE Transform         AUTH_HMAC_MD5_96              1           Optional           [RFC2403]
Type 3 (integrity)    AUTH_HMAC_SHA1_96             2           Required           [RFC2404]
                      AUTH_AES_XCBC_96              5           Recommended        [RFC3566]
IKE Transform         1024 MODP (Group 2)           2           Required           [RFC2409]
Type 4                2048 MODP (Group 14)          14          Recommended        [RFC3526]
(DH groups)

         18.8.1.7 The IKE_AUTH Exchange
         As mentioned earlier, the SKEYSEED value is used to derive encryption and
         authentication keys that are in turn used to secure payloads during the IKE_
         AUTH exchange. These keys are called SK_e and SK_a, respectively. The notation
         SK{P1, P2, ..., PN} indicates that payloads P1, ..., PN are encrypted and integrity-
         protected using these keys. The primary purpose of the IKE_AUTH exchange is to
         provide identity validation for each peer. It also exchanges sufficient information
         to establish the first CHILD_SA.
              To begin the IKE_AUTH exchange, the initiator sends the payload SK{IDi,
         AUTH, SAi2, TSi, TSr}. Given the proper decryption key, it provides the initiator’s
         identity, authentication information validating the initiator’s identity, another SA
         payload for the first CHILD_SA called SAi2, and a pair of traffic selectors (payloads
         TSi and TSr, discussed in Section 18.8.1.8). The initiator may also include its certifi-
         cate in a CERT payload, a certificate request in a CERTREQ payload that identifies
         its trust anchors, and identification of the responder in the IDr payload. Sending
         the responder’s identity is useful in the case where the responder has multiple
         identities associated with the same IP address and needs to ensure that the proper
         SA is set up. Several different identity types are supported for ID payloads, includ-
         ing IP address, FQDN, e-mail address, and distinguished name (to be used with
         X.509 certificates). The various types are maintained in the IKEv2 Identification
         Payload ID Types registry [IKEPARAMS].
              The final message of the exchange includes the responder’s identity (IDr),
         authentication material to prove the responder’s identity (AUTH), the other SA

constituting the CHILD_SA (SAr2), and a set of traffic selectors (TSi and TSr),
which may be subsets of the original TSi and TSr values. All payloads in the
IKE_AUTH exchange are encrypted and integrity-protected. A certificate payload
(CERT) containing one or more certificates may also be sent at this point. If so,
any public key required to validate the AUTH payload appears first in the certifi-
cate list. The specific contents vary depending on the cryptographic suite selected.
During the exchanges, both sides must check all applicable signatures in order to
be safe from compromise, including MITM attacks.

18.8.1.8 Traffic Selectors and TS Payloads
Traffic selectors indicate the fields and corresponding values of an IP datagram
that cause it to be “selected” for IPsec processing. They are used in combination
with an IPsec SPD to determine whether the containing datagram should be pro-
tected using IPsec. As mentioned previously, datagrams that are not protected are
either bypassed or dropped by IPsec processing.
    The contents of a TS payload may include IPv4 or IPv6 address ranges, port
number ranges, and an IPv4 protocol ID or IPv6 header value. Ranges are some-
times denoted with wildcard notation. For example, the notation 192.0.2.* or
192.0.2.0/24 would represent the range 192.0.2.0–192.0.2.255. Traffic selectors can
be used to help implement policies such as which cryptographic suite is required
to establish an SA to a particular host or port range. Most of these details are han-
dled in the management interface to the SPD. During an IKE_AUTH exchange,
each party specifies a TSi and TSr payload containing TS values. When one range
is smaller than another, the smaller range is selected for use in a process called
“narrowing.”

18.8.1.9 EAP and IKE
Although IKE includes its own authentication methods (see Section 2.15 of
[RFC5996]), it can also make use of EAP (see Sections 2.16 and 3.16 of [RFC5996]).
With EAP, a wide array of authentication methods can be used beyond the rela-
tively limited set of pre-shared keys or public key certificates otherwise required
by IKE. Indeed, these limited sets of options for keying are one reason for the
relatively limited success of IPsec more generally.
     A desire to use EAP is indicated by omitting the first AUTH payload from
the IKE_AUTH exchange in message 3 (Figure 18-1). By including the IDi pay-
load but no AUTH payload, the initiator asserts an identity but does not prove it.
If EAP is acceptable, the responder returns an EAP payload and defers sending
the SAr2, TSi, and TSr payloads until the EAP-based authentication is complete.
This happens once the initiator has finally sent an EAP-acceptable AUTH payload
that can be verified by the responder after one or more EAP payloads have been
exchanged.
     One issue regarding EAP with IKE involves a possible inefficiency due to
double authentication. In particular, older EAP methods provided only one direc-
tion of authentication (peer to authenticator), so IKE requires certificate-based

      authentication to perform authentication in the other direction. Recognizing that
      deploying the necessary key infrastructure is sometimes difficult, and that newer
      EAP methods support mutual authentication and key derivation, [RFC5998] pro-
      vides a way to use only EAP for authentication. Using an EAP_ONLY_AUTHEN-
      TICATION Notification payload sent by the initiator, the responder is able to
      suppress sending the AUTH and CERT payloads carried in message 4 (in Fig-
      ure 18-1). In this case, subsequent AUTH payloads use the key generated by EAP
      instead of SK_pi and SK_pr.
           Performing EAP-only authentication relies on EAP methods that are suffi-
      ciently secure so as to obviate the need for IKE authentication. These are called
      safe EAP methods. To be safe, an EAP method must provide mutual authentica-
      tion, be capable of generating keys, and be resistant to dictionary attacks. Some 13
      methods are given in [RFC5998], including EAP-TLS, EAP-FAST, and EAP-TTLS,
      that are believed to be safe.

      18.8.1.10 Better-than-Nothing Security (BTNS)
      A relatively recent development with IKE and IPsec is called better-than-nothing
      security (BTNS, pronounced “buttons”). BTNS aims to address some of the usabil-
      ity and ease of deployment issues with IPsec, especially the need to establish a
      PKI or other deployed authentication system [RFC5387] to use certificates. Tech-
      nically, BTNS is essentially unauthenticated IPsec [RFC5386], and it can be sup-
      ported when IKE is used to establish an SA. With BTNS, public keys are used,
      but their containing certificates are not checked against a chain or root certificate.
      Consequently, an SA can ensure that the same entity is communicating over time
      but cannot ensure that any particular, validated entity established the SA. This
      form of authentication is called continuity of association and is weaker than the data
      origin authentication present in ordinary IPsec. BTNS makes no other substantive
      changes to IPsec; the formats of IKE, AH, and ESP messages remain the same.

      18.8.1.11 The CREATE_CHILD_SA Exchange
      The CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange is used to create CHILD_SAs for ESP or AH,
      or to rekey existing SAs (either IKE_SAs or CHILD_SAs) once the initial exchanges
      have completed. It uses a single exchange of packets and may be initiated by either
      side of the IKE_SA established during the initial exchanges. There are two vari-
      ants, depending on whether a CHILD_SA or IKE_SA is being modified. Figure
      18-14 shows the variants, where the initiator is the entity initiating the CREATE_
      CHILD_SA exchange and not necessarily the original initiator of the IKE_SA.
           In Figure 18-14, the first exchange depicts a CREATE_CHILD_SA used to cre-
      ate a new CHILD_SA or rekey an existing one. Rekeying is indicated by the pres-
      ence of an N(REKEY_SA) Notification payload sent by the initiator. To complete
      the rekey operation, a new SA is first created, and the old one is subsequently
      deleted (see the next section). The new SA and traffic selector (TS) information
      allows most of the connection parameters to be altered. If desired, new DH val-
      ues can also be exchanged at this point using KE payloads. This provides better

                                ,QLWLDWRU?                                               5HVSRQGHU?
                                     L                                                       U
                                                 +'5??6
                                                        .^1??6$
                                                                  1L??>.(
                                                                         L?@?76L??7
                                                                                   6U`
       &5($7(B&+,/'B6$
                 ([FKDQJH
   1HZ?RU?5HNH\?&+,/'B6$                                                    L??76U`
                                                                    (U?@??76
                                                       6.^6$??1U??>.
                                                  +'5??

                                                       +'5??6
                                                               .^6$??1
                                                                       L??.(L`

        &5($7(B&+,/'B6$
                ([FKDQJH
            5HNH\?,.(?6$
                                                                    U??.(U`
                                                             .^6$??1
                                                       +'5??6

Figure 18-14   The CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange can be used to create or rekey a CHILD_SA, or to rekey an
               IKE_SA. A Notification payload is used when modifying a CHILD_SA to indicate the SPI of the
               SA to modify.

         forward secrecy for the new SA. Rekeying an IKE_SA uses a similar exchange,
         except the KE payloads are required and the TS payloads are not used, as shown
         in the second part of Figure 18-14.

         18.8.1.12 The INFORMATIONAL Exchange
         The INFORMATIONAL exchange is used for conveying status and error informa-
         tion, usually using Notify (N) payloads. It is also used for deleting SAs using a
         Delete (D) payload and therefore constitutes one portion of the SA rekeying pro-
         cedure. The exchange is shown in Figure 18-15.
              An INFORMATIONAL exchange can take place only after successful comple-
         tion of the initial exchanges. It includes an optional set of notifications, Delete (D)
         payloads that specify SAs to delete by SPI value, and Configuration (CP) payloads.
         Some response is always required for any message received from an initiator,
         even if it is an empty IKE message (i.e., contains only a header). Otherwise, the
         initiator would retransmit its message unnecessarily. In unusual cases, INFOR-
         MATIONAL messages may be sent outside the context of an INFORMATIONAL
         exchange, usually to signal the receipt of an IPsec message containing an unrec-
         ognized SPI value or unsupported IKE major version number.

                              ,QLWLDWRU?                                          5HVSRQGHU?
                                   L                                                  U
                                                   +'5??6
                                                         .^>1?@?>
                                                                 '?@?>&3
                                                                         @????`

        ,1)250$7,21$/
              ([FKDQJH
                                                                              `
                                                                     >&3?@??
                                                        6.^>1?@?>'?@
                                                   +'5

Figure 18-15   The INFORMATIONAL exchange is used to convey status information and delete SAs.
                      It makes use of Notification (N), Delete (D), and Configuration (CP) payloads.

       18.8.1.13 Mobile IKE (MOBIKE)
       Once the IKE_SA has been established, it is ordinarily used until no longer
       required. However, when IPsec operates in an environment where IP addresses
       may change because of mobility or interface failure, a variant of IKE has been
       specified in [RFC4555] called MOBIKE. MOBIKE augments the basic IKEv2 proto-
       col to include additional “address change” options available in INFORMATIONAL
       exchanges. MOBIKE specifies what to do when the changed addresses are known.
       It does not address the discovery problem of how to determine these addresses.

18.8.2 Authentication Header (AH)
       Defined in [RFC4302], the IP Authentication Header (AH), one of the three major
       components of IPsec, is an optional portion of the IPsec protocol suite that pro-
       vides a method for achieving origin authentication and integrity (but not confi-
       dentiality) of IP datagrams. By providing only integrity and not confidentiality
       (and not working with NAT; see the remainder of this section), AH is the (far)
       less popular of the two primary IPsec data-securing protocols. In transport mode,
       AH uses a header placed between the layer 3 (IPv4, IPv6 base, or IPv6 extension)
       header and the following protocol header (e.g., UDP, TCP, ICMP). With IPv6, AH
       may appear immediately before a Destination Options extension header, if pres-
       ent. In tunnel mode, the “inner” IP header carries the original IP datagram, con-
       taining the ultimate IP source and destination information, and a newly created
       “outer” IP header contains information describing the IPsec peers. In this mode,
       AH protects the entire inner IP datagram. Generally speaking, transport mode
       is used between end hosts that are directly connected, and tunnel mode is used
       between SGs or between a single host and an SG (e.g., for supporting a VPN). The
       IPv4 and IPv6 encapsulations for transport-mode AH, using TCP as an example,
       are shown in Figure 18-16.
                                        ,3Y?                                                                          ,3Y?

        ,3Y??        7&3                                                                                       ,3Y?              7&3
                                                                                             ,3Y?
       +HDGHU       +HDGHU                        'DWD                                                          ([W             +HDGHU     'DWD
                                                                                            +HDGHU
        2SWLRQV     2SWLRQV                                                                                   +HDGHUV           2SWLRQV

                                                 ,3Y??$+?7UDQVSRUW?0RGH

        ,3Y??                  7&3
       +HDGHU        $+       +HDGHU                          'DWD
        2SWLRQV               2SWLRQV
                                                                                                              ,3Y??$+?7UDQVSRUW?0RGH
        0XWDEOH                                ,PPXWDEOH
       3URFHVVLQJ                              3URFHVVLQJ

                                           $XWKHQWLFDWHG?
                                          ([FHSW?0XWDEOH?)LHOGV

                                                                                           ,3Y?                     ,3Y?
                                                                      ,3Y?                                         'VW?2SWV
                                                                                                                                 7&3
                                                                                   +%+??'VW?2SWV??
                                                                                     5WJ??)UDJ
                                                                                                        $+          ([W?        +HDGHU?    'DWD
                                                                     +HDGHU
                                                                                                                                2SWLRQV
                                                                                    ([W?+HDGHUV                    +HDGHU

                                                                               0XWDEOH                                        ,PPXWDEOH
                                                                              3URFHVVLQJ                                      3URFHVVLQJ

                                                                                                     $XWKHQWLFDWHG?
                                                                                                  ([FHSW?0XWDEOH?)LHOGV

Figure 18-16    The IPsec Authentication Header is used to provide authentication and integrity protection for IPv4 and IPv6 datagrams. In
                      transport mode (depicted here with TCP), a conventional IP datagram is modified to include the AH.

           In the figure, the IPv4 encapsulation uses a special IPv4 protocol number (51).
      For IPv6, the AH is placed between the destination and other options. In either
      case, the resulting datagram has a mutable portion of its header and an immuta-
      ble portion of its header. The mutable portion is changed as the datagram moves
      through the network. Modifications include changing the IPv4 TTL or IPv6 Hop
      Limit field, IPv6 Flow Label field, DS Field, and ECN bits. The immutable portion,
      containing the source and destination IP addresses, is not changed by the net-
      work and is integrity-protected using fields in the AH. This prevents transport
      mode AH datagrams from being rewritten by NATs, a potential problem for many
      deployments. Transport mode cannot be used with fragments (IPv4 or IPv6).
           An alternative to transport mode is AH tunnel mode, shown in Figure 18-17.
      In this mode, the original datagram is untouched and instead is inserted inside an
      integrity-protecting new IP datagram.
           In tunnel mode, the entire original IP datagram is encapsulated and protected
      with the AH. The “inner” header is unmodified, and the “outer” header is created
      using the source and destination IP addresses associated with an SG or host. In
      such cases, AH protects all of the original datagram, plus some portions of the
      new header (which prevents it being modified by a NAT).
           Both modes of AH use the same AH shown in Figure 18-18. It identifies the
      datagram length and associated SA and includes integrity check information
      The Payload Length specifies the length of the AH in 32-bit-word units minus 2.
      The Security Parameters Index (SPI) field contains a 32-bit identifier of an SA at
      the receiver that contains SA-derived information relating to the association. For
      multicast SAs, the SPI value is handled in a special way (see Section 18.8.4). The
      Sequence Number is a 32-bit field that increments by 1 for each packet sent on the
      SA. This field is used for replay protection if enabled by the receiver (but it is
      always included by the sender, even if not checked by the receiver). An extended
      sequence number (ESN) operating mode is also defined and recommended and is
      negotiated during the IKE_SA_INIT exchange. If enabled, the sequence number
      is calculated using 64 bits, but only the lower-order 32 bits are included in the
      Sequence Number field. The length of the Integrity Check Value (ICV) field is vari-
      able and depends on the cryptographic suite used. This field is always an integral
      multiple of 32 bits in length.
           The algorithm used for integrity protection is specified in the correspond-
      ing SA as a type 3 transform and can be established manually or by using some
      automatic method such as IKE. The optional, recommended, and mandatory algo-
      rithms for AH (and ESP, later) are provided in [RFC4835] and include HMAC-
      MD5-96 (optional), AES-XCBC-MAC-96 (recommended), and HMAC-SHA1-96
      (mandatory). The integrity check is computed over the following portions of the
      datagram: header fields before the AH that are either immutable in transit or pre-
      dictable in value when arriving at the destination AH SA endpoint, the AH, every-
      thing after the AH, high-order bits of the ESN (if employed, even though they are
      not sent), plus any padding.
                                         ,3Y?                                                                        ,3Y?

         ,3Y??       7&3                                                                                      ,3Y?
                                                                                      ,3Y?                                     7&3
        +HDGHU      +HDGHU                            'DWD                                                     ([W                             'DWD
                                                                                     +HDGHU                                   +HDGHU
        2SWLRQV     2SWLRQV                                                                                  +HDGHUV

                                             ,3Y??$+?7XQQHO?0RGH

                               ,3Y??       7&3
         ,3Y?
        +HDGHU       $+       +HDGHU      +HDGHU                         'DWD
                              2SWLRQV     2SWLRQV
                                                                                                                         ,3Y??$+?7XQQHO?0RGH
         1HZ
                              2ULJLQDO    2ULJLQDO

                                                     ,PPXWDEOH
        0XWDEOH                                      3URFHVVLQJ
       3URFHVVLQJ
                                                   $XWKHQWLFDWHG??
                                                ([FHSW?0XWDEOH?)LHOGV

                                                                ,3Y?                                          ,3Y?
                                           ,3Y?                             $+        ,3Y?                                     7&3
                                                                 ([W                                           ([W                             'DWD
                                          +HDGHU                                     +HDGHU                                   +HDGHU
                                           1HZ
                                                               +HDGHUV                2ULJLQDO
                                                                                                             +HDGHUV
                                                                   1HZ                                        2ULJLQDO

                                                       0XWDEOH                                               ,PPXWDEOH
                                                      3URFHVVLQJ                                             3URFHVVLQJ

                                                                                    $XWKHQWLFDWHG?????????
                                                                                 ([FHSW?0XWDEOH?)LHOGV

Figure 18-17    The IPsec tunnel mode AH encapsulations provide authentication and integrity protection for IPv4 and IPv6 datagrams. In
                      tunnel mode (depicted here carrying TCP), a conventional IP datagram is encapsulated inside a new “outside” IP datagram
                      that carries the original datagram.

                                                                                                           

       1H[W?+HDGHU? ??ELWV     3D\ORDG?/HQJWK? ??ELWV                     5HVHUYHG? ???ELWV

                                    6HFXULW\?3DUDPHWHUV?,QGH[? 63,?????ELWV

                                          6HTXHQFH?1XPEHU? ???ELWV

                                   ,QWHJULW\?&KHFN?9DOXH? ,&9??YDULDEOH?OHQJWK

Figure 18-18    The IPsec AH is used to provide authentication and integrity protection for IPv4 and IPv6 data-
                grams in either transport or tunnel mode. The SPI value indicates which SA the AH belongs to.
                The Sequence Number field is used for countering replay attacks. The ICV provides a form of MAC
                over the immutable portions of the payload.

               Some controversy has arisen over the disposition of mutable fields such as the
           ECN bits used to signal incipient congestion (see Chapters 5 and 16) when tunnel
           modes are used. In [RFC4301], such fields are simply copied to the correspond-
           ing fields present in the newly created “outer” IP header. In [RFC6040], however,
           normal mode and compatibility mode for tunnel encapsulation are defined. In normal
           mode, the CE and ECT bit fields are copied to the new header on encapsulation. In
           compatibility mode, the bits are cleared, producing an “outer” packet indicating
           a non-ECN-capable transport. During decapsulation, if the outer or inner header
           contains a CE indication, the indication is copied to the packet produced after
           decapsulation unless the original packet did not indicate ECT (in which case the
           packet is dropped). In addition, if ECT is indicated by either the outer or inner
           headers, ECT is set to true in the decapsulated packet.

18.8.3 Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)
           The ESP protocol of IPsec, defined in [RFC4303] (where it is called ESP (v3) even
           though ESP provides no formal version numbers), provides a selectable combina-
           tion of confidentiality, integrity, origin authentication, and anti-replay protection
           for IP datagrams. It can employ a NULL encryption method [RFC2410], which is
           mandatory to support, if only integrity is to be used. Conversely, encryption can
           be used for confidentiality without integrity protection, although this combina-
           tion is effective only against passive attacks and is highly discouraged. In the con-
           text of ESP, integrity includes data origin authentication. Given its flexibility and
           feature set, ESP is (far) more popular than AH.

           18.8.3.1 Transport and Tunnel Modes
           Like AH, ESP has transport and tunnel modes. In tunnel mode, an “outer” IP
           packet includes an “inner” IP packet that may be entirely encrypted. This pro-
           vides for a limited form of traffic flow confidentiality (TFC) because the “inner”

datagram’s size and contents can be hidden using encryption. ESP may be used
in combination with AH, if desired, and supports both IPv4 and IPv6. Using ESP
in “integrity-only” mode may be preferable to AH in some cases for performance
reasons (ESP may be more amenable to pipelining) and is a required configuration
option for IPsec implementations. The encapsulations for ESP transport mode are
shown in Figure 18-19.
     The transport mode structure is similar to AH transport mode, except ESP
trailer structures are used in support of ESP’s encryption and integrity protection
methods (see Section 18.8.3). As with AH, ESP transport mode cannot be used
with fragments. The tunnel mode encapsulations for ESP, similar to those for AH,
are shown in Figure 18-20.
     ESP does not use a strict header in the same way AH does. Instead, there
is an overall ESP structure that includes a header and trailer portion. There is
an optional (second) trailer structure if ESP is used with an integrity protection
mechanism that requires space for additional check bits (labeled ESP ICV). The
ESP structure is shown in Figure 18-21.
     ESP-encapsulated IP datagrams use the value 50 in the Protocol (IPv4) or Next
Header (IPv6) header fields. The ESP payload structure, shown in Figure 18-21,
includes the SPI and sequence numbers, used in the same way as with AH. The
primary difference is in the payload area. This area may be confidentiality-pro-
tected (encrypted) and can include a variable-length pad portion required by
some encryption algorithms.
     The payload is required to end on a 32-bit boundary (64 for IPv6) and have the
last two 8-bit fields identify the Pad Length and Next Header (Protocol) field values.
The Pad, Pad Length, and Next Header fields constitute the ESP trailer shown in Fig-
ures 18-19 and 18-20. Certain cryptographic algorithms may employ an IV. If pres-
ent, the IV appears at the beginning of the payload area (not shown). Additional
padding for TFC purposes (called TFC padding) is permitted to appear within the
payload area in front of the ESP trailer (see Figure 2 of [RFC4303] for details). It is
used to disguise the length of the datagram to help resist traffic analysis attacks,
although this features does not appear to be widely used. The Next Header field
contains values chosen from the same space used in the IPv4 Protocol field or IPv6
Next Header field (e.g., 4 for IPv4, 41 for IPv6). It may contain the value 59, indicat-
ing “no next header,” when carrying a dummy packet that is to be discarded.
Dummy packets are another method sometimes used for resisting traffic analysis
attacks.
     The ESP ICV is a variable-length trailer used if integrity support is enabled
and required by the integrity-checking algorithm. It is computed over the ESP
header, payload, and ESP trailer. Implicit values (e.g., high-order ESN bits) are also
included. The length of the ICV is known as a consequence of selecting the par-
ticular integrity-checking method. It is therefore established at the time the cor-
responding SA is set up and not changed as long as the SA exists.
     Anti-replay is supported provided integrity protection is enabled. This is
accomplished using a sequence number derived from a running counter. The

                                      ,3Y?                                                               ,3Y?

         ,3Y??     7&3                                                                               ,3Y?         7&3
                                                                                     ,3Y?
        +HDGHU    +HDGHU                       'DWD                                                   ([W        +HDGHU?            'DWD
                                                                                    +HDGHU
        2SWLRQV   2SWLRQV                                                                           +HDGHUV       2SWLRQV

                                         ,3Y??(63?7UDQVSRUW?0RGH

         ,3Y??               7&3
                   (63                                                               (63      (63
        +HDGHU              +HDGHU                        'DWD                                            ,3Y??(63?7UDQVSRUW?0RGH
                  +HDGHU                                                            7UDLOHU   ,&9
        2SWLRQV             2SWLRQV

                                                       (QFU\SWHG

                                                      $XWKHQWLFDWHG

                                                               ,3Y?                   ,3Y?
                                              ,3Y?                          (63                7&3                               (63       (63
                                                            +%+??'HVW??               'HVW
                                                                                              +HDGHU?             'DWD
                                             +HDGHU        5WJ??)UDJ?([W   +HDGHU     2SWV                                      7UDLOHU    ,&9
                                                                                              2SWLRQV
                                                             +HDGHUV                 +HDGHU

                                                                                                              (QFU\SWHG

                                                                                                        $XWKHQWLFDWHG

Figure 18-19   The IPsec ESP is used to provide confidentiality (encryption), authentication, and integrity protection for IPv4 and IPv6 data-
                     grams. In transport mode (depicted here with TCP), a conventional IP datagram is modified to include the ESP head er. ESP in
                     transport mode allows the transport payload to be encrypted, authenticated, and integrity-protected.
                                         ,3Y?                                                                   ,3Y?

         ,3Y??     7&3                                                                                    ,3Y?          7&3
                                                                                     ,3Y?
        +HDGHU    +HDGHU                             'DWD                                                  ([W         +HDGHU?         'DWD
                                                                                    +HDGHU
        2SWLRQV   2SWLRQV                                                                                +HDGHUV       2SWLRQV

                                                ,3Y??(63?7XQQHO?0RGH

         ,3Y??                  ,3?
                   (63                     7&3                                                      (63         (63
        +HDGHU                +HDGHU                                        'DWD
        2SWLRQV   +HDGHU                  +HDGHU                                                   7UDLOHU      ,&9        ,3Y??(63?7XQQHO?0RGH
                              2SWLRQV
                                           2SWLRQV
         1HZ                  2ULJLQDO

                                                                  (QFU\SWHG

                                                            $XWKHQWLFDWHG

                                          ,3Y?                                      ,3Y?             7&3
                      ,3Y?                               (63          ,3Y?                                                             (63        (63
                                           ([W                                       ([W            +HDGHU?             'DWD
                     +HDGHU                             +HDGHU       +HDGHU                          2SWLRQV                          7UDLOHU     ,&9
                      1HZ
                                         +HDGHUV                      2ULJLQDO
                                                                                   +HDGHUV
                                          1HZ                                      2ULJLQDO          2ULJLQDO

                                                                                                   (QFU\SWHG

                                                                                              $XWKHQWLFDWHG

Figure 18-20    In tunnel mode (depicted here with TCP), ESP encapsulates a conventional IP datagram inside a new “outside” IP datagram
                      that carries the original datagram. ESP allows the outer datagram to be modified (e.g., for NAT traversal) while the inner data-
                      gram remains intact. ESP is more popular than AH for most applications.

                                                                                                                             

                                                     6HFXULW\?3DUDPHWHUV?,QGH[? 63,?????ELWV

                                                           6HTXHQFH?1XPEHU? ???ELWV

                                                          3D\ORDG?'DWD? YDULDEOH?OHQJWK
      ,QWHJULW\?                                                                                                                &RQILGHQWLDOLW\?
      3URWHFWHG                                                                                                                   3URWHFWHG

                                                3DG? ?±????E\WHV             3DG?/HQJWK? ??ELWV      1H[W?+HDGHU? ??ELWV

                                                    ,QWHJULW\?&KHFN?9DOXH? ,&9??YDULDEOH?OHQJWK

Figure 18-21   The ESP message structure includes the encrypted payload in the middle. The SPI and Sequence Number constitute the ESP
                     header, and the combination of the Pad, Pad Length, and Next Header fields constitutes the ESP trailer. An optional ESP ICV
                     trailer is also used when integrity protection is employed.

counter is initialized to 0 when an SA is first set up and incremented before being
copied into each datagram sent on the SA. When anti-replay is enabled (the nor-
mal default), the sender checks to see that the counter has not wrapped and cre-
ates a new SA if wrapping is about to occur. The receiver implementing anti-replay
keeps a valid window of sequence numbers (similar in some ways to the TCP
receiver’s window). Datagrams containing out-of-window sequence numbers are
dropped.
    For systems that implement auditing, ESP processing can result in one or more
auditable events. These events include the following: no valid SA exists for a session,
the datagram given to ESP for processing is a fragment, the anti-replay counter
is about to wrap, a received packet was out of the valid anti-replay window, the
integrity check failed. Auditable events are recorded in a logging system. These
events include metadata such as the SPI value, current date and time, source and
destination IP addresses, sequence number, and IPv6 flow ID (if present).

18.8.3.2 ESP-NULL, Wrapped ESP (WESP), and Traffic Visibility
As mentioned previously, ESP ordinarily provides privacy using encryption, but
it can also operate in an integrity-only mode using the NULL encryption algo-
rithm. Integrity-only mode (also called ESP-NULL) may be desirable in some cir-
cumstances, especially in enterprise environments where sophisticated packet
inspection takes place within the network and confidentiality may be addressed
in other ways. For example, some network infrastructure devices inspect pack-
ets for unwanted content (e.g., malware signatures) and are capable of providing
alerts or shutting down network access when policy is violated. Such devices are
essentially disabled if ESP is used with encryption in an end-to-end fashion (i.e.,
the way it was designed). Said another way, unless they have traffic visibility, they
cannot do their jobs.
     When a packet inspection device is faced with ESP traffic, it needs to make
a decision about whether the traffic is encrypted (i.e., whether NULL encryption
is being used or not). Given that the negotiation of an IPsec cryptographic suite
is handled outside ESP (e.g., manually or using a protocol such as IKE), there are
two current methods for doing so. The first is simply to use a set of nonstandard
heuristics to make a guess [RFC5879]. Use of these has the benefit of not requiring
any modification to ESP for supporting traffic visibility. The other method is to
add a special description to ESP to indicate whether encryption is used. Wrapped
ESP (WESP) [RFC5840], a standards-track RFC, defines a header that is placed
ahead of the ESP packet structure. WESP uses a different protocol number (141)
from ESP and can be negotiated with IKE using the USE_WESP_MODE (value
16415) Notify payload. The variable-length WESP header includes fields to indi-
cate the location of payload information, along with a Flags field (maintained by
the IANA [IWESP]) containing a bit indicating whether ESP-NULL is being used.
Although WESP makes the job of determining whether ESP-NULL is being used
or not easier for network infrastructure, its utility also depends on end hosts using
the WESP header appropriately. Given that WESP is relatively new, this is not yet

       the case today. On the other hand, the WESP format is extensible, so once imple-
       mented it could be adapted for other purposes in the future.

18.8.4 Multicast
       IPsec optionally supports multicast operations [RFC5374], although this capabil-
       ity is not often used. The most basic form involves using manual key configura-
       tion, but there are also multicast group key establishment methods called group
       key management (GKM) protocols managed by group controller/key servers (GCKSs).
       These are used to produce group security associations (GSAs), which include one
       or more IPsec SAs plus one or more GKM SAs used to provide parameters for
       establishing the IPsec SAs [RFC3740]. Given that members may dynamically join
       or leave a group, GKM protocols must deal with rekeying more frequently and
       carefully than regular two-party key establishment protocols, and such protocols
       have been a favorite topic for security researchers [AKNT04]. We shall not explore
       the details of how GKMs operate (such an explanation would be lengthy), but the
       interested reader may consult documentation for GDOI [RFC3547] or GSAKMP
       [RFC4535].
            At present, multicast IPsec operation requires all members of a group to be
       homogeneous in their algorithmic and protocol processing capabilities. Both any-
       source and single-source multicast (ASM and SSM) operations are supported (see
       Chapter 9), and the same procedures are used for IPv4 local broadcast addresses
       and for IPv6 anycast addresses. Host IPsec implementations may use any combi-
       nation of tunnel and transport mode, but SGs must use tunnel mode where the
       tunnel destination addresses are multicast addresses.
            Multicast IP datagrams present a challenge for IPsec when a tunnel mode is
       used because the outer IP datagram’s addressing needs to be a multicast desti-
       nation address in order to be routed efficiently using a multicast-capable infra-
       structure. This requires a special procedure, known as tunnel mode with address
       preservation, to be applied when placing datagrams into AH or ESP tunnels.
       In short, this procedure involves choosing the outer IP source and destination
       addresses to match the inner addresses (assuming the same version of IP is being
       used). The purposes of doing so are (1) to ensure that multicast routing is invoked
       on the datagram and (2) to ensure that the reverse path forwarding (RPF) check
       used in computing multicast routes works properly (see Chapter 9).
            Introduction of multicast requires modification of some of the low-level IPsec
       machinery we saw in Figure 18-10. For example, the SPD and SAD are modified to
       include an “address preservation” flag used in implementing the address-preserv-
       ing tunnel modes. In addition, a directionality flag in the SPD is used to determine
       under what circumstances SAs should be automatically created. This ensures that
       no SAs are created that would use prohibited multicast source addresses as a con-
       sequence of simply reversing source and destination IP addresses (as with unicast
       SAs). The SPD may need to include state as to when a GKM protocol needs to be
       invoked (e.g., for obtaining a needed group key), and a group PAD (GPAD) holds

       the information specific to each GCKS, including for which traffic selectors each
       GCKS is able to produce SAs and authentication information that may be required
       to engage in a particular GKM protocol with a particular GCKS. GPAD material is
       not consulted by non-GKM protocols such as IKE, but the PAD and GPAD struc-
       tures might be implemented together.

18.8.5 L2TP/IPsec
       The Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) (see Chapter 3) supports tunneling of layer
       2 traffic such as PPP through IP and non-IP networks. It relies on authentication
       methods that provide some authentication during connection initiation, but no
       subsequent per-packet authentication, integrity protection, or confidentiality. To
       address this concern, L2TP can be combined with IPsec [RFC3193]. The combi-
       nation, called L2TP/IPsec, provides a recommended method to establish remote
       layer 2 VPN access to enterprise (or home) networks. L2TP can be secured with
       IPsec using either a direct L2TP-over-IP encapsulation (protocol number 115) or a
       UDP/IP encapsulation that eases NAT traversal.
            L2TP/IPsec uses IKE by default, although other keying methods are possible.
       It uses an ESP SA in either transport mode (support required) or tunnel mode
       (support optional). The SA is used to secure the L2TP traffic, which is then respon-
       sible for establishing the layer 2 tunnel. Because it is really a combination of two
       protocols, both of which involve authentication, L2TP/IPsec often requires two
       distinct authentication procedures: one for the machine (using IPsec with pre-
       shared keys or certificates) and another for the user (e.g., using a name and pass-
       word or access token).
            L2TP/IPsec is supported on most modern platforms. On Windows, creating a
       new connection with the “Connect to a workplace” option can be used to enable
       L2TP and L2TP/IPsec. Some smartphones (e.g., Android, iPhone) support L2TP in
       their networking configuration setup screens. Mac OS X includes an L2TP/IPsec
       network adapter type that can be added using the system preferences. On Linux,
       it may be necessary to configure both IPsec and L2TP for them to work together. If
       L2TP is not required on such systems, direct IPsec may be preferable.

18.8.6 IPsec NAT Traversal
       Using NATs with IPsec can present something of a challenge, primarily because IP
       addresses have traditionally been used in identifying communication endpoints
       and are assumed to not change. These assumptions were not entirely avoided (or
       obviated) when IPsec was first designed, so NAT has posed a problem. This is
       one factor contributing to the relatively slow deployment of IPsec. However, today
       IPsec supports both changing addresses (with MOBIKE) and NAT traversal.
           To have a complete NAT traversal solution, we must take into account IKE, AH,
       and ESP in both transport and tunnel modes. As we shall see, when NATs must be
       accommodated, not all combinations of IPsec may be usable with all applications.

      Guidance for what a solution requires is given in [RFC3715]. We shall first discuss
      a variety of issues that highlight fundamental incompatibilities between NATs
      and IPsec and then describe the methods that have been adopted to handle the
      problems.
           One fundamental problem arises with AH and how NATs update the
      addresses in datagrams. Because the AH includes a MAC computation covering
      the datagram’s IP addresses, a NAT is unable to rewrite addresses without invali-
      dating the AH. Note that ESP does not share this issue, as its integrity protection
      mechanism does not include the IP addresses in its MAC.
           Another problem arises with the UDP and TCP transport protocols because of
      the pseudo-header checksum, which incorporates IP addresses in its computation.
      When the transport-layer checksum is integrity-protected or encrypted, the NAT
      is unable to update the checksum without forming an invalid packet. A similar
      situation can arise for NAPT when changing port numbers, or for other protocols
      that perform layering violations.
           A third major problem relates to the ID payloads in IKE. There are several ways
      to identify an IKE peer, one of which is to use IP addresses. As these addresses are
      embedded within an encrypted IKE payload, they are not able to be modified by
      a conventional NAT, leading to failure. Alternative methods for identifying peers
      may be available, however (e.g., FQDN or the distinguished name from an X.509
      certificate).
           A fourth significant concern is how a NAT or NAPT demultiplexes incoming
      traffic to the proper host. In protocols such as TCP and UDP, the port number is
      used for this purpose. However, IPsec AH and ESP act like transport protocols
      that carry no port numbers but instead use an SPI value. While some NATs can
      make use of the SPI value for demultiplexing, these values are chosen by an IPsec
      responder as a local matter and multiple independent hosts may choose the same
      value. Because a NAT cannot easily modify these values, it is possible for a NAT to
      improperly demultiplex incoming (returning) traffic, with a potential for errone-
      ous delivery.
           There are other potential problems for NATs that become more acute when
      IPsec is employed. For example, application protocols that carry IP addresses (e.g.,
      SIP), if integrity-protected or encrypted, cannot be modified by a conventional
      NAT. In addition, configuration and analysis are more difficult because traffic that
      could otherwise be decoded for analysis is now obscured because of encryption.
      Fortunately, some network analysis tools (e.g., Wireshark) can process encrypted
      traffic if provided the necessary key material.
           The primary approach to dealing with most of the NAT traversal concerns is
      to encapsulate IPsec ESP and IKE traffic using UDP/IP, which can be modified by
      conventional NATs when necessary. (There is no supported solution for NAT tra-
      versal of AH.) An IKE initiator can use UDP port 500 or 4500 for sending IKE and
      then transition to using port 4500 for UDP-encapsulated ESP and IKE, whether or
      not a NAT is present. UDP ESP encapsulation is prohibited on port 500 according

      to [RFC5996]. The purpose of using port 4500 is to avoid some NATs that improp-
      erly process IPsec traffic on port 500.
           NAT traversal for IKE is an optional feature of an IKE implementation. If
      supported, the following two Notification payloads can be included with the
      IKE_SA_INIT exchange: NAT_DETECTION_DESTINATION_IP and NAT_
      DETECTION_SOURCE_IP. If present, these appear after the Ni and Nr payloads
      and before CERTREQ payloads. The data associated with these payloads includes
      a SHA-1 hash of the SPIs for the SA, the source or destination IP address, and the
      source or destination port number. Such information is preserved as the IKE mes-
      sages are passed through NATs. When receiving IKE messages that suggest a NAT
      is present, IKE processing continues using a UDP/IP encapsulation on port 4500,
      which tends to pass through NATs unimpeded.
           After having traversed one or more NATs, arriving IKE traffic being used to
      set up a transport-mode SA may contain traffic selectors (TS payloads) with IP
      addresses or ranges that are not meaningful (i.e., they are private IP addresses
      “behind” a NAT) and that do not match the IP addresses contained in the address-
      ing fields of the IKE datagram arriving at the responder. This is handled by first
      storing the addresses in TSi and TSr IKE payloads for later use and later replacing
      them with the source and destination IP addresses present in the received data-
      gram. In essence, this is a form of “delayed NAT” on TS payloads performed by
      the recipient. The resulting datagram and TS payloads are used to query the SPD
      in order to determine the security policy for the requested SA. If transport mode is
      used, the responder completes the exchange and the initiator performs similar TS
      payload substitution processing (see Section 2.23.1 of [RFC5996] for more details).

18.8.7 Example
      There are several open-source and proprietary IPsec implementations. Windows 7
      supports IKEv2 and MOBIKE in Microsoft’s Agile VPN subsystem. Linux includes
      kernel-level IPsec support in kernel version 2.6 and later, and the OpenSwan and
      StrongSwan packages can be used to implement complete VPN solutions. In the
      following example, we use a Linux server running StrongSwan (IPv4 address
      10.0.0.3) with a Windows 7 client (IPv4 address 10.0.1.48) using RSA-based machine
      certificates we have created for authentication to demonstrate IKE. The IKE initial
      exchanges are shown in Figure 18-22.
           Looking at this figure, we can see that Wireshark decodes the IKE exchange
      using ISAKMP as the protocol name. This is the now-deprecated Internet Security
      Association and Key Management Protocol and is the historical name of what ulti-
      mately became IKE. The IKE header contains the initiator’s SPI (labeled “Initiator
      cookie”) and the responder’s SPI, which has not yet been established. The version
      number is 2, indicating that this packet contains IKEv2, and the exchange type is
      IKE_SA_INIT.
           Looking closer, we can see this is an IKE_SA_INIT message containing five
      payloads: one SA, one KE, one Nonce, and two of type Notify. The SA payload
      includes six proposals, each of which contains a list of transforms. The proposals

Figure 18-22   A trace of the initial IKE exchanges, highlighting the first packet. The IKE_SA_INIT exchange is
               carried on UDP port 500 and includes the initiator’s SPI, proposals for cryptographic suite algo-
               rithms, DH key exchange material, a nonce, and Notify payloads used to indicate addresses for
               NAT traversal. Each proposal in the SA payload requests the establishment of an IKE_SA using
               a set of transforms for encryption, integrity protection, a PRF used for generation of random
               numbers, and DH group parameters used in key agreement.

represent sets of algorithms the initiator is willing to use. Proposal 6 (the last one)
has been expanded to show more detail. It suggests AES in CBC mode with a 256-
bit key length for encryption, HMAC with SHA-256 for integrity protection, a PRF
based on SHA-384, and the alternate 1024-bit MODP group for DH key agreement.
The other proposals (not detailed) include suggestions for 3DES encryption, AES
encryption with different key lengths, SHA-1 for integrity protection, and other
SHA variants for the PRF. Following the SA payload, the Key Exchange payload
contains the public information required to perform a DH exchange using the
“alternate 1024-bit MODP group.” In the other payloads, we find a nonce contain-
ing a 48-byte random bit string and two Notify payloads used for NAT traversal.
The first Notify payload is of type NAT_DETECTION_SOURCE_IP, and the sec-
ond contains NAT_DETECTION_DESTINATION_IP. The value in the first con-
tains a 20-byte SHA-1 hash over these values: 8 bytes of the initiator’s SPI, 8 bytes
of the responder’s SPI (0 here), 4 bytes of source IPv4 address, and 2 bytes of UDP
source port number. The value in the second covers the same as the first, except
the destination port is used in place of the source port. Figure 18-23 illustrates the
response to the first IKE_SA_INIT message.
     In this figure, the IKE_SA_INIT message contains the following payloads: SA,
KE, Nonce, three of type Notify, and a Certificate Request. The SA payload con-
tains only one proposal, comprising the following transforms: 3DES for encryp-
tion, HMAC_SHA1_96 for integrity, HMAC_SHA1 for the PRF, and group 2 for the
DH exchange. The KE payload contains a 128-byte value from the 1024-bit MODP
group. The Nonce payload contains a 32-byte random value for freshness. The next
two Notify payloads contain NAT_DETECTION_SOURCE_IP and NAT_DETEC-
TION_DESTINATION_IP, as described earlier. Following these are new payloads
we have not yet encountered: CERTREQ and MULTIPLE_AUTH_SUPPORTED.
     The Certificate Request (CERTREQ) payload indicates the responder’s pre-
ferred certificates. In this case, the responder indicates that any certificates later
supplied by the initiator should be associated with a particular certificate author-
ity. The encoding used to express the CA is one of several defined in Section 3.6
of [RFC5996], but only the values 4, 12, and 13 are currently standardized. Here,
the payload contains the value 4, meaning the Certificate Authority Data subfield
contains a concatenation of SHA-1 hashes of the public keys (X.509 Subject Public
Key Info element) of trusted CAs. Given that the length of this subfield is only 20
bytes in this example, we can see that only a single CA is listed. It happens to be
the SHA-1 hash of the DER encoding of the public key of the sample root certificate
for the “Test CA” we created for this example.

    Note
    The binary Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER) format is a subset of the ASN.1
    standard Basic Encoding Rules (BER). DER permits values to be encoded in only
    a single, unambiguous way. DER is one of the two most popular ways to encode
    X.509 certificates. The other is PEM, an ASCII format, which we showed earlier. Var-
    ious utilities, including openssl, may be used to convert between the two formats.

Figure 18-23   The completion of the IKE_SA_INIT exchange includes the responder’s SPI (labeled
               “cookie”), a single proposal with transforms, DH parameters, a nonce value, and NAT
               traversal address parameters. This message also includes a CERTREQ payload to
               indicate and request acceptable certificates, and a notification indicating that multiple
               authentication methods (in series) are supported.

     The final payload in Figure 18-23 is a Notify payload containing the MULTIPLE_
AUTH_SUPPORTED indication and no associated data. Defined as an experi-
mental extension to IKE in [RFC4739], it indicates the ability to use more than one
authentication method. Such a situation may arise, for example, when using an
IKE_AUTH exchange based on certificates to establish IKE SAs to a service pro-
vider, followed by some form of EAP-based authentication for the individual user.
     The remaining packets shown in Figure 18-23 contain IKE_AUTH messages
that are encrypted. They are carried using source and destination port number
4500 instead of 500, and the encapsulation uses the special “non-ESP marker” con-
taining 4 bytes of 0 [RFC3947], indicating that the traffic is IKE and not ESP. The
marker and port numbers are also used for the INFORMATIONAL exchanges we
discussed previously.
     Wireshark has the capability to decrypt encrypted IKE traffic if provided with
the proper keys and SPI values. By providing a copy of the log trace file from the
IKE server to Wireshark (located under Edit | Preferences | Protocols | ISAKMP),
we can see the decrypted IKE payload information. (The Wireshark developers
tend to prefer the original names of protocols such as ISAKMP and SSL instead of
IKE and TLS, so that is what we see when looking at Wireshark output.)
     The third packet in Figure 18-22 is the first fragment of a UDP/IP datagram
that Wireshark reassembles when it receives the second fragment (packet 4). The
decrypted and reassembled result is shown in Figure 18-24.
     Here we can see the contents of the reassembled and decrypted UDP/IPv4
fragments constituting the first packet of the IKE_AUTH exchange. The client
provides the following IKE payloads: IDi, CERT, CERTREQ, AUTH, N(MOBIKE_
SUPP), CP, SA, TSi, and TSr. The IDi payload contains the name of the initiator,
test client. The CERT payload contains a client certificate for test client signed by
the Test CA certificate authority that we know the corresponding server should
accept (because it was configured to). The CERTREQ payload contains requests
for Test CA as well as 21 other CAs (not shown) known by this Windows 7 cli-
ent. The AUTH payload contains a data block signed using the RSA private key
of the initiator (see Section 2.15 of [RFC5996]), which provides origin authentica-
tion. The N(MOBIKE_SUPPORTED) indicates the client’s willingness to follow
the MOBIKE protocol. The CP(CFG_REQUEST) payload (not detailed) contains
the following attributes: INTERNAL_IP4_ADDRESS, INTERNAL_IP4_DNS,
INTERNAL_IP4_NBNS, and a PRIVATE_USE type (23456). These are used to
help in configuring VPN access and serve a similar purpose to the configuration
information typically provided locally by DHCP (see Chapter 6). NBNS refers to a
NetBIOS name server. NetBIOS is an API that can be implemented on a number of
networking protocols and is common in Microsoft Windows environments.
     The SA payload in Figure 18-24 represents the information required to form a
CHILD_SA. There are two proposals (not detailed), each for ESP using 32-bit SPI
values (note that IKE uses 64-bit SPI values) with AUTH_HMAC_SHA1_96 as the
integrity algorithm and not using extended sequence numbers (indicated using
a proposal transform). The first proposal suggests the use of ENCR_AES_CBC

Figure 18-24   The IKE_AUTH exchange contains encrypted information and operates on UDP port 4500. The
               reassembly of two fragments produces an IKE message with an Encrypted/Authenticated data
               payload containing the following payloads: Identification initiator (IDi), Certificate (CERT), Cer-
               tificate Request (CERTREQ), Authentication (AUTH), Notify (N), Configuration (CP), Security
               Association (SA), Traffic Selector initiator (TSi), and Traffic Selector responder (TSr).

(256-bit keys) for encryption, and the second suggests ENCR_3DES. Because there
is no N(USE_TRANSPORT_MODE) payload present, we conclude that each of the
proposals involves using ESP in the default tunnel mode.
     The Traffic Selector (TSi and TSr) payloads in Figure 18-24 indicate the IPv4
and IPv6 address ranges that are permitted to be associated with the forming SA.
The TSi has both a TS_IPv6_ADDR_RANGE and TS_IPv4_ADDR_RANGE that
contain their entire address and port number ranges. TSr (not detailed) contains
the same values.
     The first IKE_AUTH message we just discussed is fairly complicated and
requires more than a single 1500-byte UDP/IPv4 datagram to hold it. After pro-
cessing by the responder, the final message in the exchange is produced. It is
shown in Figure 18-25.
     In this figure, the server sends a response with the following payloads: IDr,
CERT, AUTH, CP(CFG_REPLY), SA, TSi, TSr, N(AUTH_LIFETIME), N(MOBIKE_
SUPPORTED), and N(NO_ADDITIONAL_ADDRESSES). The IDr payload contains
a DER-encoded name of the server. The CERT payload contains the matching (server)
certificate, and the AUTH payload indicates knowledge of the corresponding pri-
vate key. The CP(CFG_REPLY) payload includes an INTERNAL_IP4_ADDRESS
attribute, which is useful for VPN configuration. The SA payload is similar to the cli-
ent’s SA payload from Figure 18-24 and includes a single proposal with transforms
ENCR_AES_CBC (256-bit keys), AUTH_HMAC_SHA1_96, and no ESNs.
     The TSi and TSr values in this packet have been “narrowed” to be much smaller
ranges than in the client’s IKE_AUTH message. In this case, the TSi is narrowed to
the single IPv4 address 10.100.0.1. The TSr has been narrowed to 10.0.0.0/16. Each
uses the full port range 0–65535. This is a relatively simple case of narrowing. In
cases where more than one discontinuous subset of the range specified by the
initiator is acceptable, an N(ADDITIONAL_TS_POSSIBLE) payload may be gener-
ated. Narrowing is used to achieve mutually agreeable address ranges for an SA.
     The N(AUTH_LIFETIME) payload indicates that the authentication is going
to last at most only 2.8 hours (10,154s, expressed as 000027aa in the trace). The
N(MOBIKE_SUPPORTED) payload indicates the responder’s support for MOBIKE.
The N(NO_ADDITIONAL_ADDRESSES) payload (not detailed) is used with
MOBIKE to indicate that no additional IP addresses other than those used in the
exchange are being used.
     At this point, a tunnel mode ESP CHILD_SA has been set up and traffic can
flow. We do not detail the traffic flow containing ESP packets (they are compara-
tively straightforward) but instead jump to the point where the SAs are to be torn
down. This is accomplished using two sets of INFORMATIONAL exchanges con-
taining Delete payloads—one for the ESP SA and one for the IKE SA. Figure 18-26
shows the request to close the ESP SA.
     We can see in this figure the SA being deleted based on a close request at
the client. Like other IKE traffic, it includes an encrypted and authenticated pay-
load. The encrypted payload in turn includes a single Delete payload. The Delete
payload can indicate that more than one SPI is to be deleted, but in this case it

Figure 18-25 Completing the IKE_AUTH exchange, the responder produces an Encrypted/Authenticated data
             payload containing the following payloads: Identification responder (IDr), CERT, AUTH, CP(CFG_
             REPLY), SA, narrowed TSi and TSR, along with N(AUTH_LIFETIME), N(MOBIKE_ SUPPORTED),
             and N(NO_ADDITIONAL_ADDRESSES). The first CHILD_SA can now commence.

Figure 18-26   A request to delete the child ESP SA with SPI 6cfca5ef is carried on the IKE SA. The
               Delete payload shows Port: 1, which is mislabeled by Wireshark. (It should be Number
               of SPIs: 1.)

indicates only the one with SPI value 0x6cfca5ef. Packet 7 from the responder is
essentially the same but contains a different setting in the Flags field (responder
instead of initiator and response instead of request), a different encryption IV
and integrity checksum data, and specification of a different SPI (c348faf2) in the
Delete payload.
    To close the IKE_SA, another exchange of INFORMATIONAL messages is
required. The initiator begins with the packet shown in Figure 18-27. We can see
here a request to close the IKE SA. Encrypted like other traffic, the Delete payload
does not need to include an SPI value because it is implied to be the IKE SA car-
rying the deletion request. To complete the IKE SA deletion, the responder replies
with an IKE message containing only an empty encrypted/authenticated payload
type in packet 9. Its Next Payload type field is NONE (zero). This indicates the
completion of the IKE SA deletion.

Figure 18-27   A request to delete the IKE SA. SPI values are not required because the entire message
                     is carried on the IKE SA and there is no ambiguity.

18.9 Transport Layer Security (TLS and DTLS)
      So far we have discussed security protocols at layers 2 and 3. The most widely
      used protocol for security operates just above the transport layer and is called
      Transport Layer Security (TLS). TLS is used for securing Web communications and
      for several other popular protocols, including POP and IMAP (which are called
      POP3S and IMAPS, respectively, when protected with TLS). One reason for TLS’s
      popularity is that it can be implemented within or underneath applications that
      ride on top of the lower layers, whereas protocols such as EAP and IPsec usually
      require capabilities within the operating systems and protocol implementations of
      hosts and embedded devices.
          There are several versions of TLS and its predecessor, the Secure Sockets Layer
      (SSL) [RFC6101]. We shall focus on TLS version 1.2 [RFC5246], which is the most

         recent at the time of writing. TLS 1.2 can support backward compatibility with
         most older versions of TLS and SSL (e.g., TLS 1.0, 1.1, and SSL 3.0). However, SSL
         2.0 is weaker, and while interoperability with it is possible, it is now prohibited
         [RFC6176]. After discussing TLS 1.2, which operates over a stream-oriented proto-
         col (usually TCP), we will look at the datagram-oriented variant called the Datagram
         Transport Layer Security (DTLS) [RFC4347]. DTLS is slowly gaining popularity for
         some applications such as VPN implementations that do not use IPsec. Its current
         specification is based on TLS 1.1 [RFC4346], but updates are under way [IDDTLS].

18.9.1 TLS 1.2
         The security goals of TLS are not unlike those for IPsec, but TLS operates at a
         higher layer. Confidentiality and data integrity are provided based on a variety of
         cryptographic suites that use certificates that can be provided by a PKI. TLS can
         also establish secure connections between two anonymous parties (without using
         certificates), but this application is vulnerable to a MITM attack (not surprising,
         given that each end is not even strongly identified). The TLS protocol has two
         layers of its own, called the record layer and the upper layer. The Record protocol
         implements the record (lower) layer and is assumed to be layered on a reliable
         underlying protocol (e.g., TCP). Figure 18-28 shows the basic organization.

       &LSKHU                                                                           +LJKHU?
                           $OHUW             +DQGVKDNH          $SSOLFDWLRQ
      &KDQJH                                                                             /D\HU?
                          3URWRFRO            3URWRFRO            'DWD                 3URWRFROV
      3URWRFRO

                                  )UDJPHQWDWLRQ
                                                                                           5HFRUG?/D\HU
                                  &RPSUHVVLRQ
                                                                                          5HFRUG?3URWRFRO
                        (QFU\SWLRQ?DQG?,QWHJULW\?3URWHFWLRQ

Figure 18-28   The TLS protocol “stack” has a lower record layer and three of its own upper-layer protocols
               called handshaking protocols. A fourth upper-layer protocol is the application protocol using
               TLS. The record layer provides fragmentation, compression, integrity protection, and encryp-
               tion. The handshaking protocols perform many of the same tasks for TLS that IKE does for IPsec.

              TLS is a client/server protocol, designed to support security for a connection
         between two applications. The Record protocol provides fragmentation, compres-
         sion, integrity protection, and encryption for data objects exchanged between
         clients and servers, and the handshake protocols establish identities, perform
         authentication, indicate alerts, and provide unique key material for the Record
         protocol to use on each connection. The handshaking protocols comprise four spe-
         cific protocols: the Handshake protocol, the Alert protocol, the Change Cipher
         Spec protocol, and the application data protocol. Like IPsec, TLS is extensible and

      can accommodate existing or future cryptographic suites, which TLS calls cipher
      suites (CS). Many such combinations have been defined, and the IANA maintains
      a registry of the current set [TLSPARAMS]. Modern variants of TLS are based
      on SSL 3.0, originally developed by Netscape. TLS and SSL do not directly inter-
      operate, but there are negotiation mechanisms that allow clients and servers to
      dynamically discover which protocol to use when a connection is first established.
           The Change Cipher Spec protocol is used to change the current operating
      parameters. This is accomplished by first using the Handshake protocol to set up
      a “pending” state, followed by an indication to switch from the current state to the
      pending state (which then becomes the current state). Such switching is allowed
      only after the pending state has been readied. TLS depends on five cryptographic
      operations: digital signing, stream cipher encryption, block cipher encryption,
      AEAD, and public key encryption. For integrity protection, the TLS record layer
      uses HMAC. For key generation, TLS 1.2 uses a PRF based on HMAC with SHA-
      256. TLS also integrates an optional compression algorithm that is negotiated
      when a connection is first established.

      18.9.1.1 TLS Record Protocol
      The Record protocol uses an extensible set of record content type values to iden-
      tify which message type (i.e., which of the higher-layer protocols) is being mul-
      tiplexed. At any given point in time, the Record protocol has an active current
      connection state and another set of state parameters called the pending connection
      state. Each connection state is further divided into a read state and a write state.
      Each of these states specifies a compression algorithm, encryption algorithm, and
      MAC algorithm to be used for communication, along with any necessary keys
      and parameters. When a key is changed, the pending state is first set up using
      the Handshake protocol, and then a synchronization operation (usually accom-
      plished using the Cipher Change protocol) sets the current state equal to the pend-
      ing state. When first initialized, all states are set up with NULL encryption, no
      compression, and no MAC processing.
           The Record protocol’s processing flow is shown in Figure 18-29. It divides
      (fragments) higher-layer information blocks into records called TLSPlaintext
      records, which can be at most 214 bytes in length (but are usually much less). The
      choice of record size resides within TLS; higher-layer message boundaries are
      not preserved. Once formed, TLSPlaintext records are compressed using a com-
      pression algorithm [RFC3749] identified in the current connection state. There is
      always one compression protocol active, although it may be (and usually is) the
      NULL compression protocol (which, not surprisingly, provides no compression
      gain). The compression algorithm converts a TLSPlaintext record into a TLSCom-
      pressed structure. Compression algorithms are required to be lossless and may not
      produce an output that is larger than the input by more than 1KB. To protect the
      payload from disclosure and modification, encryption and integrity protection
      algorithms convert a TLSCompressed structure into a TLSCiphertext structure,
      which is then sent on the underlying transport connection.

                                                                                                           

      &RQWHQW?7\SH? ??ELWV   9HUVLRQ?0DMRU? ??ELWV       9HUVLRQ?0LQRU? ??ELWV   /HQJWK? KLJK?RUGHU???ELWV         )URP?+LJKHU
                                                                                                                      8SSHU ?
  /HQJWK? ORZ?RUGHU???ELWV                                                                                            /D\HU

                                            3D\ORDG?)UDJPHQW                                                   7/63ODLQWH[W
                                          YDULDEOH??XS?WR?????E\WHV

                                                                                                                   &RPSUHVV
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                    2SWLRQDO

      &RQWHQW?7\SH? ??ELWV   9HUVLRQ?0DMRU? ??ELWV       9HUVLRQ?0LQRU? ??ELWV   /HQJWK? KLJK?RUGHU???ELWV

  /HQJWK? ORZ?RUGHU???ELWV

                                         &RPSUHVVHG?3D\ORDG?)UDJPHQW                                          7/6&RPSUHVVHG
                                         YDULDEOH??XS?WR????????????E\WHV

                                                                                                                     (QFU\SW?
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                   $XWKHQWLFDWH

      &RQWHQW?7\SH? ??ELWV   9HUVLRQ?0DMRU? ??ELWV       9HUVLRQ?0LQRU? ??ELWV   /HQJWK? KLJK?RUGHU???ELWV

  /HQJWK? ORZ?RUGHU???ELWV

                                          (QFU\SWHG?3URWHFWHG?3D\ORDG                                         7/6&LSKHUWH[W
                                   HQFU\SWLRQ???0$&???>SDGGLQJ?SDG?OHQJWK@ ?RU
                                           QRQFH???VLJQFU\SWHG?FRQWHQW                                               6HQG?WR
                                                                                                                    7UDQVSRUW

Figure 18-29       The TLS record layer starts with a TLSPlaintext record, which is compressed by a lossless com-
                   pression algorithm to form a TLSCompressed record. The TLSCompressed record is encrypted
                   (and has a MAC applied) to form a TLSCiphertext record, which is sent for transmission. Con-
                   ventional stream and block ciphers require a MAC, and block ciphers may include padding.
                   When using AEAD ciphers, a nonce is included with the encrypted and integrity-protected con-
                   tent, but no separate MAC is used.

                  Referring to Figure 18-29, when producing a TLSCiphertext structure, a
             sequence number is first computed (but not placed in the message), then a MAC
             is computed if necessary, and finally symmetric encryption is performed. Prior
             to encryption, the message may be padded (up to 255 bytes) to meet any block
             length requirements imposed by the encryption algorithm (e.g., for block ciphers).
             A MAC is not required for AEAD algorithms that provide both integrity and
             encryption (e.g., CCM, GCM), but a nonce is used in such cases.
                  Keys for the Record protocol are derived from a master secret provided by some
             method outside the Record protocol, most often by the Handshake protocol. Using
             the master secret, along with random values provided by the client and server
             applications at the beginning of the connection, the following keys are generated:

                      Mc | Ms | Dc | Ds | IVc | IVs = PRF(master_secret, "key expansion",
                                        server_random + client_random)

           In this assignment, | is the splitting operator and + is the concatenation opera-
      tor. Mc denotes the MAC write key for the client, Ms denotes the MAC write key for
      the server, Dc denotes the client’s data write key, Ds denotes the server’s data write
      key, IVc denotes the client’s IV, and IVs denotes the server’s IV. With the | opera-
      tor, each key uses however many bytes from the PRF function are required. MAC,
      encryption, and IV keys, if used, have a fixed length based on the cipher suite
      selected. The last two values are used only in cases where implicit nonce genera-
      tion takes place with AEAD ciphers (see Section 3.2.1 of [RFC5116]). According to
      [RFC5246], the cipher suite requiring the most material is AES_256_CBC_SHA256.
      It requires four 32-byte keys, for a total of 128 bytes.

      18.9.1.2 TLS Handshaking Protocols
      There are three subprotocols to TLS, which perform tasks roughly equivalent
      to those performed by IKE in IPsec. More specifically, these other protocols are
      identified by numbers used for multiplexing and demultiplexing by the record
      layer and are called the Handshake protocol (22), Alert protocol (21), and Cipher
      Change protocol (20). The Cipher Change protocol is very simple. It consists of one
      message containing a single byte that has the value 1. The purpose of the message
      is to indicate to the peer a desire to change from the current to the pending state.
      Receiving such a message moves the read pending state to the current state and
      causes an indication to the record layer to transition to the pending write state as
      soon as possible. This message is used by both client and server.
           The Alert protocol is used to deliver status information from one end of a
      TLS connection to another. This can include terminating conditions (either fatal
      errors or controlled shutdowns) or nonfatal error conditions. As of the publica-
      tion of [RFC5246], 24 alert messages were defined in standards. More than half of
      them are always fatal (e.g., bad MACs, missing or unknown messages, algorithm
      failures).
           The Handshake protocol sets up the relevant connection operating parameters.
      It allows the TLS endpoints to achieve six major objectives: agree on algorithms
      and exchange random values used in forming symmetric encryption keys, estab-
      lish algorithm operating parameters, exchange certificates and perform mutual
      authentication, generate a session-specific secret, provide security parameters to
      the record layer, and verify that all of these operations have executed properly.
      Figure 18-30 shows the messages required.
           The handshake shown in Figure 18-30 begins with Hello messages. The
      ClientHello message is usually the first message sent from client to server. It con-
      tains a session ID, proposals for the cryptographic suite number (CS in Figure
      18-30), and a set of acceptable compression algorithms (which are usually just
      NULL, although [RFC3749] also defines DEFLATE). TLS supports in excess of 250
      cipher suite options [TLSPARAMS].
           The ClientHello message also contains the TLS version number and a ran-
      dom number called ClientHello.random. Upon receiving the ClientHello message,
      the server checks to see if the session ID is present in its cache. If so, the server

                                &OLHQW                          6HUYHU
                                              &OLHQ
                                       VHVV          W
                                             LRQ?,' +HOOR
                                            ^H[WH ??&6??&RP
                                                  QVLRQ     S
                                                        V`

                                                     OOR S
                                                HU+H
                                            6HUY ??&6??&RP
                                              Q?,'
                                              LR        `  V
                                       VHVV          QVLRQ
                                               ^H[WH
                                                           HUYHU
                                                LF DWH? 6
                                         &HUWLI                    H
                                                            KDQJ
                                             U.H     \([F
                                       6HUYH                   HVW
                                                         5HTX
                                                  LFDWH
                        $EEUHYLDWHG      &HUWLI
                        +DQGVKDNH                           RQH
                         5HVXPH
                                              HU+    HOOR'
                                         6HUY
                                                                       $EEUHYLDWHG
                                         &HUWLI                        +DQGVKDNH
                                               LFDWH                    5HVXPH
                                      &OLHQ      ? &OLH
                                           W.H\         QW
                                                ([FK
                                        &HUWLI        D QJH
                                      >&KD LFDWH9HULI
                                          QJH&          \
                                               LSKHU
                                                     6SHF
                                           )LQLV           @
                                                 KHG

                                                         6     SHF@
                                                   LSKHU
                                        & K D QJH& HG
                                      >              K
                                               )LQLV

                                          'DWD?([FKDQJH
                                               3URWHFWHG

Figure 18-30   The normal TLS connection initiation exchange consists of several messages that
               may be pipelined. Required messages have solid arrows and are shown in boldface
               type. An abbreviated exchange takes place if a previously existing connection can be
               restarted. This avoids endpoint authentication, which can be costly for systems with
               limited processing capabilities.

may agree to continue a previously existing connection (called a “resume”) by
performing an abbreviated handshake. The abbreviated handshake is key to TLS
performance and avoids having to repeatedly verify the authenticity of each end-
point, but it does require synchronization with respect to the cipher specification.
The ServerHello message completes the first part of the exchange by carrying the
server’s random number (ServerHello.random) to the client. This message also con-
tains a session ID value. If the value is the same as that provided by the client, it
indicates the server’s willingness to resume. If not, it has the value 0 and a full
handshake is required.
    If a full (nonabbreviated) handshake is executed, the exchange of Hello mes-
sages results in each end becoming aware of the cipher suites, compression algo-
rithms, and random values of its peer. The server selects among the cryptographic
suites specified by the client and may be required to provide its certificate chain in

      a Certificate message if it is to be authenticated (which is the typical case for secure
      Web traffic or HTTPS). The server may also send a ServerKeyExchange message if
      its certificate is not valid for signing, it has no certificate, or a temporary or ephem-
      eral key is to be used to generate session keys.

          Note
          The ServerKeyExchange message is used only in cases where the Certificate
          (server) message does not contain enough information to establish a premaster
          secret. Such cases include anonymous or ephemeral DH key agreement (i.e.,
          cipher suites starting with TLS_DHE_anon, TLS_DHE_DSS, TLS_ DHE_RSA).
          The ServerKeyExchange message is not used for other suites, including those
          starting with TLS_RSA, TLS_DH_DSS, or TLS_DH_RSA.

           At this point, the server may require client authentication. If so, it generates
      a CertificateRequest message. Once this message is sent, the server completes the
      second portion of the exchange by sending the mandatory ServerHelloDone mes-
      sage. Upon receiving this (possibly pipelined) message from the server, the client
      may be required to prove its identity (i.e., knowledge of an appropriate private
      key corresponding to a certificate). If so, it first sends its certificate using a Cer-
      tificate message in the same format used by the server. It then sends the manda-
      tory ClientKeyExchange message. The contents of this message depend on the
      cryptographic suite used, but it generally contains either an RSA-encrypted key or
      Diffie-Hellman parameters that may be used to create a type of seed for creating
      new keys (called the premaster secret). Finally, it sends a CertificateVerify message
      to demonstrate that it possesses the private key corresponding to the previously
      provided certificate, if the server requested client authentication. This message
      contains a signature on the hash of all of the handshake messages the client has
      received and sent up to this point.
           The final portion of the exchange includes a ChangeCipherSpec message,
      which is an independent TLS protocol content type (i.e., technically not a Hand-
      shake protocol message). However, the mandatory Handshake protocol Finished
      messages can be exchanged only after a successful exchange of ChangeCipher-
      Spec messages. The Finished messages are the first ones to be protected using the
      parameters exchanged up to this point. The Finished message themselves contain
      “verify data,” which consists of the following value:

       verify_data = PRF(master_secret, finished_label, Hash(handshake_messages))

      where finished_label has the value “client finished” for the client and
      “server finished” for the server. The particular hash function Hash is associ-
      ated with the selection of the PRF made during the initial Hello exchange. TLS 1.2
      provides the ability to have variable-length verify data, but all previous versions
      and current cipher suites produce 12 bytes of verify data. The 48-byte master_
      secret value is computed as follows:

            master_secret = PRF(premaster secret, “master secret”,
                  ClientHello.random + ServerHello.random)

where + is the concatenation operator. The Finished message is important because
it can be used to know with a high degree of certainty that the Handshake proto-
col has completed successfully and subsequent data exchange can take place.

18.9.1.3 TLS Extensions
If we compare the capabilities of IKE and TLS we have discussed so far, we can
see that IKE includes the ability to carry information beyond that required for
basic SA establishment. This is accomplished using IKE Notify and Configuration
payloads. To provide a similar extensible mechanism for TLS, various extensions
can be included with TLS 1.2 messages in a standard way. The baseline specifica-
tion for TLS 1.2 [RFC5246] includes a “signature algorithms” extension that a client
uses to specify to a server what types of hash and signature algorithms it supports
(MD5, SHA-1, SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512 for hashes and RSA, DSA,
ECDSA for digital signatures are defined). They are indicated in descending order
of preference by pairs, as some systems allow only certain combinations. The cur-
rent list of extensions is given in [TLSEXT].
     Previous versions of TLS had about a half-dozen extensions, and [RFC6066]
updates these extensions for TLS 1.2. It defines the following extensions: server_
name (DNS-style name of the server being contacted), max_fragment_length
(maximum length of a message as 2n bytes for n having values 9–12), client_certifi-
cate_url (indicates support for the CertificateURL handshake message used to send
the URL of a certificate instead of a complete certificate), trusted_ca_keys (hashes
or the names of trusted CA public keys and/or certificates), truncated_hmac (use
the first 80 bits of HMAC calculations only), and status_request (requests that a
server invoke OCSP and provide the DER-encoded response in a CertificateStatus
handshake message to check a certificate). Each of these extensions may be pres-
ent in an (extended) ClientHello message and in some circumstances may appear
in the ServerHello message to indicate agreement. Aside from these extensions
and the two handshake messages already mentioned, [RFC6066] also defines
four alert messages: certificate_unobtainable, unrecognized_name, bad_certifi-
cate_status_response, and bad_certificate_hash_value. These are self-explanatory
and are not sent unless the peer has demonstrated understanding of the extended
ClientHello type message.
     Several other extensions have been defined or are reserved. The user_map-
ping extension [RFC4681] provides a method for providing context for the user
identifier (e.g., Windows domain). Another expands the cert_type extension to
include not only X.509 certificates but also OpenPGP certificates [RFC6091]. Ellip-
tic curve cipher suites are described by the informational document [RFC4492].
The Secure Remote Password protocol (SRP) can be integrated with TLS according to
the methods defined in the informational document [RFC5054]. A use_srtp exten-
sion designed to produce a version of the Secure Real-Time protocol (SRTP) based on
DTLS (see Section 18.9.2) is given in [RFC5764]. A method to eliminate the state a

      server must store to perform session resumption is given by the SessionTicket TLS
      extension [RFC5077]. It involves placing the necessary state in an encrypted form
      in the client. Finally, an important renegotiation_info extension is used to combat
      a renegotiation vulnerability. We shall describe it in more detail next.

      18.9.1.4 Renegotiation
      TLS supports the ability to renegotiate cryptographic connection parameters while
      maintaining the same connection. This can be initiated by either the server or the
      client. If the server wishes to renegotiate the connection parameters, it generates a
      HelloRequest message, and the client responds with a new ClientHello message,
      which begins the renegotiation procedure. The client is also able to generate such
      a ClientHello message spontaneously, without prompting from the server.
           Support for renegotiation is optional but “highly recommended” and is used,
      for example, when sequence numbers are about to wrap. Renegotiation can be
      refused by generating a “no_renegotiation” (type 100) warning alert. Although
      this type of alert is not required to be terminal, receiving such an alert may, by
      local policy, result in connection termination.
           In 2009, a successful attack on TLS was demonstrated using the renegotiation
      capability. We describe it in more detail in Section 18.12. The vulnerability allows
      an attacker to establish a malicious TLS session with a server that can later be
      spliced into a subsequent legitimate session by a client using a MITM attack. The
      server believes that only a standards-compliant renegotiation has taken place. A
      solution to the problem, given in [RFC5746], involves binding any renegotiation
      more closely with the existing session using a TLS extension called renegotiation_
      info (type 0xff01). When creating a new connection, renegotiation_info is empty.
      When client renegotiation takes place, it contains “client_verify_data,” and when
      server renegotiation takes place it contains a concatenation of “client_verify_data”
      and “server_verify_data.” The client_verify_data is defined to be the same verify_
      data used with the Finished message sent by the client on the completion of the
      last handshake. This is a 12-byte value in TLS (36 for SSLv3). The server_verify_
      data is defined to be the verify_data used with the Finished message sent by the
      server on completion of the last handshake.
           Some deployed TLS (and SSL) servers abort a connection when unknown
      extensions are present. To handle this issue when deploying the (relatively new)
      renegotiation_info extension, an alternative is available. The TLS cipher suite
      TLS_EMPTY_RENEGOTIATION_INFO_SCSV can be used during connection
      establishment to indicate the equivalent of an empty renegotiation_info exten-
      sion. This is using a signaling cipher suite value (SCSV) not to encode a real cipher
      suite, but instead to indicate a certain set of functions. (A similar trick is used in
      DNSSEC for NSEC3 records; see Section 18.10.1.3.)

      18.9.1.5 Example
      In the example shown in Figure 18-31, we see the messages exchanged during a
      connection setup with TLS 1.2 using TCP/IP on the local loopback interface. The
      client and server have RSA certificates, which each provides to its peer. The initial

TCP handshake and window update, as well as the 127.0.0.1 source and destina-
tion IPv4 addresses, are not shown. The trace has been annotated with right and
left arrows for additional clarity. The arrows pointing to the right indicate TCP
segments containing at least one TLS message sent by the client headed for the
server. Left-pointing arrows indicate messages from the server to the client. To see
this output, Wireshark was told to decode the trace by first choosing SSL under
the Analyze | Decode As ... menu.

Figure 18-31   A normal TLS 1.2 connection establishment as shown by Wireshark. The server runs
               on port 5556. Client messages sent to the server are highlighted by arrows pointing to
               the right. Server messages sent to the client are shown with left-pointing arrows. TCP
               ACKs are interspersed with the TLS messages. After the Change Cipher Spec mes-
               sage (segment 21), other messages are encrypted and authenticated. Segment 13 also
               includes the ServerHelloDone message.

    In Figure 18-31, after the initial TCP-level handshake, the TLS exchange begins
with a ClientHello message. TCP pure ACKs are seen interspersed with the TLS
messages. After the ChangeCipherSpec message has been processed, the subse-
quent information is encrypted. To see what is happening in more detail, we shall
expand the first few TLS messages. Figure 18-32 shows the detailed contents of the
ClientHello message.

Figure 18-32   A ClientHello message in TLS 1.2 contains version information, supported cipher
                     suites and compression algorithms, random data, and a number of extensions. Here,
                     the client supports Diffie-Hellman key agreement as well as key exchange using RSA.
                     It uses AES-256 in CBC mode for encryption and SHA-256 for integrity protection.

     The ClientHello message detailed in Figure 18-32 is a Record protocol message
carrying the ClientHello handshake message. It contains a 32-bit UNIX timestamp
counting seconds since midnight, January 1, 1970, plus a random 28-byte value
(ClientHello.random) used in forming keys. As this is a brand-new connection, its
session ID is 0. Six bytes are devoted to carrying the client’s three supported cipher
suites in preference order (most preferred first). Each suite is encoded using a
16-bit value specified by the TLS Cipher Suite Registry in [TLSPARAMS]. Only a
single compression method is supported—the NULL method, which achieves no
compression gain and is typical. Also, 50 bytes are included for extensions. The
cert_type extension indicates that either X.509 or OpenPGP certificates are under-
stood. The server_name extension contains 127.0.0.1, which was the name of the
server provided to the client application. The renegotiation_info is empty, as this
is the first handshake, as is the SessionTicket TLS extension. The signature_algo-
rithms extension indicates that the following combinations can be processed by
the client: sha1-rsa, sha1-dsa, sha256-rsa, sha384-rsa, and sha512-rsa.
     In this sample exchange, the server has been configured with only one cipher
suite, TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA256 (0x006b). The server indi-
cates this fact when responding to the ClientHello by using the ServerHello mes-
sage shown in Figure 18-33.
     In this figure, the server responds with a ServerHello message to the client’s
ClientHello. The server provides its copy of the current time and its 28-byte ran-
dom value. It also includes a random 32-byte session ID. The server supports only
a single cipher suite (DH key agreement using RSA certificates with AES-256
encryption in CBC mode for encryption and SHA-256 for integrity protection).
Like the client, it does not support any compression methods. It includes an empty
renegotiation_info extension and an empty SessionTicket TLS extension. Follow-
ing this first message, the server continues with a Certificate message, as shown
in Figure 18-34.
     The message in Figure 18-34 carries the server’s 841-byte X.509v3 certificate to
the client, which has been signed by a sample certificate authority called Test CA
shown in the Issuer field. The field called SubjectPublickeyInfo contains the server’s
270-byte public RSA key, which the client will use in authenticating the server.
There are six extensions in the certificate: basicConstraints (critical), subjectAltName
(contains a DNS name for the server using the certificate), extKeyUsage (extended
key usage, indicating that the purpose of the key is for authenticating a server),
keyUsage (critical; indicates that the enclosed key may be used for key encipher-
ment or for generating digital signatures), subjectKeyIdentifier (a 20-byte number
identifying the signed public key), and the authorityKeyIdentifier (a 20-byte number
identifying the key used by the certificate authority to produce this certificate).
     The ClientKeyExchange message is not detailed as it mostly includes binary
information used in forming the DH exchange. The next message of interest is
segment 13, which is a single TCP segment containing both a CertificateRequest
message and a ServerHelloDone message. Figure 18-35 shows the contents.

Figure 18-33   A ServerHello message in TLS 1.2 contains version information, supported cipher
                     suites and compression algorithms, and a number of extensions. Here, the client sup-
                     ports Diffie-Hellman key agreement. It uses AES-256 for encryption and SHA-256 for
                     integrity protection.

           Figure 18-35 shows a TCP segment containing both a CertificateRequest mes-
      sage and a ServerHelloDone message. The CertificateRequest is requesting the
      client to provide its certificate and to verify its authenticity using a subsequent
      CertificateVerify message. The type of certificate requested should be signed using
      either RSA or DSS from the Test CA certificate authority. The signature algorithms
      listed are sha1-rsa, sha1-dsa, sha256-rsa, sha384-rsa, and sha512-rsa.
           Packet 15 (not detailed) contains the Certificate message that has the certificate
      chain for the client and its public key. In this case, the subject field contains “test
      client” and the issuer is Test CA. Thus, the client’s and server’s certificates were
      signed by the same CA and the chain is a single certificate. For the client to prove
      that it possesses the corresponding private key, it generates the CertificateVerify
                              Section 18.9 Transport Layer Security (TLS and DTLS                  889

Figure 18-34   Following the ServerHello, the server generates a Certificate message to carry its cer-
               tificate. The client can use the certificate to authenticate the server. The same message
               format is used when the server authenticates the client.

Figure 18-35   The server’s CertificateRequest and ServerHelloDone messages are contained in the
                     same TCP segment. The client can use the certificate to authenticate the server. The
                     same message format is used when the server authenticates the client.

      message (packet 19). The CertificateVerify message contains a signature on a hash
      of all the session’s handshake messages sent or received so far, signed using the
      private key of the client. This proves not only that the client is authentic, but that
      it has participated appropriately in the TLS exchanges up to this point and not
      lost or reordered any messages. After the CertificateVerify message, the Change
      Cipher message begins the subsequent (encrypted) communication.

18.9.2 TLS with Datagrams (DTLS)
      The TLS protocol assumes a stream-based underlying transport protocol for deliv-
      ering its messages. A datagram version (DTLS) relaxes this assumption but aims
      to otherwise achieve the same security goals as TLS using essentially all the same
      message formats. It was originally motivated by protocols such as SIP that run on
      UDP but do not care to use IPsec [RFC5406]. DTLS has also been adapted for use
      with DCCP [RFC5238] and SCTP [RFC6083]. The current version at the time of
      writing is DTLS 1.0 [RFC4347], based on TLS 1.1. An update, based on TLS1.2, is in
      the works [IDDTLS]. It uses the same protocol layering shown in Figure 18-28 and
      most of the same message exchanges.
          The main challenge of providing TLS-like service without a reliable trans-
      port is that datagrams may get lost, reordered, or duplicated. These problems
      can affect encryption and the Handshake protocol, both of which have ordering
      dependencies in TLS. To handle them, DTLS adds an explicit sequence number to
      each record carried by the record layer (they were implicit with regular TLS) and
      a timeout-based retransmission scheme with (different) sequence numbers from
      those used by the Handshake protocol.

      18.9.2.1 DTLS Record Layer
      In TLS, the ordering of records is important because the MAC computation of
      one record depends on its predecessor. More specifically, the MAC computation
      depends on an implicit 64-bit sequence number for each record that is incorrect
      in the presence of datagram reordering or loss. To remedy this problem, DTLS
      uses explicit sequence numbers at the record layer. These sequence numbers are
      reset to the value 0 after each ChangeCipherSpec message is sent. They are used
      in combination with an additional 16-bit epoch number incorporated into each
      record’s header. The epoch number is incremented by 1 for each change of cipher
      state. This handles the situation where multiple messages containing the same
      sequence number, generated as a result of multiple proximate handshakes, might
      be in flight simultaneously.
           The MAC computation in DTLS is modified from its TLS counterpart to
      include the 64-bit concatenation of the two new fields (epoch first, followed by
      sequence number). This allows each record to be handled independently. Note
      that with TLS, a bad MAC results in connection termination. With DTLS, a full
      connection abort is not necessary, and a receiver may choose to simply discard the

      record containing the invalid MAC or send an alert message (which, if generated,
      must be terminal).
           Duplicates are simply dropped or are optionally considered as a replay and
      possible attack. Replay detection, if supported, is based on keeping a window of
      current sequence numbers at the receiver. The window is required to be at least 32
      messages but is suggested to be at least 64. The scheme is similar to that used in
      IPsec for AH and ESP. Records arriving with sequence numbers less than the left
      window edge are silently discarded as old or duplicative. Those within the win-
      dow are checked as possible duplicates. A message within the window carrying
      a valid MAC is kept, even if out of order. Those with invalid MACs are discarded.
      Those with valid MACs that exceed the right window edge cause the right win-
      dow edge to be advanced. Thus, the right window edge represents the validated
      message with the highest sequence number.
           A single datagram may contain multiple DTLS records, but no single record
      may span multiple datagrams. The record layer allows applications to implement
      a PMTUD process similar to TCP’s (see Chapter 15) and avoids sending datagrams
      it believes are likely to be fragmented. Indeed, applications are supposed to receive
      an error indication if they attempt to send application messages that exceed the
      PMTU or maximum application datagram size (PMTU minus DTLS overhead).
      An exception to this rule is how DTLS handles the Handshake protocol, which can
      involve relatively large messages.

      18.9.2.2 DTLS Handshake Protocol
      Handshake protocol messages can be as large as 224 - 1 bytes but in practice are sev-
      eral kilobytes. This can exceed a typical maximum UDP datagram size of 1.5KB.
      To handle this situation, a Handshake protocol message may span multiple DTLS
      records using a fragmentation procedure. Each fragment is contained in a record,
      which is contained in an underlying datagram. To implement fragmentation, each
      Handshake message contains a 16-bit Sequence Number field, a 24-bit Fragment Off-
      set field, and a 24-bit Fragment Length field.
           To perform fragmentation, the original message’s content is divided into mul-
      tiple contiguous data ranges. Each range is required to be less than the maxi-
      mum fragment size. Each range is placed in a message fragment. Each fragment
      contains the same sequence number as the original message. The Fragment Off-
      set and Fragment Length fields are expressed in bytes. Senders avoid overlapping
      data ranges, but receivers are required to handle this possibility because senders
      may be required to adjust their record size over time and retransmissions may be
      necessary.
           To handle message loss, DTLS implements a simple timeout and retransmis-
      sion capability that operates on groups of messages called flights. Figure 18-36
      shows both the full (left) and abbreviated (right) establishment exchanges, along
      with the DTLS Handshake protocol state machine.
           In Figure 18-36, flight numbers are given in the area between the full and
      abbreviated exchanges. The full exchange is very similar to the full TLS exchange

                                                                    $EEUHYLDWHG?([FKDQJH
                  )XOO?([FKDQJH                                          5HFRQQHFW

      &OLHQW                             6HUYHU         &OLHQW                               6HUYHU
                      &OLHQ                                                &OLHQ
               6HVV         W
                    LRQ?,' +HOOR
                                                                    6HVV        W
                                                                         LRQ?,' +HOOR
                            &6??                    ?                          ??&6??
                                 &RP                                                 &RP
                                     S                                                  S
                                   HV     W                                            OOR S
                              5HTX                  ?                           HU+H
                  O OR 9 HULI\ LH                                       6HUY ??&6??&RP
               +H          RRN                                               Q ?, '           @
                         &
                                                                     6HVV
                                                                          LR
                                                                                         6SHF
                      &OLHQ                                                J H &   LSKHU
                                                                        Q
                      &RRN
                            W+  HOOR                                >&KD QLVKHG
                             LH?????                ?                      )L

                                    OOR S
                              HU+H                                  >&KD
                   6HUY ??&6??&RP                                          QJH&
                                                                                LSKHU
                       LRQ?,'                                                         6SHF
                6HVV                   YHU                                                @
                                   6HU                                      )LQLV
                  H U W LI LFDWH                                                  KHG
                &                          H
                                     KDQJ           ?
                         U  . H\([F
               6HUY   H
                                       HVW                             'DWD?([FKDQJH
                                 5HTX
                  H U W LI LFDWH
                &
                                        QH
                                OOR'R
                          HU+H
                6HUY
                                                                                    5HFHLYH?1H[W
                &HUWLI                                                                 )OLJKW
                      LFDWH                               &OLHQW?
               &OLHQ        ? &OLH                        6WDUW
                    W.H\           QW                                                        5HDG?57;
                          ([FK                                                                 )OLJKW
                 &HUWLI          D QJH              ?
               >&KD LFDWH9HULI                                                                      7LPHU
                   QJH&            \                                                               ([SLUHV
                          LSKHU                                            %XIIHU
                                6SHF                      3UHSDULQJ                 6HQGLQJ
                                                                                                   6HW?57;?
                                                                                                              :DLWLQJ
                     )LQLV            @                                    )OLJKW                   7LPHU
                           KHG
                                                                                    6HQW
                                                                                                         5HFHLYH
                                           @                                        /DVW?
                                 6SHF                      6HQG?RU?5HFHLYH                              /DVW?)OLJKW
                            LSKHU
                                                                                    )OLJKW
                                                            +HOOR5HTXHVW
                 & K D QJH& HG                      ?
               >              K                                                                                   6HUYHU?
                        )LQLV                                                       )LQLVKHG                       6WDUW

                  'DWD?([FKDQJH

Figure 18-36   In DTLS, the possibility of lost datagrams must be handled. The initial full exchange
               (left) comprises six “flights” of information, each of which can be retransmitted. The
               DTLS abbreviated exchange (top right) uses only three and differs slightly from TLS.
               DTLS maintains a three-state finite state machine (bottom right) when processing the
               protocol.

shown in Figure 18-30, except for the additional HelloVerifyRequest and second
ClientHello messages (which now contain cookies). The abbreviated exchange is
different, however. In DTLS the server sends the first Finished message, whereas
in TLS the client sends the first Finished message.
    The lower right portion of Figure 18-36 depicts the state machine used by
DTLS implementations when performing the Handshake protocol. There are
three primary states: Preparing, Sending, and Waiting. The client starts in the Pre-
paring state as it creates its ClientHello message. The server begins in the Waiting

      state with no buffered messages or active retransmission timer. When sending, a
      retransmission timer is set and the Waiting state is entered upon completion of
      the transmission. Expiration of the retransmission (RTX) timer brings the proto-
      col back to the Sending state to perform a retransmission, as does the receipt of
      a retransmitted flight from the peer. In this latter case the local system performs
      a retransmission of its own flight with the rationale that its previous transmis-
      sion must have been partially or completely lost, as indicated by the presence of
      peer retransmission. If everything goes well, a flight is received, and the local
      system either finishes or returns to the Preparing state to form its next flight for
      transmission.
           The state machine is driven by a retransmission timer with a recommended
      default value of 1s. If no response for a flight has been received within the timeout
      duration, the flight is retransmitted using the same Handshake protocol sequence
      numbers; record-layer sequence numbers still advance. Subsequent retransmis-
      sions without a response result in doubling of the RTX timeout value, up to a value
      of at least 60s. This value may be reset after a successful transmission or a long idle
      period (ten times the current timer value or more).

      18.9.2.3 DTLS DoS Protection
      When datagrams are used instead of a reliable byte stream protocol, some addi-
      tional security considerations come into play. Of special concern are two potential
      DoS attacks. It is relatively simple for an attacker to forge a source IP address when
      sending a ClientHello message. Many such messages could cause a DoS attack
      at the DTLS server because of exhaustion of processing resources when forming
      responses. A variant of this attack involves having multiple attacking machines
      include the same forged source (victim) IP address. The responding server(s)
      then send(s) responses to the victim’s IP address, causing the victim machine to
      undergo a DoS attack.
           A stateless cookie validation procedure incorporated into the Hello exchange
      helps resist both DoS attacks. When a server receives a ClientHello message, it
      generates a new HelloVerifyRequest message containing a 32-bit cookie (which
      may be a function of a secret, the client’s IP addresses, and the connection param-
      eters). A subsequent ClientHello message must contain a copy of the appropri-
      ate cookie. Otherwise, the server refuses the exchange. This allows the server to
      quickly dispense with requests that do not provide valid cookies. It does not pro-
      tect against coordinated attacks from multiple legitimate IP addresses that can
      complete the cookie exchange.

18.10 DNS Security (DNSSEC)
      Now that we have discussed popular security protocols at the link, network, and
      transport layers, we move to the application layer. Although it is not yet widely
      deployed at the time of writing, we shall focus on how to provide enhanced

security for the Domain Name System (DNS). Security for DNS covers both data
within the DNS (resource records or RRs) as well as security of transactions that
synchronize or update contents of DNS servers. Given its important role in the
operation of the Internet, a major effort has been undertaken to deploy these secu-
rity mechanisms. The mechanisms are called the Domain Name System Security
Extensions (DNSSEC) and are discussed in a family of RFCs [RFC4033][RFC4034]
[RFC4035]. These RFCs are sometimes referred to as DNSSECbis because they
replace an earlier set of specifications for DNSSEC. As we explore DNSSEC in
further detail, it may be worthwhile to review the description of basic DNS (see
Chapter 11).
     The extensions provide origin authentication and integrity assurance for DNS
data, along with a (limited) key distribution facility. That is, the extensions provide
a cryptographically secure way to determine what entity has authored a block of
DNS information and that the information has been received unaltered. DNSSEC
also provides authenticated nonexistence. DNS responses indicating the nonexis-
tence of a particular domain name include protection similar to that of responses
for existing domain names. DNSSEC does not provide privacy (confidentiality)
of DNS information, DoS protection, or access control. Transaction security, used
with DNSSEC, is defined separately, and we will mention it briefly after discuss-
ing the core DNSSEC data security capabilities.
     DNSSEC accommodates resolvers with varying levels of security “aware-
ness.” A validating security-aware resolver (also called validating resolver) checks
cryptographic signatures to ensure that the DNS data it handles is secure. Other
resolvers, including stub resolvers on hosts and the “resolver side” of recursive
name servers, may be security-aware but may not perform cryptographic valida-
tion. Instead, such resolvers should establish secure associations with validating
resolvers. We shall focus on the validating resolvers, as they are the most sophis-
ticated and interesting. When operating, they are able to ascertain whether DNS
information is secure (valid with all signatures checked), insecure (valid signatures
indicate that something should not be present but is), bogus (proper data appears
to be present but cannot be validated for some reason), or indeterminate (veracity
cannot be determined, usually because of lack of signatures). The indeterminate
case is the default case when no other information is available.
     DNSSEC works securely only when a zone is signed by a domain administra-
tor, there is some basis for trust, and both server and resolver software participate.
Validating resolvers check signatures to ensure that DNS information is secure,
and they must be configured with one or more initial trust anchors that are simi-
lar to root certificates in a PKI. Note, however, that DNSSEC is not a PKI; in par-
ticular, it provides only limited signing and key revocation. It does not implement
an analog to certificate revocation lists [RFC5011].
     When performing a DNS query with DNSSEC, a security-aware resolver
uses EDNS0 and enables the DO (DNSSEC OK) bit in an OPT meta-RR pres-
ent in the request. This bit indicates the client’s interest in and ability to process
DNSSEC-related information along with its support for EDNS0. The DO bit is

      the first (high-order) bit of the second 16-bit field in the “extended RCODE and
      flags” portion of the EDNS0 meta-RR (see Section 3 of [RFC3225] and Section 4 of
      [RFC2671]). Servers that receive requests in which the DO bit is not set (or pres-
      ent) are prohibited from returning most of the RRs discussed in Section 18.10.1
      unless such records are explicitly asked for in the request. This helps to improve
      DNS performance because it avoids having to carry security-related RRs that are
      never processed by security-unaware resolvers. This can be especially beneficial
      because DNS typically uses relatively small UDP packets and falls back to using
      TCP, which increases latency due to its three-way handshake, for large responses.
          When a server processes a request from a DNSSEC-enabled resolver, it checks
      the CD (checking disabled) bit in the DNS request (see Chapter 11). If set, this
      indicates that the client is willing to accept nonvalidated data in a response. When
      preparing a response, a server ordinarily validates the data it is returning crypto-
      graphically. Successful validation results in the AD (authentic data) bit being set
      in the response [RFC4035]. A security-aware but nonvalidating resolver can in
      principle trust this information if it has a secure path to the server. However, the
      arguably best case is to use validating stub resolvers that perform cryptographic
      validation and consequently set the CD bit on queries. This provides end-to-end
      security of the DNS (i.e., an intermediate resolver need not be trusted), and it
      reduces the computational load on the intermediate servers that would otherwise
      have to perform cryptographic validation.

18.10.1 DNSSEC Resource Records
      As specified in [RFC4034], DNSSEC uses four new resource records (RRs) and two
      message header bits (CD and AD). It also requires EDNS0 support and uses the
      DO bit field we mentioned previously. Two of the four RRs are used to contain sig-
      natures for portions of the DNS name space, and the other two are used in helping
      to distribute and validate keys. A change in [RFC5155] created two additional new
      RRs, intended to replace one of the original four.

      18.10.1.1 DNS Security (DNSKEY) Resource Records
      We begin by looking at how DNSSEC stores and distributes keys. DNSSEC uses
      the DNSKEY resource record to hold public keys. The keys are intended for use
      with DNSSEC only; other RRs (e.g., the CERT RR [RFC4398]) may be useful for
      holding keys or certificates for other purposes. The format of the RDATA portion
      of a DNSKEY RR is shown in Figure 18-37.
           The Flags field in Figure 18-37 has 3 bits currently defined. Bit 7 is the Zone Key
      bit field. If set, the DNSKEY RR owner’s name must be the name of a zone and the
      included key is called either a Zone Signing Key (ZSK) or a Key Signing Key (KSK).
      If not set, the record holds some other kind of DNS key that cannot be used for
      validating signatures for zones. Bit 15 is called the Secure Entry Point (SEP) bit. It
      is a hint that can be used by debugging or signing software to make an informed
      guess as to the purpose of the key. Signature validation does not interpret the SEP

                                                                                             

                           )ODJV                           3URWRFRO          $OJRULWKP
                              ELWV                          ??ELWV             ??ELWV

                                              3XEOLF?.H\
                                               YDULDEOH

Figure 18-37   The RDATA portion of the DNSKEY RR contains a public key used only for DNSSEC.
               The Flags field includes a Zone Key indicator (bit 7), a Secure Entry Point indicator (bit
               15), and Revoked indicator (bit 8). Generally, the zone key is set for all DNSSEC keys.
               If the advisory SEP bit is also set, the key is typically called a key signing key and is
               used for validating delegations to child zones. If not, the key is usually a zone sign-
               ing key, has a shorter validity period, and is typically used to sign zone contents and
               not delegations. The included key is to be used with the algorithm specified in the
               Algorithm field.

bit, but keys with this bit set are usually KSKs and are used to secure the DNS
hierarchy by validating keys in child zones (via DS records; see Section 18.10.1.2).
Bit 8 is the Revoked bit [RFC5011] if set the key cannot be used for validation.
The Protocol field holds the value 3 for this version of DNSSEC. The Algorithm
field indicates the signing algorithm [DNSSECALG]. Only DSA and RSA with
SHA-1 (values 3 and 5, respectively) are defined for use with DNSKEY RRs accord-
ing to [RFC4034], but additional specifications support other algorithms (e.g., see
[RFC5933] for ECC-GOST (value 12), [RFC5702] for SHA-256 (value 8)). These val-
ues are also used with several of the other DNSSEC RRs. The Public Key field holds
a public key whose format depends on the Algorithm field.

18.10.1.2 Delegation Signer (DS) Resource Records
A delegation signer (DS) resource record is used to refer to a DNSKEY RR, usu-
ally from a parent zone to a descendant zone. These records are used during the
authentication process to verify a public key (see Section 18.10.2). The DS RR for-
mat is shown in Figure 18-38.

                                                                                             

                          .H\?7DJ                          $OJRULWKP        'LJHVW?7\SH
                              ELWV                           ??ELWV            ??ELWV

                                                 'LJHVW
                                                YDULDEOH

Figure 18-38   The RDATA portion of the DS RR contains a nonunique reference to a DNSKEY RR in
               the Key Tag field. It also contains a message digest of the DNSKEY RR and its owner,
               plus indications of the type of digest and algorithm.

            The Key Tag field in Figure 18-38 is a reference to a DNSKEY RR. However, it
      is not unique. Multiple DNSKEY RRs may have the same tag value, so the field is
      used only as a search hint (confirming that validation is still necessary). The value
      for this field is computed as the 16-bit unsigned sum of data comprising the refer-
      enced DNSKEY RR RDATA area (carries are ignored) as shown in Figure 18-37. The
      Algorithm field uses the same values as the DNSKEY RR Algorithm field. The Digest
      Type field indicates the type of signature used. Only value 1 (SHA-1) is defined by
      [RFC4034], but SHA-256 (value 2) is specified for use by [RFC4509]. The current
      list is contained in the DS RR Type Digest Algorithms registry [DSRRTYPES]. The
      Digest field contains the digest of the DNSKEY RR being referenced. More specifi-
      cally, the digest is computed as follows:

            digest = digest_algorithm(DNSKEY owner name | DNSKEY RDATA)

      where | is the concatenation operator and the DNSKEY RDATA value is computed
      from the referenced DNSKEY RR as follows:

                 DNSKEY RDATA = Flags | Protocol | Algorithm | Public Key

           For the case of SHA-1, the digest is 20 bytes in length. For SHA-256 it is 32
      bytes. The DS RR is used to provide a downward link in the authentication chain
      across zone boundaries, so the referenced DNSKEY RR must be a zone key (i.e., bit
      7 of the Flags field in the DNSKEY RR must be set).

          Note
          At the time of writing, a variant of the DS RR called DS2 is under consideration
          [IDDS2]. It introduces a Canonical Signer Name to the DS RR so that multiple
          zones with identical content can be named differently and signed by multiple (dif-
          ferent) signers. In addition, there is a DLV RR [RFC4431] that has been used to
          provide delegations in cases where a parent zone is not signed or has not pub-
          lished DS RRs. The format of a DLV RR is identical to that of a DS RR; only the
          interpretation differs.

      18.10.1.3 NextSECure (NSEC and NSEC3) Resource Records
      Now that we have seen the RRs needed to hold and securely refer to keys, we move
      on to the records used to validate the structure of a zone and the resource records
      it contains. The NextSECure (NSEC) RR is used to hold the “next” RRset owner’s
      domain name in the canonical ordering of names (see Section 18.10.2.1) or a delega-
      tion point NS type RRset. (Recall, an RRset is a set of RRs with the same owner,
      class, TTL, and type but with different data.) It also holds a list of RR types present
      at the NSEC RR owner’s name. This provides authentication and integrity verifica-
      tion for the zone structure. The format of an NSEC RR is shown in Figure 18-39.

                                                                                         

                                        1H[W?'RPDLQ?1DPH
                                             YDULDEOH

                                          7\SH?%LW?0DSV
                                             YDULDEOH

Figure 18-39   The RDATA portion of the NSEC RR contains the name of the next RRset owner for the
               zone in canonical order. It also contains an indication of which RR types were present
               at the NSEC RR owner’s domain name.

     The NSEC RR is used to form a chain of names corresponding to RRsets
within a zone. Consequently, an RRset not present in the chain can be shown to
not exist. This provides the authenticated denial of existence feature mentioned
previously. The Next Domain Name field holds the next entry in the canonically
ordered domain name chain for the zone without using the domain name com-
pression technique described in Chapter 11. The value of this field for the last
NSEC record of the chain is the zone apex (the owner name of the zone’s SOA RR).
     The Type Bit Maps field of the NSEC RR holds a bitmap of RR types present at
the NSEC RR owner’s domain name. There is a maximum of 64K possible types,
about 100 of which have been defined to date [DNSPARAMS]. Only a fraction of
these are in widespread use. For example, the Internet’s root zone (domain name
“.”), which became operational with DNSSEC on July 15, 2010, contains a Next
Domain Name field of ac (a ccTLD) and a bitmap indicating the presence of records
of the following types: NS, SOA, RRSIG, NSEC, and DNSKEY.
     To encode the presence of a type, the whole space of RR types is divided into
256 “window blocks,” numbered 0 through 255. For each block number, the pres-
ence of up to 256 RR types can be encoded using a bit mask. Given a block num-
ber N and bit position P, the corresponding RR type number is (N*256 + P). For
example, in block 1, bit position 2 corresponds to RR type 258 (a type not currently
defined). The field is encoded as follows:

        Type Bit Maps = (window block number | bitmap length | bitmap)*

where | is the concatenation operator and * represents Kleene closure (i.e., zero or
more). Each instance of the window block number contains a value in the range
0–255, and the bitmap length contains the length of the corresponding bitmap
in bytes (maximum value 32). The window block number and bitmap length are
each single bytes, and the bitmap can be as long as 32 bytes (256 bits, one for each
possible RR type in the window). Blocks in which no RR type is present are not
included. The encoding is optimized for a sparse presence of types across blocks.
For example, if only RR types 1 (A) and 15 (MX) were present, the encoding for the
field would be as follows: 0x00024001 = (0x00 | 0x02 | 0x4001).

          The original structure of NSEC records defined in [RFC4034] creates a situa-
      tion in which anyone is able to enumerate the authority records in a zone by walk-
      ing the NSEC chain, called zone enumeration. This is an unwanted opportunity
      for “leakage” of information for many deployments. As a result, a pair of RRs,
      intended to replace NSEC, is defined in [RFC5155]. The first is called NSEC3. It
      uses cryptographic hashes of RR owner domain names rather than unencoded
      domain names. The format is shown in Figure 18-40.

                                                                                                    

                     +DVK?$OJRULWKP           )ODJV                       ,WHUDWLRQV
                           ELWV               ??ELWV                        ???ELWV
                      6DOW?/HQJWK
                          ELWV                              6DOW
                                                          YDULDEOH

                      +DVK?/HQJWK
                           ELWV                  1H[W?+DVKHG?2ZQHU
                                                       YDULDEOH

                                                       7\SH?%LW?0DSV
                                                          YDULDEOH

Figure 18-40     The RDATA portion of the NSEC3 RR contains a hash of the name of the next RRset
                       owner for the zone in canonical order. The hash function has been applied the number
                       of times specified in the Iterations field. The variable-length Salt value is appended to
                       the name prior to applying the hash function to provide dictionary attack resistance.
                       The Type Bit Maps field uses the same structure as NSEC RRs. NSEC3PARAM records
                       are similar but contain only the hash parameters (not the Next Hashed Owner or Type
                       Bit Maps fields).

           In the NSEC3 record, the Hash Algorithm field identifies the hash function
      applied to the next owner name to produce the Next Hashed Owner field. Only
      SHA-1 (value 1) is defined to date [NSEC3PARAMS]. The low-order bit of the Flags
      field contains an opt-out flag. If set, it indicates that the NSEC3 record may cover
      unsigned delegations. This is used in cases where a delegation (NS RRset) refers
      to a child zone that is not required to be or is not desired to be signed. The Itera-
      tions field indicates how many times the hash function has been applied. A larger
      number of iterations may help to protect against finding the owner names cor-
      responding to hash values found in NSEC3 records (dictionary attacks). The Salt
      Length field gives the length of the Salt field in bytes. The Salt field contains a value
      appended to the original owner name prior to computing the hash function. Its
      purpose is to help thwart dictionary attacks.
           The second RR specified by [RFC5155] is called the NSEC3PARAM RR (not
      shown separately). It uses the same format as the NSEC3 RR, except the Hash

Length, Next Hashed Owner, and Type Bit Maps fields are not present. It is used by
an authoritative name server when choosing NSEC3 records to use in a negative
response. The NSEC3PARAM RR provides the parameters needed for computing
a hashed owner name.
    To obtain the hash value for the Next Hashed Owner field, the following com-
putation is performed:

                          IH(0) = H(owner name | Salt)
                        IH(k) = H(IH(k - 1) | Salt) if k > 0
                   Next Hashed Owner = H(IH(Iterations) | Salt)

where H is the hash function specified in the Hash Algorithm field and the owner
name is in canonical form. The iterations and salt values are taken from the cor-
responding fields of the NSEC3 RR.
     To avoid confusion between NSEC and NSEC3 RR types, [RFC5155] allocates
and requires the use of special security algorithm numbers 6 and 7 as aliases
for identifiers 3 (DSA) and 5 (SHA-1) in zones employing NSEC3 RRs. Resolv-
ers unaware of the NSEC3 record type receiving these values treat the resulting
records as insecure. This provides a certain limited form of backward compatibil-
ity (i.e., failing, but doing so without incorrectly interpreting RR data).

18.10.1.4 Resource Record Signature (RRSIG) Resource Records
Moving from the DNS structure to its contents, we require a way to provide ori-
gin authentication and integrity protection for RRs. DNSSEC signs and validates
signatures on RRsets using the Resource Record Signature (RRSIG) RR, and every
authoritative RR in a zone must be signed (glue records and delegation NS records
present in parent zones aren’t). An RRSIG RR contains a digital signature for a
particular RRset, along with information to identify which public key can be used
to validate the signature, as shown in Figure 18-41.
     The Type Covered field indicates the type of the RRset to which the signature
applies. The value is taken from the standard set of RR types in [DNSPARAMS].
The Algorithm field indicates the signing algorithm. Only DSA and RSA with
SHA-1 (values 3 and 5, respectively) are defined for use with RRSIG RRs according
to [RFC4034], but [RFC5702] covers SHA-2 algorithms and [RFC5933] covers GOST
algorithms (from the Russian Federation). The Labels field gives the number of
labels in the original owner’s name of the RRSIG RR. The Original TTL field holds
a copy of the TTL from the RRset as it appears in the authoritative zone (caching
name servers may reduce the TTL). The Signature Expiration and Signature Inception
fields indicate the starting and ending validity times for the signature, expressed
in seconds since January 1, 1970, 00:00:00 UTC. The Key Tag field helps to identify
the DNSKEY RR that can be used to obtain the public key necessary to validate the
signature contained in the Signature field, using the format described previously
for the DS RR.

                                                                                                  

                             7\SH?&RYHUHG                      $OJRULWKP            /DEHOV
                                   ELWV                          ??ELWV             ??ELWV
                                                   2ULJLQDO?77/
                                                         ELWV
                                               6LJQDWXUH?([SLUDWLRQ
                                                         ELWV
                                               6LJQDWXUH?,QFHSWLRQ
                                                        ELWV
                                .H\?7DJ
                                    ELWV
                                                                  6LJQHU¶V?1DPH
                                                                     YDULDEOH

                                                   6LJQDWXUH
                                                    YDULDEOH

Figure 18-41   The RDATA portion of the RRSIG RR contains a signature for an RRset. The TTL of
                     the RRset as it appears in the authoritative zone is also included, along with indicators
                     of the algorithm and signature validity period. The Key Tag field refers to a DNSKEY
                     RR containing a public key that can be used to validate the signature. The Labels field
                     indicates how many labels constitute the original owning name of the RR.

18.10.2 DNSSEC Operation
      Now that we have covered all the RRs required by DNSSEC, we can see how to
      use DNSSEC to secure zones. We shall first require the definition of a canonical
      ordering, mentioned earlier when defining the NSEC and NSEC3 record types. The
      purpose of a defined canonical ordering for a zone is to be able to enumerate a
      zone’s contents in a reproducible way that can be signed (different orders of the
      same contents would produce different values for any good hash function). Once
      we are familiar with the ordering, we look at how a zone is signed and how signed
      records describing a zone are validated.

      18.10.2.1 Canonical Orderings and Forms
      There are three canonical orderings of interest to us: the canonical name order
      within a zone, the canonical form for a single RR, and the canonical ordering of
      an RRset [RFC4034]. Recall from Chapter 11 that each RR has an owner name
      (owner’s domain name) consisting of labels. By treating each label in a name as a
      left-justified string of bytes and treating uppercase US-ASCII letters as lowercase,
      we can form a list of names. We first sort the names by their most significant
      (right-most) label, then by the next most significant label, and so on. The absence
      of a byte sorts before a zero-value byte. A valid canonical ordering would be com,
      company.com, *.company.com, UK.company.COM, usa.company.com. Wild-
      cards can be used.

    For a particular RR, there is a well-defined canonical form. This form requires
the RR to adhere to the following rules:

    1. Every domain name is an FQDN and fully expanded (no compression
       labels).
    2. All uppercase US-ASCII letters in the owner name are replaced by the cor-
       responding lowercase versions.
    3. All uppercase US-ASCII letters are replaced by their lowercase versions
       for any domain names present in the RDATA portion of records with type
       numbers 2–9, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21, 24, 26, 33, 35, 36, 39, and 38.
    4. Any wildcards (*) are not substituted.
    5. The TTL is set to its original value as it appeared in the originating authori-
       tative zone or the Original TTL field of the covering RRSIG RR.

    Note
    A number of clarifications and important changes are being applied to the base-
    line DNSSECbis family of documents. The reader is encouraged to consult the
    most recent version of [IDDCIN] for further details.

    The canonical order of the RRs within an RRset follows essentially the same
rule as for owner names but applies to an RR’s RDATA contents in canonical form
treated as a left-justified byte string.

18.10.2.2 Signed Zones and Zone Cuts
DNSSEC depends on signed zones. Such zones include RRSIG, DNSKEY, and
NSEC (or NSEC3) RRs and may contain DS RRs if there is a signed delegation
point. Signing makes use of public key cryptography where the public keys are
stored in and distributed by the DNS. Figure 18-42 shows an abstract delegation
point between a parent and child zone.
     In the figure, the parent zone contains its own DNSKEY RR, which provides
the public key corresponding to the private key used to sign all authoritative
RRsets in the zone using RRSIG RRs (multiple DNSKEYs are possible). A DS RR
in the parent provides a hash of one of the DNSKEY RRs in the child’s apex. This
establishes a chain of trust from the parent to the child. A validating resolver that
trusts the parent’s DS RR can validate the child’s DNSKEY RR and ultimately the
RRSIGs and signed RRsets within the child zone. This happens only if the valida-
tor has a root of trust that can be connected to the parent’s DNSKEY RR.

18.10.2.3 Resolver Operation Example
Given a chain of signed zones and a security-aware validating resolver, we can
see how the contents of a DNS response can be validated. In the best case, a zone

                                                                 556,*?55
                                                                IRU?'16.(<?
                                                 6LJQ
                                                                   55VHW
                                 '16.(<?55
                                  LQ?3DUHQW
                                                                             556,*?55
                                                                            IRU?'6?55VHW
                    556,*?55                      9DOLGDWHV
                     IRU?16(&?
                                                                                 6LJQ
                      55VHW           6LJQ

                                                                 '6?55                                  (;$03/(?
                                          16(&?55             +DVK?RI?&KLOG¶V?                          3DUHQW?=RQH
                                        7\SHV?DW?$SH[         '16.(<?55
      'HOHJDWLRQ?3RLQW
   1DPH?RI?3DUHQW?=RQH

                                              6DPH?2ZQHU               +DVK
                                                                                           =RQH?&XW
         =RQH?$SH[
      1DPH?RI?&KLOG?=RQH
                                                              '16.(<?55          VLJQ      556,*?55
                                                                                                        68%?(;$03/(?
                                                                DW?$SH[                    IRU?'16.(<
                                                                                                        &KLOG??=RQH

                                                               16(&?55????       VLJQ      556,*?55
                                                              62$?7\SH?%LW?6HW              IRU?16(&

                                                                 16?55???????????VLJQ      556,*?55
                                                                  DW?$SH[                    IRU?16

Figure 18-42     A zone cut for an authenticated delegated zone includes a DS RR in the parent containing a hash
                 of the DNSKEY RR(s) in the child. All RRsets are signed with corresponding RRSIG RRs except
                 the delegation NS RRs (and glue records) in the parent. NSEC RRs can be used to verify the
                 types present in the zone and include an SOA RR type indication at the apex in the child zone.

           can be reached through a chain of trust from the root zone. ICANN keeps a list of
           which zones have been enabled for DNSSEC by having DS records present in the
           root zone and signed DNSKEY RRs [TLD-REPORT].
               Assume that we wish to resolve and verify an A RR type for the domain name
           www.icann.org. Proceeding from the root downward, we shall at first require
           the root’s trust anchor (i.e., DNSKEY RRs), DS records for org. contained in one
           of the root name servers, and perhaps RRSIG and NSEC (NSEC3) records. We
           then repeat the process using the org. and icann.org. domain names and cor-
           responding DNS servers. We begin with the root zone:

           Linux% dig @a.root-servers.net. . dnskey +noquestion +nocomments \
           +nostats +multiline
           ;; Truncated, retrying in TCP mode.
           ; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a.root-servers.net. . dnskey
                  +noquestion +nocomments +nostats +multiline
           ; (1 server found)
           ;; global options: +cmd
           . 86400 IN     DNSKEY      257 3 8 ( AwEAAagAIKl ... ) ; key id = 19036

.   86400 IN    DNSKEY       256 3 8 ( AwEAAb5gVAz ... ) ; key id = 21639
.   86400 IN    DNSKEY       256 3 8 ( AwEAAcAPhPM ... ) ; key id = 40288

     Here we can see the trust anchor for the root zone, which constitutes the root
of trust for all DNSSEC in the Internet. The first key is a KSK, indicated by the
value 257 (SEP bit is 1), which is the preferred one used in forming trust chains.
The others are marked as ZSKs. Next, we would like to ensure that all the records
we have just seen are supposed to be present and have appropriate signatures. The
root’s RRSIG records of interest can be seen as follows:

Linux% dig @a.root-servers.net. . rrsig +noquestion +nocomments \
+nostats +noauthority +noadditional
;; Truncated, retrying in TCP mode.

; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a.root-servers.net. . rrsig +noquestion
       +nocomments +nostats +noauthority +noadditional
; (1 server found)
;; global options: +cmd
. 86400 IN RRSIG NSEC 8 0 86400 20101228000000 20101220230000
                        40288 . RyoGB1dxxX...
. 86400 IN RRSIG DNSKEY 8 0 86400 20110105235959 20101221000000
                          19036 . f8bzNvPmHR...

...

     The RRSIG covering the DNSKEY record uses key tag 19036, which matches
the KSK contained in the root zone’s DNSKEY RR. The root contains other RRSIG
records (for its SOA and NS records), but we are more concerned with the RRSIGs
for the DNSKEY and NSEC RRs. Just to be extra-sure that the DNSKEY RR should
be present, we can inspect the root’s NSEC RR to verify that its type is present:

Linux% dig @a.root-servers.net. . nsec +noquestion +nocomments \
+nostats +noauthority +noadditional
; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a.root-servers.net. . nsec +noquestion
       +nocomments +nostats +noauthority +noadditional
; (1 server found)
;; global options: +cmd
.                  86400 IN   NSEC ac. NS SOA RRSIG NSEC DNSKEY

     This confirms that the root zone officially contains RRset types NS, SOA,
RRSIG, NSEC, and DNSKEY, so we are in good shape so far. (Note also that ac.
is the first TLD in the canonical ordering of the root zone.) Next we need to check
out the signatures on the delegation from the root to org.. This can be done as
follows:

Linux% dig @a.root-servers.net. org. rrsig +noquestion +nocomments \
+nostats +noadditional +dnssec
; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a.root-servers.net. org. rrsig +noquestion
       +nocomments +nostats +noadditional +dnssec

      ; (1 server found)
      ;; global options: +cmd
      org. 172800     IN    NS    d0.org.afilias-nst.org.
      org. 172800     IN    NS    b2.org.afilias-nst.org.
      org. 172800     IN    NS    a0.org.afilias-nst.info.
      org. 172800     IN    NS    b0.org.afilias-nst.org.
      org. 172800     IN    NS    a2.org.afilias-nst.info.
      org. 172800     IN    NS    c0.org.afilias-nst.info.
      org. 86400      IN    DS    21366 7 2 96EEB2FFD9 ...
      org. 86400      IN    DS    21366 7 1 E6C1716CFB ...
      org. 86400 IN   RRSIG DS 8 1 86400 20101228000000 20101220230000
                            40288 . jpcJOGclvvlnx9Kvz5 ...

          The presence of the DS RRset and its associated RRSIG suggests that indeed
      there is a DNSSEC secured delegation. The RRSIG RR contains the key tag 40288,
      which refers to the third DNSKEY RR we saw earlier for the root zone (the ZSK).
      The NS records provide us with the names of the next servers to use in the next
      steps for our query. We can proceed by repeating the queries we made for the root,
      but this time using org.. We direct such queries at one of the servers specified in
      the NS RR for org. in the root:

      Linux% dig @d0.org.afilias-nst.org. org. dnskey +dnssec +nostats \
      +noquestion +multiline
      ; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @d0.org.afilias-nst.org. org. dnskey +dnssec
             +nostats +noquestion +multiline
      ; (1 server found)
      ;; global options: +cmd
      ;; Got answer:
      ;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 8061
      ;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 6, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
      ;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

      ;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
      ; EDNS: version: 0, flags: do; udp: 4096
      ;; ANSWER SECTION:
      org. 900 IN DNSKEY       256 3 7 ( AwEAAZTErUF ... ) ; key id = 1743
      org. 900 IN DNSKEY       256 3 7 ( AwEAAazTpnm ... ) ; key id = 43172
      org. 900 IN DNSKEY       257 3 7 ( AwEAAYpYfj3 ... ) ; key id = 21366
      org. 900 IN DNSKEY       257 3 7 ( AwEAAZTjbIO ... ) ; key id = 9795
      org. 900 IN RRSIG DNSKEY 7 1 900 20101231154644
                                   20101217144644 21366 org.
                                   aIZgEsoJO+Q8ZXM ...
      org. 900 IN RRSIG DNSKEY 7 1 900 20101231154644
                         20101217144644 43172 org. MWWosWBdEmM8CiM ...

          Here we can see that four DNSKEY RRs exist, two of which are KSKs (value
      257) and two of which are ZSKs (value 256). The third one listed (21366) corre-
      sponds to the DS RR we found located in the root zone. The RRSIG RRs use this
      key, plus the ZSK with ID 43172. To verify their presence as legitimate, we can
      look for NSEC or NSEC3 records that may be present for org.:

Linux% dig @d0.org.afilias-nst.org. org. nsec +dnssec +nostats \
+noquestion
; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @d0.org.afilias-nst.org. nsec org. +dnssec
       +nostats +noquestion
; (1 server found)
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 61632
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 0, AUTHORITY: 4, ADDITIONAL: 1
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags: do; udp: 4096
;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
h9p7u7tr2u91d0v0ljs9l1gidnp90u3h.org. 86400 IN NSEC3 1 1 1
                                      D399EAAB
                                      H9RSFB7FPF2L8HG35CMPC765TDK23RP6
                                      NS SOA RRSIG DNSKEY NSEC3PARAM
h9p7u7tr2u91d0v0ljs9l1gidnp90u3h.org. 86400 IN RRSIG NSEC3 7 2
                                      86400 20110105003654
                                      20101221233654
                                      43172 org. eBtna4fok ...

    Here we see an NSEC3 record with owner name equal to the hashed version
of org.. It indicates the presence of a DNSKEY and RRSIG record, as well as NS
and NSEC3PARAM records. Following the last type, we can determine the NSEC3
information:

Linux% ./dig @a0.org.afilias-nst.info. org. nsec3param +dnssec \
+nostats +noadditional +noauthority +noquestion
; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a0.org.afilias-nst.info. org. nsec3param
       +dnssec +nostats +noadditional +noauthority +noquestion
; (1 server found)
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 38602
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 7, ADDITIONAL: 13
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags: do; udp: 4096
;; ANSWER SECTION:
org.               900  IN    NSEC3PARAM 1 0 1 D399EAAB
org.               900  IN    RRSIG NSEC3PARAM 7 1 900 20101231154644
                              20101217144644 43172 org. fS2kFw53e1Y ...

     We can see that this NSEC3PARAM RR matches the NSEC3 RR because of the
match of the value D399EAAB (signature). We can also see that the signature in the
RRSIG RR came from the private key associated with DNSKEY having ID 43172.
If all signatures match, so far we have a valid chain of trust. To complete the chain,
we need information about icann.org.:

      Linux% dig @a0.org.afilias-nst.info. icann.org. any +dnssec +nostats \
      +noadditional
      ; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a0.org.afilias-nst.info. icann.org. any
             +dnssec +nostats +noadditional
      ; (1 server found)
      ;; global options: +cmd
      ;; Got answer:
      ;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 61234
      ;; flags: qr rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 0, AUTHORITY: 8, ADDITIONAL: 3
      ;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

      ;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
      ; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
      ;; QUESTION SECTION:
      ;icann.org.             IN    ANY

      ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
      icann.org.        86400 IN       NS    a.iana-servers.net.
      icann.org.        86400 IN       NS    b.iana-servers.org.
      icann.org.        86400 IN       NS    c.iana-servers.net.
      icann.org.        86400 IN       NS    d.iana-servers.net.
      icann.org.        86400 IN       NS    ns.icann.org.
      icann.org.        86400 IN       DS    41643 7 1 93358DB ...
      icann.org.        86400 IN       DS    41643 7 2 B8AB67D ...
      icann.org.        86400 IN       RRSIG DS 7 2 86400 20101231154644
                                       20101217144644 43172 org. cZ1Z30w// ...

          We can see the DS RR indicating the signed delegation for icann.org. from
      org.. The RRSIG for the DS RRset is signed based on the ZSK with ID 43172.
      Using one of the servers present in the NS records, we can look at the final server:

      Linux% dig @a.iana-servers.net. icann.org. dnskey +dnssec +nostats \
      +noquestion +multiline

      ; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a.iana-servers.net. icann.org. dnskey +dnssec
             +nostats +noquestion +multiline
      ; (1 server found)
      ;; global options: +cmd
      ;; Got answer:
      ;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 22065
      ;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 5, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1
      ;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

      ;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
      ; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
      ;; ANSWER SECTION:
      icann.org. 3600 IN DNSKEY 256 3 7 ( AwEAAbDmrVc ... ) ; key id = 41295
      icann.org. 3600 IN DNSKEY 256 3 7 ( AwEAAbgrYZd ... ) ; key id = 55469
      icann.org. 3600 IN DNSKEY 257 3 7 ( AwEAAZuSdr4 ... ) ; key id = 7455
      icann.org. 3600 IN DNSKEY 257 3 7 ( AwEAAcyguBH ... ) ; key id = 41643
      icann.org. 3600 IN RRSIG DNSKEY 7 2 3600 20101229153632
                          20101222042536 41643 icann.org.
                          UxR/5vyOIS ...

    Here we can see that four DNSKEY RRs exist—two KSKs and two ZSKs. The
fourth one listed (41643) corresponds to the DS RR we found located in the org.
zone. The RRSIG RR uses this key. To find the answer to our ultimate query, we
request the A record:

Linux% dig @a.iana-servers.net. www.icann.org. a +dnssec +nostats \
+noquestion +noauthority +noadditional
; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> @a.iana-servers.net. www.icann.org. a +dnssec
       +nostats +noquestion +noauthority +noadditional
; (1 server found)
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 56258
;; flags: qr aa rd; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 6, ADDITIONAL: 3
;; WARNING: recursion requested but not available

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
;; ANSWER SECTION:
www.icann.org.          600   IN    A     192.0.32.7
www.icann.org.          600   IN    RRSIG A 7 3 600 20101229143630
                                    20101222042536 55469 icann.org.
                                    YRhlL/RA ...

    We have finally reached the end of the chase for the A RR for www.icann.
org.. It contains the IP address 192.0.32.7, signed by an RRSIG RR using key
ID 55469. This is the key from the fourth DNSKEY RR we saw at the apex of the
icann.org. zone. So at this point it would appear that all is order. However, we
have not demonstrated that all the signature values are actually correct. To do this
validation, the following command may be executed:

Linux% dig @a.root-servers.net. www.icann.org. a +sigchase +topdown \
+trusted-key=trusted-keys

     This command works if the dig program has been compiled with the –DDIG_
SIGCHASE=1 compile-time option and the file trusted-keys contains the root’s
DNSKEY RRset. After many lines of output, we find that it does indicate success.
A simpler method for checking the validity can be achieved using a DNS/DNS-
SEC-checking Web site such as http://dnsviz.net. Output from such a query
is shown in Figure 18-43.
     Here we can see a successful validation for the A and AAAA RR types for the
domain name www.icann.org.. Each rectangle represents a zone and contains
its name and the time it was analyzed. Within each zone are ovals representing
elements in the chain of trust, either DNSKEY or DS RRs. Dashed ovals indicate
that the keys are not being used for signatures of interest. Arrows between ovals
indicate RRSIG or DS digests. Two types of algorithms are represented. In the root

Figure 18-43   A visualization of a DNSSEC chain of trust. Rectangles represent zones. Ovals represent chain
               nodes, and shaded ovals have the SEP bit set. Arrows indicate valid RRSIG records or DS digests.
               The double-circle oval indicates a trust anchor.

       zone, “alg = 8” indicates that RSA/SHA-256 [RFC5702] signatures are in use. In
       other zones, “alg = 7” indicates RSA/SHA-1 that permits the use of NSEC3 records
       [RFC5155]. For the DS RR in the root zone, “digest algs = 1,2” indicates that SHA-1
       [RFC4034] and SHA-256 [RFC4509] are supported.

18.10.3 Transaction Authentication (TSIG, TKEY, and SIG(0))
       Some transactions in DNS, such as zone transfers and dynamic updates, could
       compromise the DNS structure or contents if improperly used. Consequently,
       they require some form of authentication. Even conventional DNS resolution may
       require authentication if a resolver expects to depend on validated DNS resolu-
       tions but does not implement full DNSSEC processing. With transaction authenti-
       cation, the exchange between a particular resolver and server (or between servers)
       is protected. Note, however, that transactional security does not directly protect
       the contents of the DNS, as does DNSSEC. As a result, DNSSEC and transaction
       authentication are complementary and can be deployed together. DNSSEC pro-
       vides data origin authentication and integrity of zone data, while transaction
       authentication provides integrity and authentication for a particular transaction
       between a client and a server without checking the correctness of the content
       being exchanged.
            There are two primary methods for authenticating DNS transactions: TSIG
       and SIG(0). TSIG uses shared keys and SIG(0) uses public/private key pairs. To
       help ease the burden of deployment, a TKEY RR type can be used to help form
       keys (e.g., by holding public DH values) for either TSIG or SIG(0). We will begin
       by discussing TSIG, the more common of the transaction security mechanisms.

       18.10.3.1 TSIG
       Secret Key Transaction Authentication for DNS or Transaction Signatures (TSIG)
       [RFC2845] adds transactional authentication for DNS exchanges using signatures
       based on shared secret keys. TSIG makes use of a TSIG pseudo-RR that is com-
       puted on demand and is used only to secure a single transaction. The format of
       the RDATA portion of a TSIG pseudo-RR is shown in Figure 18-44.
           The figure shows the format of a TSIG pseudo-RR. Such RRs are sent in the
       additional data section of a DNS request or response. The original MAC algorithm
       specified in [RFC2845] was based on HMAC-MD5, but newer GSS-API (Kerbe-
       ros) [RFC3645] and SHA-1- and SHA-256-based algorithms have since been speci-
       fied in [RFC4635]; the current list is available at [TSIGALG]. The algorithm names
       were envisioned to be encoded as domain names (e.g., HMAC-MD5.SIG-ALG.
       REG.INT), but now most use descriptive strings (e.g., hmac-sha1, hmac-sha256).
       The 48-bit Signed Time field is in UNIX time format (seconds since January 1, 1970,
       UTC) and gives the time the message contents were signed. This field is covered
       in the digital signature and is designed to detect and prevent replay attacks. The
       consequence of using an absolute time here is that peers using TSIG must agree on
       the time to within the number of seconds specified by the Fudge field. The MAC

                                                                                            

                             $OJRULWKP?1DPH? HQFRGHG?DV?GRPDLQ?QDPH??YDULDEOH

                            7LPH?6LJQHG? ???ELWV
                                                                    )XGJH? ???ELWV

                          0$&?6L]H? ???ELWV
                                                                    0$&? YDULDEOH

                          2ULJLQDO?,'? ???ELWV                      (UURU? ???ELWV

                         2WKHU?/HQJWK? ???ELWV
                                                                  2WKHU?'DWD
                                                            YDULDEOH??XVHG?IRU?HUURUV

Figure 18-44   The TSIG pseudo-RR RDATA area contains a signature algorithm ID, signature time
                     and time fudge factor, and a MAC. Originally, only an MD5-based signature was
                     used, but now SHA-1- and SHA-2-based signatures have been standardized. TSIG
                     peers must be time-synchronized to within the number of seconds in the Fudge field.
                     TSIG RRs are carried in the additional data section of a DNS message.

      Size field gives the number of bytes required to contain the MAC in the MAC field
      and depends on the particular MAC algorithm. The Other Length field gives the
      size of the Other Data field in bytes, which is used only in carrying error messages.
           To see TSIG in action, we can construct a sample zone called dynzone. and
      perform a signed dynamic update. We use the nsupdate program supplied with
      BIND9 to perform the update:

      Linux% nsupdate
      > zone dynzone.
      > server 127.0.0.1
      > key tsigkey.dynzone. 1234567890abcdef
      > update delete two.dynzone.
      > send

          This series of instructions forms a DNS update message signed using TSIG
      that is sent to the server once the send instruction is issued. The request is shown
      in Figure 18-45.
          In this figure, a dynamic DNS update request has been signed using the
      HMAC-MD5 signature algorithm. The signing key’s name is tsigkey.dynzone..
      The request is to update the zone dynzone. by removing the entry two.dynzone..
      The name of the signature algorithm is HMAC-MD5.SIG-ALG.REG.INT, which is

Figure 18-45   A DNS dynamic update signed using TSIG. The request is to delete the RR for two.
               dynzone.. The request is signed using the key with name tsigkey.dynzone.. The
               signature algorithm is HMAC-MD5, which produces a 128-bit (16-byte) signature.

the only signature algorithm supported by this particular software package. Note
that the Original ID field (15746 decimal) matches the value of the Transaction ID
field (0x3d82). The response confirms that the update was successful, as shown in
Figure 18-46.
     Figure 18-46 show a successful response to a DNS dynamic update request
signed using TSIG. The Flags field indicates that a dynamic update response con-
tains no errors. Once again, the TSIG pseudo-RR is contained in the additional
information area.

Figure 18-46   A DNS dynamic update response signed using TSIG. The RRset two.dynzone. has
                     been successfully removed using dynamic update.

      18.10.3.2 SIG(0)
      Early versions of DNSSEC included signature (SIG) resource records that corre-
      spond to the modern RRSIG RRs discussed previously. However, a particular kind
      of SIG RR called SIG(0) [RFC2931] does not cover static records in the DNS but
      instead is generated dynamically for transactions. The 0 part of SIG(0) refers to the
      length of data within an RR covered by the signature. As a result, SIG(0) records
                                  Section 18.11 DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)     915

      can in principle be used instead of TSIG RRs to achieve the same result. However,
      they are implemented in different ways. Most importantly, SIG(0) places its basis
      of trust in public keys instead of shared keys. SIG(0) appears to be shrinking in
      popularity in favor of TSIG, so we do not discuss it further.

      18.10.3.3 TKEY
      The TKEY meta-RR type is intended to simplify the deployment of DNS transac-
      tion security such as TSIG and SIG(0) [RFC2930]. To do this, TKEY RRs are dynam-
      ically created and sent in the additional information section of DNS requests and
      responses. They can contain either keys or material used to form keys such as DH
      public values. It may be useful in local deployments but is not in widespread use.

18.10.4 DNSSEC with DNS64
      In Chapter 11 we described DNS64, which translates IPv6 DNS requests into IPv4
      DNS requests and can synthesize AAAA records based on A records found in the
      IPv4 DNS. The scheme is useful for allowing IPv6-only hosts to access IPv4 servers
      and services. DNS64 works by synthesizing AAAA records. With DNSSEC, how-
      ever, DNS RRs need to be signed by the signing authority (typically the domain
      name owner or zone administrator). This presents a challenge: How can DNS64
      synthesize RRs if it lacks the keys to produce DNSSEC-compatible signatures? The
      answer is, essentially, that it does not (see Sections 5.5 and 6.2 in [RFC6147]).
           To operate DNS64 in conjunction with DNSSEC, the validation function
      is performed either in the host (where DNS64 could be implemented) or by the
      DNS64 device, assuming there exists a secure channel between a stub resolver
      and the DNS64 acting as a recursive name server. A validating DNS64 is known as
      vDNS64. A vDNS64 interprets the CD and DO bits in an incoming query. If neither
      is set, the vDNS64 performs synthesis and validation but does not set the AD bit
      in the (validated) response. If the DO bit is set and the CD bit is not, the vDNS64
      performs validation and synthesis and returns a validated response with the AD
      bit set (which the client presumably interprets as meaning that the returned RRs
      are authentic). Note that the DNS64 first requests AAAA records on the IPv4 side
      and synthesizes A records only when it can validate that no AAAA records with
      the same owner exist. If both the DO and CD bits are set, the DNS64 may perform
      validation but not synthesis. In this case, it is presumed that the client will per-
      form validation. This case represents a potential problem because if the client is
      security-aware but translation-oblivious, the returned RRs will probably not be
      usable in the IPv6 addressing realm.

18.11 DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
      DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) [RFC5585] is intended to provide an associa-
      tion between an entity and a domain name that can be used to help determine
      the party responsible for originating a message, especially in the e-mail context.

       It provides a method to help authenticate the signer of a message, which is not
       necessarily the sender, and this can be used in helping to fight spam at the e-mail
       distribution level (i.e., between mail agents). This is accomplished by adding a
       DKIM-Signature field to the basic Internet message format [RFC5322]. This field
       contains a digital signature of the header and body of the message. DKIM replaces
       an earlier standard called DomainKeys, which uses the DomainKey-Signature field.

18.11.1 DKIM Signatures
       To produce a digital signature for a message, a Signing Domain Identifier (SDID)
       uses RSA/SHA-1 or RSA/SHA-256 and an associated private key. SDIDs are
       domain names from the DNS and are used to retrieve public keys stored as TXT
       RRs. A DKIM signature is encoded as a message header field using Base64 (such
       as PEM) that signs an explicitly listed set of message fields and the message body.
       When receiving an e-mail, for example, a mail transfer agent uses the SDID to
       perform a DNS query to find the corresponding public key, which it then uses to
       verify the signature. This avoids requiring a PKI. The owning domain name is
       constructed from the domain itself along with the selector (public key selector). For
       example, the public key for the selector key35 in domain example.com would be
       a TXT RR owned by key35._domainkey.example.com.
            The DKIM-Signature field [RFC6376] is added to a message header and may
       contain several subfields (see [DKPARAMS] for the complete list). The operation
       of DKIM is conceptually similar to the DNS Sender Policy Framework (SPF; see
       Chapter 11) but is stronger because of the cryptographic digital signature. DKIM
       and SPF can be used together.
            DKIM-enabled domains may elect to participate in Author Domain Signing
       Practices (ADSP) [RFC5617]. ADSP involves the creation of a machine-readable
       signing practices statement for a domain. Such records are placed in the DNS using
       TXT RRs with owner name equal to _adsp._domainkey.domain.. At present
       ADSP records are simple and indicate only how the authoring domain uses DKIM
       signatures. The values may be unknown, all, or discardable. These are really
       hints as to what a receiving agent might do with a received message. The value
       unknown indicates no particular statement, all indicates that the author signs
       all messages but unsigned ones may still be worthwhile, and discardable indi-
       cates that unsigned messages should be considered subject to discarding. dis-
       cardable is the most stringent level.

18.11.2 Example
       To get an idea of how a DKIM signature appears in an e-mail, we can simply
       extract the DKIM-Signature field from an e-mail message generated from a large
       e-mail provider such as Google’s Gmail:

       DKIM-Signature: v=1; a=rsa-sha256; c=relaxed/relaxed;
               d=gmail.com; s=gamma;
                            Section 18.11 DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)     917

        h=domainkey-signature:mime-version:received:
          sender:received:date
         :x-google-sender-auth:message-id:subject:from:to:content-type;
        bh=PU2XIErWsXvhvt1W96ntPWZ2VImjVZ3vBY2T/A+wA3A=;
        b=WneQe6kpeu/BfMfa2RSlAl1TvYKfIKmoQRXNc
          IQJDIVoE38+fGDaj0uhNm8vXp/8kJ
          I8HqtkV4/P6/QVPMN+/5bS5dsnlhz0S/YoP
          bZx0Lt2bD67G4HPsvm6eLsaIC9rQECUSL
          MdaTBK3BgFhYo3nenq3+8GxTe9I+zBcqWAVPU=

     This indicates a version 1 signature and digest algorithm of SHA-256 signed
using RSA. The header and body canonicalization algorithms are both “relaxed,” as
shown by the c= field. Canonicalization algorithms are used to rewrite messages
in a consistent form. The current options are “simple” (the default), which does not
alter the text, and “relaxed,” which can rewrite the input in common ways such
as altering whitespace and wrapping long header lines. The selector (s=) is called
gamma and the domain (d=) is gmail.com. We shall use these later to retrieve
the appropriate public key. The header fields used in computing the signature
(indicated by h=) include domainkey-signature (predecessor to DKIM), ver-
sion of MIME, received, sender date, x-google-sender-auth, message-id,
subject, from, and content-type. The bh= subfield indicates the hash value
on the message body expressed in Base64. The b= value contains the RSA signa-
ture on the hash of the headers listed in the h= subfield.
     To retrieve the public key to validate the signature, we can form the following
query:

Linux% dig gamma._domainkey.gmail.com. txt +nostats +noquestion
; <<>> DiG 9.7.2-P3 <<>> gamma._domainkey.gmail.com. txt
       +nostats +noquestion
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 17372
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 0

;; ANSWER SECTION:
gamma._domainkey.gmail.com. 296      IN   TXT   "k=rsa\; t=y\; p=MIGfMA0GCS
qGSIb3DQEBAQUAA4GNADCBiQKBgQDIhyR3oItOy22ZOaBrIVe9m/iME3RqOJeasANSpg2YTHTYV
+Xtp4xwf5gTjCmHQEMOs0qYu0FYiNQPQogJ2t0Mfx9zNu06rfRBDjiIU9tpx2T+NGlWZ8qhbiLo
5By8apJavLyqTLavyPSrvsx0B3YzC63T4Age2CDqZYA+OwSMWQIDAQAB"

    This result indicates that the key is an RSA public key. The t=y entry denotes
that the domain is testing DKIM, meaning that the results of any DKIM validation
should not ultimately affect the message delivery process. To see an example of an
ADSP, we can execute the following command:

Linux% host –t txt _adsp._domainkey.paypal.com.
_adsp._domainkey.paypal.com descriptive text "dkim=discardable"

          Here we can see that Paypal has elected to use the most stringent DKIM sign-
      ing policy, suggesting that messages failing DKIM validation should be subject to
      being discarded. The use of ADSP statements at present is fairly rare because of
      the wide variety of e-mail systems and the ways that various mail agents rewrite
      messages.

18.12 Attacks on Security Protocols
      Attacks on security protocols are somewhat different from the attacks on protocols
      we have seen in other chapters. Attacks discussed in other chapters tend to com-
      promise some protocol that was never really designed with security in mind by
      taking advantage of some design or implementation flaw. Attacks against security
      protocols not only take these forms but may also involve cryptographic attacks
      that somehow subvert the mathematical basis upon which the security depends.
      Attacks can be successful against poor algorithms, weak or too-short keys, or
      poor combinations of various components that render an otherwise secure system
      much weaker. (A classic and fascinating example can be seen in the cryptanalysis
      of the VENONA system [VENONA].)
           To understand some of the types of attacks targeting security protocols, we
      will begin from the lowest layer and work our way up. A number of attacks have
      been waged against 802.11 and EAP. Early security in 802.11 (e.g., WEP and WPA-
      TKIP) has been shown to be easily compromised cryptographically [TWP07]
      [OM09], and WPA2-AES is believed to be substantially more resilient, although
      use of poorly selected pre-shared keys (PSKs) can represent a significant vulner-
      ability to dictionary attacks.
           EAP does not have its own authentication method but can inherit vulnera-
      bilities of the authentication methods on which it depends. Once again, systems
      based on EAP using keys derived from user passwords (e.g., EAP-GSS, EAP-LEAP,
      EAP-SIM) are often vulnerable to dictionary attacks. 802.1X/EAP is vulnerable
      to MITM attacks involving tunneled authentication protocols as discussed in
      [ANN02]. The problem relates to deriving a session key after only one side of a
      two-party connection has been authenticated. For example, if a server authenti-
      cates to a client and this exchange is used as the basis to form a tunnel secured
      by a derived session key where another protocol that authenticates in the reverse
      direction operates inside, a MITM attack involving impersonation of the legiti-
      mate client becomes possible.
           A number of attacks have been published against IPsec, including a class of
      attacks that exploit the use of encryption without integrity protection [PY06], a
      configuration option supported but discouraged by the IPsec documentation. In
      essence, the ability to modify the ciphertext undetected using a bit flipping attack
      can cause encrypted datagrams to be decrypted into datagrams that have been
      corrupted in predictable ways. For example, a tunnel mode ESP datagram with
      its bits flipped appropriately may decrypt to a datagram with an artificially
                                                         Section 18.13 Summary       919

    increased Internet Header Length (IHL) field that causes the payload to be processed
    as (invalid) IP options, ultimately generating an ICMP message that may be of use
    to an attacker.
         At the transport layer, SSL 2.0 was shown to be vulnerable to a cipher suite
    rollback attack, in which a MITM could cause each end of an SSL connection to
    conclude that the peer is capable of only weak encryption. Doing so causes the
    peers to adopt an insecure cipher suite, which the attacker can exploit. A more
    sophisticated attack on SSL/TLS took advantage of the order of operations per-
    formed at a receiver: decrypt, remove padding, and check MAC. If the padding
    length or MAC is incorrect, an SSL error message is generated. By observing the
    timing of these error messages, it was possible to create a padding oracle [CHVV03]
    to recover plaintext from OpenSSH. A padding oracle tells whether the plaintext
    used to create a ciphertext had a valid amount of padding. As mentioned previ-
    ously, a more recent attack (on TLS 1.2) involves a MITM attack whereby a prefix of
    arbitrary length is injected into a TLS association, which is then renegotiated (but
    continued) when a legitimate client arrives [RD09]. The solution involves binding
    the previous channel parameters to the subsequent channel parameters using a
    TLS extension. The issue of channel binding and security is covered more broadly
    in [RFC5056].
         Securing the DNS has been a long time coming, but the importance was
    underscored by the Kaminsky cache poisoning attack we described in Chapter 11.
    One of the original problems was the enumeration attack made available (actually
    required) by the use of NSEC records and countered by the use of NSEC3 records,
    if used properly [BM09]. At the end of 2009, Dan Bernstein mentioned a number
    of problems with DNSSEC in his keynote talk at a workshop [B09]: it can be used
    as a basis for amplification of DoS attacks, it leaks zone data even with NSEC3,
    its implementations contain exploitable bugs, signatures cannot be revoked, the
    cryptography may be subject to cryptanalysis, and some NS and A records pose
    vulnerabilities. At the time of writing, the root zone has been signed only recently,
    and few organizations have fully adopted DNSSEC. It is therefore likely that a
    variety of improvements and modifications will be implemented in the years to
    come.

18.13 Summary
    The subject of security is broad and interesting, and we have only scraped the
    surface in this chapter. We desire several important properties of communica-
    tion security, and typically these consist of some combination of confidentiality,
    authentication, integrity, and nonrepudiation. Cryptography is our most impor-
    tant tool for achieving these information security properties. It involves a set of
    algorithms and keys. The two most important forms are symmetric or “secret
    key” cryptography, which has good computational performance but requires keys
    to be kept secret, and public key (asymmetric key) cryptography whereby each

      principal has a key pair and one key is made public. Public key cryptography
      supports both authentication and confidentiality and can be combined with sym-
      metric key cryptography for better performance. Other algorithms that involve
      mathematics closely related to cryptography include Diffie-Hellman key agree-
      ment used to establish symmetric keys, pseudorandom functions for selecting
      random components to form keys, and MACs used to check message integrity.
      Protocols that use random nonces attempt to ensure freshness and resist replay
      attacks by requiring queries and responses to hold a common recently generated
      value. Salt (in the cryptographic sense) is used to perturb algorithms or input to
      algorithms in order to make dictionary attacks more difficult to mount.
           When relying on a public key, we ordinarily want the public key to be signed
      or authenticated by some entity or group that we trust. A public key infrastructure
      or PKI that involves one or more certificate authorities is commonly used for this
      purpose, but web of trust models are also available. The most common format for
      holding PKI public keys (and other material) is based on the ITU-T X.509 standard
      for PKI and certificates. Certificates are usually signed recursively forming a tree,
      culminating at some top-level root of trust or trust anchor. To ensure that the trust
      chain is in place, certificates must be validated to ensure that the trust chain is
      unbroken and each chain element has not been revoked. Certificate status can be
      evaluated using widely distributed certificate revocation lists (CRLs) or using an
      online protocol such as OCSP. The entire certificate validation process can also
      be delegated to another party using SCVP, a protocol developed for this specific
      purpose.
           There are a variety of file formats for holding certificates and keys. The DER
      or CER format is a binary encoding based on ASN.1. The PEM format expresses
      the DER encoding in ASCII, so such files are easily edited and inspected. The
      PKCS#12 (successor to Microsoft’s PFX) format can hold both certificates and pri-
      vate keys and is ordinarily encrypted for protection of the private key material. A
      variety of programs such as openssl are capable of converting between formats.
           There are security protocols at every protocol layer, and some between lay-
      ers. Working from layer 2 up, some link technologies include their own encryp-
      tion and authentication protocols, although these are not ordinarily considered
      TCP/IP protocols. In TCP/IP, EAP is used to establish authentication with a wide
      variety of mechanisms such as machine certificates, user certificates, smart cards,
      passwords, and so on. EAP is most often used in enterprise settings that have a
      backend authorization or AAA server. EAP can also be used for authentication in
      other protocols such as IPsec.
           IPsec is a collection of protocols that provide security at layer 3: IKE, AH,
      and ESP. IKE establishes and manages security association between two parties.
      Security associations can involve authentication (AH) or encryption (ESP) and can
      operate in either transport or tunnel mode. In transport mode, the IP header is
      modified for authentication or encryption, while in tunnel mode an IP datagram
      in its entirety is placed inside a new IP datagram. ESP is the most popular. All IPsec
                                                      Section 18.13 Summary       921

protocols can use different algorithms and parameters (cryptographic suites) for
encryption, integrity protection, DH key agreement, and authentication.
     Moving up the stack, transport-layer security (current version TLS 1.2) protects
information moved between applications. It has its own internal layering consist-
ing of a record-layer protocol and three handshaking protocols called the Cipher
Change protocol, Alert protocol, and Handshake protocol. In addition, the Record
protocol supports application data. The record layer is responsible for encrypting
and integrity-protecting data based on parameters supplied by the Handshake
protocol. The Cipher Change protocol is invoked to change from a previously set-
up pending protocol state to an active protocol state. The Alert protocol indicates
errors or connection problems. TLS with TCP/IP is the most widely used security
protocol and supports encrypted Web browser connections (HTTPS). A variant of
TLS called DTLS adapts TLS for use with datagrams and protocols such as UDP
and DCCP.
     To help secure host names and the Web better, DNSSEC is targeted at provid-
ing security for the DNS. On July 15, 2010, the Internet’s signed root zone was
put into operation, satisfying a prerequisite for worldwide deployment. DNS-
SEC works by employing several new resource records in the DNS: DNSKEY, DS,
NSEC/NSEC3/NSEC3PARAM, and RRSIG. The first two hold and refer to public
keys used for signing the structure and contents of a zone. The NSEC or NSEC3/
NSEC3PARAM records help provide a canonical ordering of names and list of
types present for a domain name. This allows a query to reliably determine the
nonexistence of a domain name or presence of a particular type for a particular
domain name. RRSIG records hold signatures on other records, and for a zone
to be signed, all authoritative RRs within the zone must have associated RRSIG
RRs. Once set up, security of DNS queries is checked by a validating resolver or
name server that requires a trust anchor. Such systems check to ensure that digi-
tal signatures match the public keys supplied by the DNS. This allows for errors
to be generated when some record is found to be inconsistent, and it is hoped
it can thwart domain name hijacking attacks in which attackers masquerade as
legitimate hosts. In some cases, DNS transactions are also secured. The TSIG and
SIG(0) protocols provide a form of channel authentication, but only in the scope of
DNS transactions. These protocols are used for transactions such as DNS dynamic
updates and zone transfers.
     Attacks on security protocols include not only the common exploitation of
implementation bugs and insecure designs but also mathematical compromises
and “side channel” attacks that are used to discover secret information (e.g., bits of
keys). Over the years it has become clear that flexibility is needed in the strength
of the cryptography used to secure communications, so most of the protocols we
have discussed provide for cryptographic suites that can evolve as computational
power improves and additional experience is gained. Many seemingly secure pro-
tocols, even those that have received extensive scrutiny by experts, have fallen
prey to an energetic set of analysts who seek exploitable flaws, especially when
MITM and other active attacks are possible. Extreme care is required in designing
new security protocols and operating existing protocols in a secure fashion.

18.14 References
      [802.1X-2010] “IEEE Standard for Port-Based Network Access Control,” IEEE Std
      802.1X-2010, Feb. 2010.
      [AKNT04] Y. Amir, Y. Kim, C. Nita-Rotaru, and G. Tsudik, “On the Performance
      of Group Key Agreement Protocols,” ACM Transactions on Information and System
      Security, 7(3), Aug. 2004.
      [ANN02] N. Asokan, V. Niemi, and K. Nyberg, “Man-in-the-Middle in Tunneled
      Authentication Protocols (Extended Abstract),” Proc. 11th Security Protocols Work-
      shop/LNCS 3364 (Springer, 2003).
      [B06] M. Bellare, “New Proofs for NMAC and HMAC: Security without
      Collision-Resistance” (preliminary version in CRYPTO 06), June 2006.
      [B09] D. Bernstein, “Breaking DNSSEC,” keynote talk at Workshop on Offensive
      Technologies (WOOT), Aug. 2009.
      [BCK96] M. Bellare, R. Canetti, and H. Krawczyk, “Keying Hash Functions for
      Message Authentication” (abridged version in CRYPTO 96/LNCS 1109), June
      1996.
      [BM09] J. Bau and J. Mitchell, “A Security Evaluation of DNSSEC with NSEC3,”
      Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), Feb.–Mar. 2010.
      [BOPSW09] R. Biddle et al., “Browser Interfaces and Extended Validation SSL
      Certificates: An Empirical Study,” Proc. ACM Cloud Security Workshop, Nov. 2009.
      [CABF09] CA/Browser Forum, “Guidelines for the Issuance and Management
      of Extended Validation Certificates (v1.2),” 2009, http://www.cabforum.org/
      Guidelines_v1_2.pdf
      [CHP] National Institute of Standards and Technology, Cryptographic Hash
      Project, Computer Security Division—Computer Security Resource Center,
      http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/hash
      [CHVV03] B. Canvel, A. Hiltgen, S. Vaudenay, and M. Vuagnoux, “Password
      Interception in a SSL/TLS Channel,” CRYPTO 2003/LNCS 2729.
      [DH76] W. Diffie and M. Hellman, “New Directions in Cryptography,” IEEE
      Transactions on Information Theory, IT-22, Nov. 1976.
      [DKPARAMS] http://www.iana.org/assignments/dkim-parameters
      [DNSSECALG] http://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-sec-alg-numbers
      [DOW92] W. Diffie, P. Oorschot, and M. Wiener, “Authentication and uthenti-
      cated Key Exchanges,” Designs, Codes and Cryptography, 2, June 1992.
      [DSRRTYPES] http://www.iana.org/assignments/ds-rr-types

[FIPS186-3] National Institute for Standards and Technology, “Digital Signature
Standard (DSS),” FIPS PUB 186-3, June 2009.
[FIPS197] National Institute for Standards and Technology, “Advanced Encryp-
tion Standard (AES),” FIPS PUB 197, Nov. 2001.
[FIPS198] National Institute for Standards and Technology, “The Keyed-Hash
Message Authentication Code (HMAC),” FIPS PUB 198, Mar. 2002.
[FIPS800-38B] National Institute for Standards and Technology, “Recommenda-
tion for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: The CMAC Mode for Authentication,”
NIST Special Publication 800-38B, May 2005.
[GGM86] O. Goldreich, S. Goldwasser, and S. Micali, “How to Construct Random
Functions,” Journal of the ACM, 33(4), Oct. 1986.
[IDDCIN] S. Weiler and D. Blacka, “Clarifications and Implementation Notes for
DNSSECbis,” Internet draft-ietf-dnsext-dnssec-bis-updates, work in progress,
July 2011.
[IDDS2] B. Dickson, “DNSSEC Delegation Signature with Canonical Signer
Name,” Internet draft-dickson-dnsext-ds2 (expired), work in progress, Nov. 2010.
[IDDTLS] E. Rescorla and N. Modadugu, “Datagram Transport Layer Security
Version 1.2,” Internet draft-ietf-tls-rfc4347-bis, work in progress, July 2011.
[IEAP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/eap-numbers
[IK03] T. Iwata and K. Kurosawa, “OMAC: One-Key CBC MAC,” Proc. Fast Soft-
ware Encryption, Mar. 2003.
[IKEPARAMS] http://www.iana.org/assignments/ikev2-parameters
[IPANA] http://www.iana.org/assignments/pana-parameters
[ITUOID] http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/asn1
[IWESP] http://www.iana.org/assignments/wesp-flags
[K87] N. Koblitz, “Elliptic Curve Cryptosystems,” Mathematics of Computation, 48,
1987.
[L01] C. Landwehr, “Computer Security,” Springer-Verlag Online, July 2001.
[M85] V. Miller, “Uses of Elliptic Curves in Cryptography,” Advances in Cryptol-
ogy: CRYPTO ’85, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 218 (Springer-
Verlag, 1986).
[MSK09] S. McClure, J. Scambray, and G. Kurtz, Hacking Exposed, Sixth Edition
(McGraw-Hill, 2009).

      [MW99] U. Maurer and S. Wolf, “The Relationship between Breaking the Diffie-
      Hellman Protocol and Computing Discrete Logarithms,” Siam Journal on Comput-
      ing, 28(5), 1999.
      [NAZ00] Network Associates and P. Zimmermann, Introduction to Cryptogra-
      phy, Part of PGP 7.0 Documentation, available from http://www.pgpi.org/doc/
      guide/7.0/en
      [NIST800-38B] National Institute for Standards and Technology, “Recommenda-
      tion for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and
      GMAC,” NIST Special Publication 800-38D, Nov. 2005.
      [NSEC3PARAMS] http://www.iana.org/assignments/dnssec-nsec3-parameters
      [OM09] T. Ohigashi and M. Morii, “A Practical Message Falsification Attack on
      WPA,” Joint Workshop on Information Security, Aug. 2009.
      [PY06] K. Paterson and A. Yau, “Cryptography in Theory and Practice: The Case
      of Encryption in IPsec,” EUROCRYPT 2006/LNCS 4004.
      [RD09] M. Ray and S. Dispensa, “Renegotiating TLS,” PhoneFactor Technical
      Report, Nov. 2009.
      [RFC1321] R. Rivest, “The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm,” Internet RFC 1321
      (informational), Apr. 1992.
      [RFC2104] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, and R. Canetti, “HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for
      Message Authentication,” Internet RFC 2104 (informational), Feb. 1997.
      [RFC2403] C. Madson and R. Glenn, “The Use of HMAC-MD5-96 within ESP and
      AH,” Internet RFC 2403, Nov. 1998.
      [RFC2404] C. Madson and R. Glenn, “The Use of HMAC-SHA-1-96 within ESP
      and AH,” Internet RFC 2404, Nov. 1998.
      [RFC2409] D. Harkins and D. Carrel, “The Internet Key Exchange (IKE),” Internet
      RFC 2409 (obsolete), Nov. 1998.
      [RFC2410] R. Glenn and S. Kent, “The NULL Encryption Algorithm and Its Use
      with IPsec,” Internet RFC 2410, Nov. 1998.
      [RFC2451] R. Pereira and R. Adams, “The ESP CBC-Mode Cipher Algorithms,”
      Internet RFC 2451, Nov. 1998.
      [RFC2560] M. Myers, R. Ankney, A. Malpani, S. Galperin, and C. Adams, “X.509
      Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online Certificate Status Protocol—OCSP,”
      Internet RFC 2560, June 1999.
      [RFC2631] E. Rescorla, “Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement Method,” Internet RFC
      2631, June 1999.

[RFC2671] P. Vixie, “Extension Mechanisms for DNS (EDNS0),” Internet RFC
2671, Aug. 1999.
[RFC2845] P. Vixie, O. Gudmundsson, D. Eastlake 3rd, and B. Wellington, “Secret
Key Transaction Authentication for DNS (TSIG),” Internet RFC 2845, May 2000.
[RFC2865] C. Rigney, S. Willens, A. Rubens, and W. Simpson, “Remote Authenti-
cation Dial In User Service (RADIUS),” Internet RFC 2865, June 2000.
[RFC2930] D. Eastlake 3rd, “Secret Key Establishment for DNS (TKEY RR),”
Internet RFC 2930, Sept. 2000.
[RFC2931] D. Eastlake 3rd, “DNS Request and Transaction Signatures ( SIG(0)s ),”
Internet RFC 2931, Sept. 2000.
[RFC3162] B. Aboba, G. Zorn, and D. Mitton, “RADIUS and IPv6,” Internet RFC
3162, Aug. 2001.
[RFC3173] A. Shacham, B. Monsour, R. Pereira, and M. Thomas, “IP Payload
Compression Protocol (IPComp),” Internet RFC 3173, Sept. 2001.
[RFC3193] B. Patel, B. Aboba, W. Dixon, G. Zorn, and S. Booth, “Securing L2TP
Using IPsec,” Internet RFC 3193, Nov. 2001.
[RFC3225] D. Conrad, “Indicating Resolver Support of DNSSEC,” Internet RFC
3225, Dec. 2001.
[RFC3447] J. Jonsson and B. Kaliski, “Public-Key Cryptography Standards
(PKCS) #1: RSA Cryptography Specifications Version 2.1,” Internet RFC 3447
(informational), Feb. 2003.
[RFC3526] T. Kivinen and M. Kojo, “More Modular Exponential (MODP) Diffie-
Hellman Groups for Internet Key Exchange (IKE),” Internet RFC 3526, May 2003.
[RFC3547] M. Baugher, B. Weis, T. Hardjono, and H. Harney, “The Group
Domain of Interpretation,” Internet RFC 3547, July 2003.
[RFC3566] S. Frankel and H. Herbert, “The AES-XCBC-MAC-96 Algorithm and
Its Use with IPsec,” Internet RFC 3566, Sept. 2003.
[RFC3588] P. Calhoun, J. Loughney, E. Guttman, G. Zorn, and J. Arkko, “Diam-
eter Base Protocol,” Internet RFC 3588, Sept. 2003.
[RFC3602] S. Frankel, R. Glenn, and S. Kelly, “The AES-CBC Cipher Algorithm
and Its Use with IPsec,” Internet RFC 3602, Sept. 2003.
[RFC3645] S. Kwan, P. Garg, J. Gilroy, L. Esibov, J. Westhead, and R. Hall,
“Generic Security Service Algorithm for Secret Key Transaction Authentication
for DNS (GSS-TSIG),” Internet RFC 3645, Oct. 2003.

      [RFC3686] R. Housley, “Using Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Counter
      Mode with IPsec Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP),” Internet RFC 3686, Jan.
      2004.
      [RFC3713] M. Matsui, J. Nakajima, and S. Moriai, “A Description of the Camellia
      Encryption Algorithm,” Internet RFC 3713 (informational), Apr. 2004.
      [RFC3715] B. Aboba and W. Dixon, “IPsec-Network Address Translation (NAT)
      Compatibility Requirements,” Internet RFC 3715 (informational), Mar. 2001.
      [RFC3740] T. Hardjono and B. Weis, “The Multicast Group Security Architec-
      ture,” Internet RFC 3740 (informational), Mar. 2004.
      [RFC3748] B. Aboba, L. Blunk, J. Vollbrecht, J. Carlson, and H. Levkowetz, ed.,
      “Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP),” June 2004.
      [RFC3749] S. Hollenbeck, “Transport Layer Security Protocol Compression
      Methods,” Internet RFC 3749, May 2004.
      [RFC3947] T. Kivinen, B. Swander, A. Huttunen, and V. Volpe, “Negotiation of
      NAT-Traversal in the IKE,” Internet RFC 3947, Jan. 2005.
      [RFC3948] A. Huttunen, B. Swander, V. Volpe, L. DiBurro, and M. Stenberg,
      “UDP Encapsulation of IPsec ESP Packets,” Internet RFC 3948, Jan. 2005.
      [RFC4016] M. Parthasarathy, “Protocol for Carrying Authentication and Network
      Access (PANA) Threat Analysis and Security Requirements,” Internet RFC 4016
      (informational), Mar. 2005.
      [RFC4033] R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, and S. Rose, “DNS Secu-
      rity Introduction and Requirements,” Internet RFC 4033, Mar. 2005.
      [RFC4034] R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, and S. Rose, “Resource
      Records for the DNS Security Extensions,” Internet RFC 4034, Mar. 2005.
      [RFC4035] R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, and S. Rose, “Protocol
      Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions,” Internet RFC 4035, Mar. 2005.
      [RFC4058] A. Yegin, ed., Y. Ohba, R. Penno, G. Tsirtsis, and C. Wang, “Protocol
      for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA) Requirements,” Internet
      RFC 4058 (informational), May 2005.
      [RFC4086] D. Eastlake 3rd, J. Schiller, and S. Crocker, “Randomness Require-
      ments for Security,” Internet RFC 4086/BCP 0106, June 2005.
      [RFC4120] C. Neuman, T. Yu, S. Hartman, and K. Raeburn, “The Kerberos Net-
      work Authentication Service (V5),” Internet RFC 4120, July 2005.
      [RFC4251] T. Ylonen and C. Lonvick, ed., “The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Archi-
      tecture,” Internet RFC 4251, Jan. 2006.

[RFC4301] S. Kent and K. Seo, “Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol,”
Internet RFC 4301, Dec. 2005.
[RFC4302] S. Kent, “IP Authentication Header,” Internet RFC 4302, Dec. 2005.
[RFC4303] S. Kent, “IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP),” Internet RFC 4303,
Dec. 2005.
[RFC4307] J. Schiller, “Cryptographic Algorithms for Use in the Internet Key
Exchange Version 2 (IKEv2),” Internet RFC 4307, Dec. 2005.
[RFC4309] R. Housley, “Using Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) CCM Mode
with IPsec Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP),” Internet RFC 4309, Dec. 2005.
[RFC4346] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Proto-
col Version 1.1,” Internet RFC 4346 (obsolete), Apr. 2006.
[RFC4347] E. Rescorla and N. Modadugu, “Datagram Transport Layer Security,”
Internet RFC 4347, Apr. 2006.
[RFC4398] S. Josefsson, “Storing Certificates in the Domain Name System
(DNS),” Internet RFC 4398, Mar. 2006.
[RFC4431] M. Andrews and S. Weiler, “The DNSSEC Lookaside Validation (DLV)
DNS Resource Record,” Internet RFC 4431 (informational), Feb. 2006.
[RFC4434] P. Hoffman, “The AES-XCBC-PRF-128 Algorithm for the Internet Key
Exchange Protocol (IKE),” Internet RFC 4434, Feb. 2006.
[RFC4492] S. Blake-Wilson, N. Bolyard, V. Gupta, C. Hawk, and B. Moeller, “Ellip-
tic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS),”
Internet RFC 4492 (informational), May 2006.
[RFC4493] JH. Song, R. Poovendran, J. Lee, and T. Iwata, “The AES-CMAC Algo-
rithm,” Internet RFC 4493 (informational), June 2006.
[RFC4509] W. Hardaker, “Use of SHA-256 in DNSSEC Delegation Signer (DS)
Resource Records (RRs),” Internet RFC 4509, May 2006.
[RFC4535] H. Harney, U. Meth, A. Colegrove, and G. Gross, “GSAKMP: Group
Secure Association Key Management Protocol,” Internet RFC 4535, June 2006.
[RFC4555] P. Eronen, “IKEv2 Mobility and Multihoming Protocol (MOBIKE),”
Internet RFC 4555, June 2006.
[RFC4615] J. Song, R. Poovendran, J. Lee, and T. Iwata, “The Advanced Encryp-
tion Standard-Cipher-Based Message Authentication Code-Pseudo-Random
Function-128 (AES-CMAC-PRF-128) Algorithm for the Internet Key Exchange
Protocol (IKE),” Internet RFC 4615, Aug. 2006.

      [RFC4635] D. Eastlake 3rd, “HMAC SHA (Hashed Message Authentication Code,
      Secure Hash Algorithm) TSIG Algorithm Identifiers,” Internet RFC 4635, Aug.
      2006.
      [RFC4681] S. Santesson, A. Medvinsky, and J. Ball, “TLS User Mapping Exten-
      sion,” Internet RFC 4681, Oct. 2006.
      [RFC4739] P. Eronen and J. Korhonen, “Multiple Authentication Exchanges in the
      Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol,” Internet RFC 4739 (experimental), Nov.
      2006.
      [RFC4754] D. Fu and J. Solinas, “IKE and IKEv2 Authentication Using the Elliptic
      Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA),” Internet RFC 4754, Jan. 2007.
      [RFC4835] V. Manral, “Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation Requirements
      for Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and Authentication Header (AH),”
      Internet RFC 4835, Apr. 2007.
      [RFC4851] N. Cam-Winget, D. McGrew, J. Salowey, and H. Zhou, “The Flexible
      Authentication via Secure Tunneling Extensible Authentication Protocol Method
      (EAP-FAST),” Internet RFC 4851 (informational), May 2007.
      [RFC4877] V. Devarapalli and F. Dupont, “Mobile IPv6 Operation with IKEv2 and
      the Revised IPsec Architecture,” Internet RFC 4877, Apr. 2007.
      [RFC4880] J. Callas, L. Donnerhacke, H. Finney, D. Shaw, and R. Thayer, “Open-
      PGP Message Format,” Internet RFC 4880, Nov. 2007.
      [RFC5011] M. StJohns, “Automated Updates of DNS Security (DNSSEC) Trust
      Anchors,” Internet RFC 5011, Sep. 2007.
      [RFC5054] D. Taylor, T. Wu, N. Mavrogiannopoulos, and T. Perrin, “Using the
      Secure Remote Password (SRP) Protocol for TLS Authentication,” Internet RFC
      5054 (informational), Nov. 2007.
      [RFC5055] T. Freeman, R. Housley, A. Malpani, D. Cooper, and W. Polk, “Server-
      Based Certificate Validation Protocol (SCVP),” Internet RFC 5055, Dec. 2007.
      [RFC5056] N. Williams, “On the Use of Channel Bindings to Secure Channels,”
      Internet RFC 5056, Nov. 2007.
      [RFC5077] J. Salowey, H. Zhou, P. Eronen, and H. Tschofenig, “Transport Layer
      Security (TLS) Session Resumption without Server-Side State,” Internet RFC 5077,
      Jan. 2008.
      [RFC5106] H. Tschofenig, D. Kroeselberg, A. Pashalidis, Y. Ohba, and F. Bersani,
      “The Extensible Authentication Protocol-Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version
      2 (EAP-IKEv2) Method,” Internet RFC 5106 (experimental), Feb. 2008.
      [RFC5114] M. Lepinski and S. Kent, “Additional Diffie-Hellman Groups for Use
      with IETF Standards,” Internet RFC 5114 (informational), Jan. 2008.

[RFC5116] D. McGrew, “An Interface and Algorithms for Authenticated Encryp-
tion,” Internet RFC 5116, Jan. 2008.
[RFC5155] B. Laurie, G. Sisson, R. Arends, and D. Blacka, “DNS Security (DNS-
SEC) Hashed Authenticated Denial of Existence,” Internet RFC 5155, Mar. 2008.
[RFC5191] D. Forsberg, Y. Ohba, ed., B. Patil, H. Tschofenig, and A. Yegin, “Proto-
col for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA),” Internet RFC 5191,
May 2008.
[RFC5193] P. Jayaraman, R. Lopez, Y. Ohba, ed., M. Parthasarathy, and A. Yegin,
“Protocol for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA) Framework,”
Internet RFC 5193 (informational), May 2008.
[RFC5216] D. Simon, B. Aboba, and R. Hurst, “The EAP-TLS Authentication Pro-
tocol,” Internet RFC 5216, Mar. 2008.
[RFC5238] T. Phelan, “Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) over the Data-
gram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP),” Internet RFC 5238, May 2008.
[RFC5246] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Proto-
col Version 1.2,” Internet RFC 5246, Aug. 2008.
[RFC5247] B. Aboba, D. Simon, and P. Eronen, “Extensible Authentication Proto-
col (EAP) Key Management Framework,” Internet RFC 5247, Aug. 2008.
[RFC5280] D. Cooper, S. Santesson, S. Farrell, S. Boeyen, R. Housley, and W. Polk,
“Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation
List (CRL) Profile,” Internet RFC 5280, May 2008.
[RFC5281] P. Funk and S. Blake-Wilson, “Extensible Authentication Protocol Tun-
neled Transport Layer Security Authenticated Protocol Version 0 (EAP-TTLSv0),”
Internet RFC 5281 (informational), Aug. 2008.
[RFC5295] J. Salowey, L. Dondeti, V. Narayanan, and M. Nakhjiri, “Specification
for the Derivation of Root Keys from an Extended Master Session Key (EMSK),”
Internet RFC 5295, Aug. 2008.
[RFC5296] V. Narayanan and L. Dondeti, “EAP Extensions for EAP Re-authenti-
cation Protocol (ERP),” Internet RFC 5296, Aug. 2008.
[RFC5322] P. Resnick, ed., “Internet Message Format,” Internet RFC 5322, Oct.
2008.
[RFC5374] B. Weis, G. Gross, and D. Ignjatic, “Multicast Extensions to the Secu-
rity Architecture for the Internet Protocol,” Internet RFC 5374, Nov. 2008.
[RFC5386] N. Williams and M. Richardson, “Better-than-Nothing Security: An
Unauthenticated Mode of IPsec,” Internet RFC 5386, Nov. 2008.

      [RFC5387] J. Touch, D. Black, and Y. Wang, “Problem and Applicability Statement
      for Better-than-Nothing Security (BTNS),” Internet RFC 5387 (informational),
      Nov. 2008.
      [RFC5406] S. Bellovin, “Guidelines for Specifying the Use of IPsec Version 2,”
      Internet RFC 5406/BCP 0146, Feb. 2009.
      [RFC5585] T. Hansen, D. Crocker, and P. Hallam-Baker, “DomainKeys Identified
      Mail (DKIM) Service Overview,” Internet RFC 5585 (informational), July 2009.
      [RFC5617] E. Allman, J. Fenton, M. Delany, and J. Levine, “DomainKeys Identi-
      fied Mail (DKIM) Author Domain Signing Practices (ADSP),” Internet RFC 5617,
      Aug. 2009.
      [RFC5652] R. Housley, “Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS),” Internet RFC
      5652/STD 0070, Sept. 2009.
      [RFC5702] J. Jansen, “Use of SHA-2 Algorithms with RSA in DNSKEY and RRSIG
      Resource Records for DNSSEC,” Internet RFC 5702, Oct. 2009.
      [RFC5723] Y. Sheffer and H. Tschofenig, “Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version
      2 (IKEv2) Session Resumption,” Internet RFC 5723, Jan. 2010.
      [RFC5739] P. Eronen, J. Laganier, and C. Madson, “IPv6 Configuration in Internet
      Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2),” Internet RFC 5739 (experimental),
      Feb. 2010.
      [RFC5746] E. Rescorla, M. Ray, S. Dispensa, and N. Oskov, “Transport Layer Secu-
      rity (TLS) Renegotiation Indication Extension,” Internet RFC 5746, Feb. 2010.
      [RFC5753] S. Turner and D. Brown, “Use of Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)
      Algorithms in Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS),” Internet RFC 5753 (infor-
      mational), Jan. 2010.
      [RFC5755] S. Farrell, R. Housley, and S. Turner, “An Internet Attribute Certificate
      Profile for Authorization,” Internet RFC 5755, Jan. 2010.
      [RFC5764] D. McGrew and E. Rescorla, “Datagram Transport Layer Security
      (DTLS) Extension to Establish Keys for the Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol
      (SRTP),” Internet RFC 5764, May 2010.
      [RFC5840] K. Grewal, G. Montenegro, and M. Bhatia, “Wrapped Encapsulating
      Security Payload (ESP) for Traffic Visibility,” Internet RFC 5840, Apr. 2010.
      [RFC5857] E. Ertekin, C. Christou, R. Jasani, T. Kivinen, and C. Bormann, “IKEv2
      Extensions to Support Robust Header Compression over IPsec,” Internet RFC
      5857, May 2010.
      [RFC5879] T. Kivinen and D. McDonald, “Heuristics for Detecting ESP-NULL
      Packets,” Internet RFC 5879 (informational), May 2010.

[RFC5903] D. Fu and J. Solinas, “Elliptic Curve Groups Modulo a Prime (ECP
Groups) for IKE and IKEv2,” Internet RFC 5903 (informational), June 2010.
[RFC5933] V. Dolmatov, ed., A. Chuprina, and I. Ustinov, “Use of GOST Signature
Algorithms in DNSKEY and RRSIG Resource Records for DNSSEC,” Internet
RFC 5933, July 2010.
[RFC5996] C. Kaufman, P. Hoffman, Y. Nir, and P. Eronen, “Internet Key
Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2),” Internet RFC 5996, Sept. 2010.
[RFC5998] P. Eronen, H. Tschofenig, and Y. Sheffer, “An Extension for EAP-Only
Authentication in IKEv2,” Sept. 2010.
[RFC6024] R. Reddy and C. Wallace, “Trust Anchor Management Requirements,”
Internet RFC 6024 (informational), Oct. 2010.
[RFC6040] B. Briscoe, “Tunnelling of Explicit Congestion Notification,” Internet
RFC 6040, Nov. 2010.
[RFC6066] D. Eastlake 3rd, “Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions: Exten-
sion Definitions,” Internet RFC 6066, Jan. 2011.
[RFC6071] S. Frankel and S. Krishnan, “IP Security (IPsec) and Internet Key
Exchange (IKE) Document Roadmap,” Internet RFC 6071 (informational), Feb.
2011.
[RFC6083] M. Tuexen, R. Seggelmann, and E. Rescorla, “Datagram Transport
Layer Security (DTLS) for Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP),” Inter-
net RFC 6083, Jan. 2011.
[RFC6091] N. Mavrogiannopoulos and D. Gillmor, “Using OpenPGP Keys for
Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authentication,” Internet RFC 6091 (informa-
tional), Feb. 2011.
[RFC6101] A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, “The Secure Socket Layer (SSL)
Protocol Version 3.0,” Internet RFC 6101, Aug. 2011.
[RFC6147] M. Bagnulo, A. Sullivan, P. Matthews, and I. van Beijnum, “DN64:
DNS Extensions for Network Address Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4 Serv-
ers,” Internet RFC 6147, Apr. 2011.
[RFC6176] S. Turner and S. Polk, “Prohibiting Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Version
2.0,” Internet RFC 6176, Mar. 2011.
[RFC6234] D. Eastlake 3rd and T. Hansen, “US Secure Hash Algorithms (SHA
and SHA-based HMAC and HKDF),” Internet RFC 6234 (informational), May
2011.
[RFC6345] P. Duffy, S. Chakrabarti, R. Cragie, Y. Ohba, ed., and A. Yegin, “Pro-
tocol for Carrying authentication for Network Access (PANA) Relay Element,”
Internet RFC 6345, Aug. 2011.

      [RFC6376] D. Crocker, ed., T. Hansen, ed., M. Kucherawy, ed., “DomainKeys
      Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures,” Internet RFC 6376, Sep. 2011.
      [RSA78] R. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman, “A Method for Obtaining Digital
      Signatures and Public Key Cryptosystems,” Communications of the ACM, 21(2),
      Feb. 1978.
      [TLD-REPORT] http://stats.research.icann.org/dns/tld_report
      [TLSEXT] http://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-extensiontype-values
      [TLSPARAMS] http://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-parameters
      [TNMOC] The National Museum of Computing, http://www.tnmoc.org
      [TSIGALG] http://www.iana.org/assignments/tsig-algorithm-names
      [TWP07] E. Tews, R. Weinmann, and A. Pyshkin, “Breaking 104 Bit WEP in Less
      than 60 Seconds,” Proc. 8th International Workshop on Information Security Applica-
      tions (Springer, 2007).
      [VENONA] R. L. Benson, National Security Agency Center for Cryptologic His-
      tory, “The VENONA Story,” http://www.nsa.gov/public_info/declass/venona
      [VK83] V. Voydock and S. Kent, “Security Mechanisms in High-Level Network
      Protocols,” ACM Computing Surveys, 15, June 1983.
      [WY05] X. Wang and H. Yu, “How to Break MD5 and Other Hash Functions,”
      EUROCRYPT, May 2005.
      [X9.62-2005] American National Standards Institute, “Public Key Cryptography
      for the Financial Services Industry: The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Stan-
      dard (ECDSA),” ANSI X9.62, 2005.
      [Z97] Y. Zheng, “Digital Signcryption or How to Achieve Cost(Signature &
      Encryption) << Cost(Signature) + Cost(Encryption),” Proc. CRYPTO, Lecture
      Notes in Computer Science, Volume 1294 (Springer-Verlag, 1997).
