                                                                        CHAPTER 12
                                                    Using IDE Features

                                 Programming with an
                                 IDE the first time feels
                                   like superpowers.

No popular programming language would be complete without syntax highlighting
and other IDE features to help developing in it. One of TypeScript’s greatest strengths
is that its language service provides a suite of powerful development helpers for
JavaScript and TypeScript code. This chapter will cover some of the most useful
items.
I highly recommend you try these IDE features out on the TypeScript projects you’ve
built alongside this book. Although all the examples and screenshots in this chapter
are of VS Code, my favorite editor, any IDE with TypeScript support will support
most or all of this chapter. As of 2022 that includes the native support or TypeScript
plugins for at least all of: Atom, Emacs, Vim, Visual Studio, and WebStorm.

               This chapter is a nonexhaustive list of some of the more commonly
               useful TypeScript IDE features, along with any default shortcuts
               for them in VS Code. You’ll likely find more as you keep writing
               TypeScript code.

Many IDE features are generally made available in the context menu surfaced by
right-clicking on a name in code. IDEs such as VS Code generally show keyboard
shortcuts in the context menu too. Getting comfortable with your IDE’s keyboard
shortcuts can help you write code and execute refactors much more quickly.
This screenshot shows the list of commands and their shortcuts in VS Code for a
variable in TypeScript (Figure 12-1).

Figure 12-1. VS Code showing a list of commands in the right-click context menu for a
variable

                     In VS Code, as with most applications, up and down arrows select
                     drop-down options, and Enter activates one.

Navigating Code
Developers generally spend much more time reading code rather than actively writ‐
ing it. Tools that assist in navigating code are supremely useful for speeding that
time up. Many of the features provided by the TypeScript language service are geared
toward learning about code: in particular, jumping between type definitions or values
in code and where they’re used.
I’ll now go through commonly used navigation options from the context menu along
with their VS Code shortcuts.

Finding Definitions
TypeScript can start from a reference to a type definition or value and navigate you
back to its original location in code. VS Code also provides a couple of ways to
backtrace in that way:

  • Go to Definition (F12) navigates directly to where a requested name was origi‐
    nally defined.
  • Cmd (Mac) / Ctrl (Windows) + clicking a name triggers going to definition as
    well.
  • Peek > Peek Definition (Option (Mac) / Alt (Windows) + F12) brings up a Peek
    box showing the definition instead.

Go to Type Definition is a specialized version of Go to Definition that goes to the
definition of whatever type a value is. For an instance of a class or interface, it will
reveal the class or interface itself instead of where the instance is defined.
These screenshots show finding the definition of a data variable imported into a file
with Go to Definition (Figure 12-2).

Figure 12-2. Left: going to definition on a variable name; right: the resultant opened
data.ts file

                                                                       Navigating Code   |   183
When the definition is declared in your own code, such as a relative file, the editor
will bring you to that file. Modules outside your code such as npm packages will
commonly use .d.ts declaration files instead.

Finding References
Given a type definition or value, TypeScript can show you a list of all the references to
it, or places it’s used in the project. VS Code provides a couple ways to visualize that
list.
Go to References (Shift + F12) shows a list of references to that type definition or
value—starting with itself—in an expandable Peek box just below the right-clicked
name.
For example, here’s a Go to References of a data variable’s declaration in one
file, data.ts, that shows both the declaration and its usage in another file, index.ts
(Figure 12-3).

Figure 12-3. Peek menu showing references to a variable

That Peek box contains a file view of the referencing file. You can use that file—type,
run editor commands, and so on—as if it were a regularly opened file. You can also
double-click in the Peek box’s view of a file to open that file.
Clicking through the list of file names on the right of the Peek box will switch the
Peek box’s file view to the clicked file. Double-clicking a line of a file from the list will
open the file and select its matched reference.
Here, VS Code is showing the same data variable’s declaration and usage, but expan‐
ded in the sidebar view on the right (Figure 12-4).

Figure 12-4. Peek menu showing an opened reference to a variable

Find All References (Option (Mac) / Alt (Windows) + Shift + F12) also shows a list of
references, but in a sidebar view that stays visible after code navigation. This can be
useful for opening or performing actions on more than just one reference at a time
(Figure 12-5).

Figure 12-5. Find All References menu for a variable

Finding Implementations
Go to Implementations (Cmd (Mac) / Ctrl (Windows) + F12) and Find All Imple‐
mentations are specialized versions of Go To / Find All References made for inter‐
faces and abstract class methods. They find all implementations of an interface or
abstract method in code (Figure 12-6).

                                                                   Navigating Code   |   185
Figure 12-6. Find All Implementations menu for an AI interface

These are particularly helpful when you’re specifically searching for how values typed
as a type such as class or interface are used. Find All References might be too noisy, as
it will also show definitions of and other type references to the class or interface.

Writing Code
IDE language services such as VS Code’s TypeScript service run in the background
of your editor and react to actions taken in files. They see edits to files as you type
them—even before changes are saved to files. Doing so enables a slew of features that
help automate common tasks when writing TypeScript code.

Completing Names
TypeScript’s APIs can be used by editors to fill in names that exist in the same file as
well. When you start typing a name, such as when providing a previously declared
variable as a function argument, editors using TypeScript will often suggest autocom‐
pletions with a list of variables with matching names. Clicking the name in the list
with your mouse or hitting the Enter key will complete the name (Figure 12-7).

Figure 12-7. Left: autocompletions on a variable typed as dat; right: the result of
autocompleting to an imported data

Automatic import additions will be offered for package dependencies as well. These
screenshots show a TypeScript file’s imports and module code before and after sortBy
is imported from the "lodash" package (Figure 12-8).

Figure 12-8. Left: autocompletions on a variable typed as sortBy; right: the result of
autocompleting to an imported sortBy from lodash

Automatic imports are one of my favorite features of the TypeScript experience. They
greatly expedite the often laborious processes of figuring out where imports come
from and then explicitly typing them out.
Similarly, if you start typing the name of a property from a typed value, editors
powered by TypeScript will offer to autocomplete to known properties of the value’s
type (Figure 12-9).

Figure 12-9. Left: autocompletions on a property typed as forE; right: the result of
autocompleting to .forEach

Automatic Import Updates
If you rename a file or move it from one folder to another, you may need to update
potentially many import statements for the file. Updates may need to be made both in
that file itself and in any other file that imports from it.
If you drag and drop a file or rename it to a nested folder path using the VS Code file
explorer, VS Code will offer to use TypeScript to update file paths for you.
These screenshots show a src/logging.ts file being renamed to a src/shared/logging.ts
location, and file imports getting updated in a corresponding manner (Figure 12-10).

                                                                         Writing Code   |   187
Figure 12-10. Left: a src/index.ts file importing from "./logging"; middle: renaming
src/logging.ts to src/shared/logging.ts; right: src/index.ts with an updated import path

                     Multifile edits may leave changes to files unsaved. Remember to
                     save any changed files after running edits on them.

Code Actions
Many of TypeScript’s IDE utilities are provided as actions you can trigger. While
some of these modify only the current file being edited, some can modify many files
at once. Using these code actions is a great way to direct TypeScript to do many
of your manual code writing tasks such as calculating import paths and common
refactors for you.
Code actions are generally represented with some kind of icon in editors when
available. VS Code, for example, shows a clickable light bulb next to your text cursor
when at least one code action is available (Figure 12-11).

Figure 12-11. Code actions lightbulb next to a name causing a type error

               Editors generally expose keyboard shortcuts to operate their code
               actions menu or equivalent, allowing you to trigger any action in
               this chapter without using a mouse. VS Code’s default shortcut to
               open a code actions menu is Cmd + . on Mac and Ctrl + . on
               Linux/Windows. Up and down arrows select drop-down options,
               and Enter activates one.

These code actions—in particular renames and refactors—are especially powerful by
virtue of being informed by TypeScript’s type system. When applying an action to a
type, TypeScript will understand which values across all files are of that type, and can
then apply any needed changes to those values.

Renaming
Changing a name that already exists, such as that of a function, interface, or variable
can be cumbersome to perform manually. TypeScript can perform a renaming for a
name that also updates all references to the name.
The Rename Symbol (F2) context menu option creates a text box where you can
type in a new name. Triggering a rename on a function’s name, for example, would
provide a text box to rename that function and all calls to it. Hit Enter to apply that
name (Figure 12-12).

Figure 12-12. Box for renaming a log function, with logData inserted

If you’d like to see what would happen before you apply the new name, press
Shift + Enter to open a Refactor Preview pane that lists all the text changes that
would happen (Figure 12-13).

                                                                       Writing Code   |   189
Figure 12-13. Refactor preview for renaming a log function, with logData previewed
across two files

Removing unused code
Many IDEs subtly change the visual appearance of code that is unused, such as
imported values and variables that are never referenced. VS Code, for example,
reduces their opacity by about a third.
TypeScript provides code actions to delete unused code. (Figure 12-14) shows the
result of asking TypeScript to remove an unused import statement.

Figure 12-14. Left: selecting an unused import and opening the refactors menu; right: the
file after TypeScript deletes it

Other quick fixes
Many TypeScript error messages are for code problems that can be quickly rectified,
such as minor typos in keywords or variable names. Other commonly useful Type‐
Script quick fixes include:

  • Declaring a missing property on a class or interface
  • Correcting a mistyped field name
  • Filling in missing properties of a variable declared as a type

I recommend checking the list of quick fixes whenever you spot an error message
you haven’t seen before. You never know what useful utilities TypeScript has made
available to resolve it!

Refactoring
The TypeScript language service provides a plethora of handy code changes for
different structures of code. Some are as simple as moving lines of code around, while
others are as complex as creating new functions for you.
When you’ve selected an area of code, VS Code will display a lightbulb icon next to
your selection. Click it to see the list of refactors available.
Here’s a developer extracting an inline array literal to a const variable (Figure 12-15).

Figure 12-15. Left: selecting an array literal and opening the refactors menu; right:
extracting to a constant variable

Working Effectively with Errors
Reading and taking action on error messages is a fact of life for working in any pro‐
gramming language. Every developer, regardless of proficiency with the TypeScript
language, will trigger a plethora of TypeScript compiler errors each time they write
TypeScript code. Using IDE features to enhance your ability to work effectively
with TypeScript compiler errors will help you become much more productive in the
language.

                                                            Working Effectively with Errors   |   191
Language Service Errors
Editors generally surface any errors reported by the TypeScript language service as
red squigglies underneath the troublesome code. Hovering your mouse over under‐
lined characters will show a hover box next to them with the text of the error
(Figure 12-16).

Figure 12-16. Hover information on a variable that does not exist

VS Code also shows errors for any open files in a Problems tab in its Panels section.
The bottom left View Problem link in the mouse hover box for an error will open
an inline display of the message inserted after the problem’s line and before any
subsequent lines (Figure 12-17).

Figure 12-17. View Problem inline display for a variable that does not exist

When multiple problems exist in the same source file, their displays will include
up and down arrows that you can use to switch between them. F8 and Shift + F8
will work as shortcuts to go forward and backward through that list of problems,
respectively (Figure 12-18).

Figure 12-18. One of two View Problem inline displays for variables that do not exist

Problems tab
VS Code includes a Problems tab in its panel that, as its name suggests, surfaces
any problems in your workspace. That includes errors reported by the TypeScript
language service.
This screenshot shows a Problems tab showing two problems in a TypeScript file
(Figure 12-19).

Figure 12-19. Problems tab showing two errors in a file

Clicking any error within the Problems tab will bring your text cursor to the offend‐
ing line and column in its file.
Note that VS Code will only list problems for files that are currently open. If you want
a real-time updated list of all TypeScript compiler problems, you’ll need to run the
TypeScript compiler in a terminal.

                                                           Working Effectively with Errors   |   193
Running a terminal compiler
I recommending running the TypeScript compiler in watch mode (covered in Chap‐
ter 13, “Configuration Options”) in a terminal while working in a TypeScript project.
Doing so will give you a real-time updated list of all problems—not just those in files.
To do this in VS Code, open the Terminal panel and run tsc -w (or tsc -b -w if
using project references, also covered in Chapter 13, “Configuration Options”). You
should now see a terminal display showing all TypeScript issues in your project, as in
this screenshot (Figure 12-20).

Figure 12-20. Running tsc -w in a terminal to report a problem in a file

Cmd (Mac) / Ctrl (Windows) + clicking a file name will bring your text cursor to the
offending line and column in its file as well.

                     Some projects use VS Code launch.json configurations to start a
                     terminal with TypeScript compiler in watch mode for you. See
                     code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/tasks for a full reference on VS
                     Code tasks.

Understanding types
You will sometimes find that you need to learn the type of something that’s set up in
a way that the type isn’t apparent. For any value, you can hover your mouse over its
name to see a hover box showing its type.
This screenshot shows the hover box for a variable (Figure 12-21).

Figure 12-21. Hover information on a variable

Hold Ctrl while hovering to also show where the name is declared.
This screenshot shows the Ctrl hover box for the same variable as before
(Figure 12-22).

Figure 12-22. Expanded hover information on a variable

Hover info boxes are also available on types, such as type aliases. This screenshot
shows hovering over a keyof typeof type to see its equivalent union of string literals
(Figure 12-23).

                                                         Working Effectively with Errors   |   195
Figure 12-23. Expanded hover information on a type

One strategy I’ve found to be helpful when trying to understand components of
complex types is to create a type alias that represents just one component of the type.
You will then be able to hover your mouse over that type alias to see what its type
result is.
For the FruitsType type from before as an example, its typeof fruits portion could
be extracted into a separate intermediary type with a refactor. That intermediary type
can then be hovered to see type information (Figure 12-24).

Figure 12-24. Left: extracting part of the FruitsType type; right: hovering over that
extracted type

The intermediary type alias strategy is particularly useful for debugging the type
operations covered in Chapter 15, “Type Operations”.

Summary
In this chapter, you explored using TypeScript’s IDE integrations to level up your
ability to write TypeScript code:

 • Opening context menus on types and values to list their available commands
 • Navigating code by finding definitions, references, and implementations
 • Automating writing code with name completions and automatic imports
 • More code actions including renames and refactors
 • Strategies for viewing and understanding language service errors
 • Strategies for understanding types

              Now that you’ve finished reading this chapter, practice what you’ve
              learned on https://learningtypescript.com/using-ide-features.

                         What do IDEs in love say to each other?
                                  “You complete me!”

                                                                          Summary   |   197
