Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics

Jeffrey Hoffstein
Jill Pipher
Joseph H. Silverman

An
Introduction to
Mathematical
Cryptography
Second Edition
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics

Series Editors:

Sheldon Axler
San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, USA

Kenneth Ribet
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA

Advisory Board:

Colin Adams, Williams College, Williamstown, MA, USA
Alejandro Adem, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Ruth Charney, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
Irene M. Gamba, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Roger E. Howe, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
David Jerison, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
Jeffrey C. Lagarias, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Jill Pipher, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
Fadil Santosa, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
Amie Wilkinson, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics are generally aimed at third- and fourth-
year undergraduate mathematics students at North American universities. These texts
strive to provide students and teachers with new perspectives and novel approaches.
The books include motivation that guides the reader to an appreciation of interre-
lations among different aspects of the subject. They feature examples that illustrate
key concepts as well as exercises that strengthen understanding.

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/666
Jeffrey Hoffstein • Jill Pipher
Joseph H. Silverman

An Introduction
to Mathematical
Cryptography
Second Edition

123
Jeffrey Hoffstein                                         Jill Pipher
Department of Mathematics                                 Department of Mathematics
Brown University                                          Brown University
Providence, RI, USA                                       Providence, RI, USA

Joseph H. Silverman
Department of Mathematics
Brown University
Providence, RI, USA

ISSN 0172-6056                  ISSN 2197-5604 (electronic)
ISBN 978-1-4939-1710-5          ISBN 978-1-4939-1711-2 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-1711-2
Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014946354

© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2008, 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection
with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and
executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this pub-
lication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s
location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permis-
sions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable
to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publica-
tion, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors
or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the
material contained herein.

Printed on acid-free paper

Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)
