Introduction

               Principal Goals of (Public Key) Cryptography
          • Allow two people to exchange confidential information,
            even if they have never met and can communicate only
            via a channel that is being monitored by an adversary.
          • Allow a person to attach a digital signature to a document,
            so that any other person can verify the validity of the
            signature, but no one can forge a signature on any other
            document.

The security of communications and commerce in a digital age relies on the
modern incarnation of the ancient art of codes and ciphers. Underlying the
birth of modern cryptography is a great deal of fascinating mathematics,
some of which has been developed for cryptographic applications, but much
of which is taken from the classical mathematical canon. The principal goal
of this book is to introduce the reader to a variety of mathematical topics
while simultaneously integrating the mathematics into a description of modern
public key cryptography.
    For thousands of years, all codes and ciphers relied on the assumption
that the people attempting to communicate, call them Bob and Alice, share
a secret key that their adversary, call her Eve, does not possess. Bob uses the
secret key to encrypt his message, Alice uses the same secret key to decrypt
the message, and poor Eve, not knowing the secret key, is unable to perform
the decryption. A disadvantage of these private key cryptosystems is that Bob
and Alice need to exchange the secret key before they can get started.
    During the 1970s, the astounding idea of public key cryptography burst
upon the scene.1 In a public key cryptosystem, Alice has two keys, a public
encryption key K Pub and a private (secret) decryption key K Pri . Alice pub-
lishes her public key K Pub , and then Adam and Bob and Carl and everyone
else can use K Pub to encrypt messages and send them to Alice. The idea
underlying public key cryptography is that although everyone in the world
knows K Pub and can use it to encrypt messages, only Alice, who knows the
private key K Pri , is able to decrypt messages.

   1 A brief history of cryptography is given is Sects. 1.6, 2.1, 6.5, and 7.7.
                                                                                  xiii
xiv                                                               Introduction

    The advantages of a public key cryptosystem are manifold. For example,
Bob can send Alice an encrypted message even if they have never previously
been in direct contact. But although public key cryptography is a fascinating
theoretical concept, it is not at all clear how one might create a public key
cryptosystem. It turns out that public key cryptosystems can be based on
hard mathematical problems. More precisely, one looks for a mathematical
problem that is initially hard to solve, but that becomes easy to solve if one
knows some extra piece of information.
    Of course, private key cryptosystems have not disappeared. Indeed, they
are more important than ever, since they tend to be significantly more effi-
cient than public key cryptosystems. Thus in practice, if Bob wants to send
Alice a long message, he first uses a public key cryptosystem to send Alice
the key for a private key cryptosystem, and then he uses the private key
cryptosystem to encrypt his message. The most efficient modern private key
cryptosystems, such as DES and AES, rely for their security on repeated ap-
plication of various mixing operations that are hard to unmix without the
private key. Thus although the subject of private key cryptography is of both
theoretical and practical importance, the connection with fundamental un-
derlying mathematical ideas is much less pronounced than it is with public
key cryptosystems. For that reason, this book concentrates almost exclusively
on public key cryptography, especially public key cryptosystems and digital
signatures.
    Modern mathematical cryptography draws on many areas of mathematics,
including especially number theory, abstract algebra (groups, rings, fields),
probability, statistics, and information theory, so the prerequisites for studying
the subject can seem formidable. By way of contrast, the prerequisites for
reading this book are minimal, because we take the time to introduce each
required mathematical topic in sufficient depth as it is needed. Thus this
book provides a self-contained treatment of mathematical cryptography for
the reader with limited mathematical background. And for those readers who
have taken a course in, say, number theory or abstract algebra or probability,
we suggest briefly reviewing the relevant sections as they are reached and then
moving on directly to the cryptographic applications.
    This book is not meant to be a comprehensive source for all things cryp-
tographic. In the first place, as already noted, we concentrate on public key
cryptography. But even within this domain, we have chosen to pursue a small
selection of topics to a reasonable mathematical depth, rather than provid-
ing a more superficial description of a wider range of subjects. We feel that
any reader who has mastered the material in this book will not only be well
prepared for further study in cryptography, but will have acquired a real
understanding of the underlying mathematical principles on which modern
cryptography is based.
    However, this does not mean that the omitted topics are unimportant.
It simply means that there is a limit to the amount of material that can
be included in a book (or course) of reasonable length. As in any text, the
Introduction                                                                 xv

choice of particular topics reflects the authors’ tastes and interests. For the
convenience of the reader, the final chapter contains a brief survey of areas
for further study.

A Guide to Mathematical Topics: This book includes a significant amount
of mathematical material on a variety of topics that are useful in cryptography.
The following list is designed to help coordinate the mathematical topics that
we cover with subjects that the class or reader may have already studied.
  Congruences, primes, and finite fields — Sects. 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 2.10.4
       The Chinese remainder theorem — Sect. 2.8
                       Euler’s formula — Sect. 3.1
                      Primality testing — Sect. 3.4
                 Quadratic reciprocity — Sect. 3.9
                Factorization methods — Sects. 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 6.6
                   Discrete logarithms — Sects. 2.2, 3.8, 5.4, 5.5, 6.3
                         Group theory — Sect. 2.5
 Rings, polynomials, and quotient rings — Sects. 2.10 and 7.9
         Combinatorics and probability — Sects. 5.1 and 5.3
    Information and complexity theory — Sects. 5.6 and 5.7
                        Elliptic curves — Sects. 6.1, 6.2, 6.7, 6.8
                        Linear algebra — Sects. 7.3
                               Lattices — Sects. 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.13

Intended Audience and Prerequisites: This book provides a self-con-
tained introduction to public key cryptography and to the underlying math-
ematics that is required for the subject. It is suitable as a text for advanced
undergraduates and beginning graduate students. We provide enough back-
ground material so that the book can be used in courses for students with no
previous exposure to abstract algebra or number theory. For classes in which
the students have a stronger background, the basic mathematical material
may be omitted, leaving time for some of the more advanced topics.
    The formal prerequisites for this book are few, beyond a facility with
high school algebra and, in Chap. 6, analytic geometry. Elementary calculus
is used here and there in a minor way, but is not essential, and linear alge-
bra is used in a small way in Chap. 3 and more extensively in Chap. 7. No
previous knowledge is assumed for mathematical topics such as number the-
ory, abstract algebra, and probability theory that play a fundamental role in
modern cryptography. They are covered in detail as needed.
    However, it must be emphasized that this is a mathematics book with its
share of formal definitions and theorems and proofs. Thus it is expected that
the reader has a certain level of mathematical sophistication. In particular,
students who have previously taken a proof-based mathematics course will
find the material easier than those without such background. On the other
hand, the subject of cryptography is so appealing that this book makes a
good text for an introduction-to-proofs course, with the understanding that
xvi                                                              Introduction

the instructor will need to cover the material more slowly to allow the students
time to become comfortable with proof-based mathematics.

Suggested Syllabus: This book contains considerably more material than
can be comfortably covered by beginning students in a one semester course.
However, for more advanced students who have already taken courses in num-
ber theory and abstract algebra, it should be possible to do most of the remain-
ing material. We suggest covering the majority of the topics in Chaps. 1–4,
possibly omitting some of the more technical topics, the optional material
on the Vigènere cipher, and the section on ring theory, which is not used
until much later in the book. The next three chapters on information theory
(Chap. 5), elliptic curves (Chap. 6), and lattices (Chap. 7) are mostly indepen-
dent of one another, so the instructor has the choice of covering one or two
of them in detail or all of them in less depth. We offer the following syllabus
as an example of one of the many possibilities. We have indicated that some
sections are optional. Covering the optional material leaves less time for the
later chapters at the end of the course.
Chapter 1. An Introduction to Cryptography.
    Cover all sections.
Chapter 2. Discrete Logarithms and Diffie–Hellman.
    Cover Sects. 2.1–2.7. Optionally cover the more mathematically sophis-
    ticated Sects. 2.8–2.9 on the Pohlig–Hellman algorithm. Omit Sect. 2.10
    on first reading.
Chapter 3. Integer Factorization and RSA.
    Cover Sects. 3.1–3.5 and 3.9–3.10. Optionally, cover the more mathemat-
    ically sophisticated Sects. 3.6–3.8, dealing with smooth numbers, sieves,
    and the index calculus.
Chapter 4. Digital Signatures.
    Cover all sections.
Chapter 5. Probability Theory and Information Theory.
    Cover Sects. 5.1, 5.3, and 5.4. Optionally cover the more mathemati-
    cally sophisticated sections on Pollard’s ρ method (Sect. 5.5), informa-
    tion theory (Sect. 5.6), and complexity theory (Sect. 5.7). The material
    on the Vigenère cipher in Sect. 5.2 nicely illustrates the use of statistics
    in cryptanalysis, but is somewhat off the main path.
Chapter 6. Elliptic Curves.
    Cover Sects. 6.1–6.4. Cover other sections as time permits, but note that
    Sects. 6.7–6.10 on pairings require finite fields of prime power order,
    which are described in Sect. 2.10.4.
Chapter 7. Lattices and Cryptography.
    Cover Sects. 7.1–7.8. (If time is short, one may omit either or both of
    Sects. 7.1 and 7.2.) Cover either Sects. 7.13–7.14 on the LLL lattice re-
    duction algorithm or Sects. 7.9–7.11 on the NTRU cryptosystem, or
Introduction                                                                 xvii

      both, as time permits. (The NTRU sections require the material on
      polynomial rings and quotient rings covered in Sect. 2.10.)
Chapter 8. Additional Topics in Cryptography.
    The material in this chapter points the reader toward other important
    areas of cryptography. It provides a good list of topics and references
    for student term papers and presentations.

Further Notes for the Instructor: Depending on how much of the harder
mathematical material in Chaps. 2–5 is covered, there may not be time to
delve into both Chaps. 6 and 7, so the instructor may need to omit either
elliptic curves or lattices in order to fit the other material into one semester.
    We feel that it is helpful for students to gain an appreciation of the origins
of their subject, so we have scattered a handful of sections throughout the book
containing some brief comments on the history of cryptography. Instructors
who want to spend more time on mathematics may omit these sections without
affecting the mathematical narrative.

Changes in the Second Edition:
 • The chapter on digital signatures has been moved, since we felt that
   this important topic should be covered earlier in the course. More pre-
   cisely, RSA, Elgamal, and DSA signatures are now described in the short
   Chap. 4, while the material on elliptic curve signatures is covered in the
   brief Sect. 6.4.3. The two sections on lattice-based signatures from the first
   edition have been extensively rewritten and now appear as Sect. 7.12.
 • Numerous new exercises have been included.
 • Numerous typographical and minor mathematical errors have been cor-
   rected, and notation has been made more consistent from chapter to
   chapter.
 • Various explanations have been rewritten or expanded for clarity, espe-
   cially in Chaps. 5–7.
 • New sections on digital cash and on homomorphic encryption have been
   added to the additional topics in Chap. 8; see Sects. 8.8 and 8.9.
