Chapter 2

Discrete Logarithms
and Diffie–Hellman

2.1     The Birth of Public Key Cryptography
In 1976, Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman published their now famous
paper [38] entitled “New Directions in Cryptography.” In this paper they
formulated the concept of a public key encryption system and made several
groundbreaking contributions to this new field. A short time earlier, Ralph
Merkle had independently isolated one of the fundamental problems and in-
vented a public key construction for an undergraduate project in a computer
science class at Berkeley, but this was little understood at the time. Merkle’s
work “Secure communication over insecure channels” appeared in 1982 [83].
    However, it turns out that the concept of public key encryption was orig-
inally discovered by James Ellis while working at the British Government
Communications Headquarters (GCHQ). Ellis’s discoveries in 1969 were clas-
sified as secret material by the British government and were not declassi-
fied and released until 1997, after his death. It is now known that two other
researchers at GCHQ, Malcolm Williamson and Clifford Cocks, discovered
the Diffie–Hellman key exchange algorithm and the RSA public key encryp-
tion system, respectively, before their rediscovery and public dissemination by
Diffie, Hellman, Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman. To learn more about the fas-
cinating history of public key cryptography, see for example [37, 42, 63, 139].
    The Diffie–Hellman publication was an extremely important event—it set
forth the basic definitions and goals of a new field of mathematics/computer
science, a field whose existence was dependent on the then emerging age of
the digital computer. Indeed, their paper begins with a call to arms:

© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014                             61
J. Hoffstein et al., An Introduction to Mathematical Cryptography,
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-1711-2 2

       We stand today on the brink of a revolution in cryptography.

An original or breakthrough scientific idea is often called revolutionary, but
in this instance, as the authors were fully aware, the term revolutionary was
relevant in another sense. Prior to the publication of “New Directions. . . ,”
encryption research in the United States was the domain of the National Se-
curity Agency, and all information in this area was classified. Indeed, until the
mid-1990s, the United States government treated cryptographic algorithms as
munitions, which meant that their export was prosecutable as a treasonable
offense. Eventually, the government realized the futility of trying to prevent
free and open discussion about abstract cryptographic algorithms and the
dubious legality of restricting domestic use of strong cryptographic methods.
However, in order to maintain some control, the government continued to re-
strict export of high security cryptographic algorithms if they were “machine
readable.” Their object, to prevent widespread global dissemination of so-
phisticated cryptography programs to potential enemies of the United States,
was laudable,1 but there were two difficulties that rendered the government’s
policy unworkable.
    First, the existence of optical scanners creates a very blurry line between
“machine readable” and “human text.” To protest the government’s policy,
people wrote a three line version of the RSA algorithm in a programming
language called perl and printed it on tee shirts and soda cans, thereby making
these products into munitions. In principle, wearing an “RSA enabled” tee
shirt on a flight from New York to Europe subjected the wearer to a large
fine and a 10 year jail term. Even more amusing (or frightening, depending
on your viewpoint), tattoos of the RSA perl code made people’s bodies into
non-exportable munitions!
    Second, although these and other more serious protests and legal chal-
lenges had some effect, the government’s policy was ultimately rendered moot
by a simple reality. Public key algorithms are quite simple, and although it
requires a certain expertise to implement them in a secure fashion, the world is
full of excellent mathematicians and computer scientists and engineers. Thus
government restrictions on the export of “strong crypto” simply encouraged
the creation of cryptographic industries in other parts of the world. The gov-
ernment was able to slow the adoption of strong crypto for a few years, but
it is now possible for anyone to purchase for a nominal sum cryptographic
software that allows completely secure communications.2

    1 It is surely laudable to keep potential weapons out of the hands of one’s enemies,

but many have argued, with considerable justification, that the government also had the
less benign objective of preventing other governments from using communication methods
secure from United States prying.
    2 Of course, one never knows what cryptanalytic breakthroughs have been made by the

scientists at the National Security Agency, since virtually all of their research is classified.
The NSA is reputed to be the world’s largest single employer of Ph.D.s in mathematics.
However, in contrast to the situation before the 1970s, there are now far more cryptographers
employed in academia and in the business world than there are in government agencies.
2.1. The Birth of Public Key Cryptography                                      63

                                        f
                                 easy to compute
                 Domain                                    Range
                                       f−1

                                 hard to compute

                           f−1 with trapdoor information
                                  easy to compute

Figure 2.1: Illustration of a one-way trapdoor function

    The first important contribution of Diffie and Hellman in [38] was the def-
inition of a Public Key Cryptosystem (PKC) and its associated components—
one-way functions and trapdoor information. A one-way function is an invert-
ible function that is easy to compute, but whose inverse is difficult to compute.
What does it mean to be “difficult to compute”? Intuitively, a function is dif-
ficult to compute if any algorithm that attempts to compute the inverse in
a “reasonable” amount of time, e.g., less than the age of the universe, will
almost certainly fail, where the phrase “almost certainly” must be defined
probabilistically. (For a more rigorous definition of “hardness,” see Sect. 2.6.)
   Secure PKCs are built using one-way functions that have a trapdoor. The
trapdoor is a piece of auxiliary information that allows the inverse to be easily
computed. This idea is illustrated in Fig. 2.1, although it must be stressed
that there is a vast chasm separating the abstract idea of a one-way trapdoor
function and the actual construction of such a function.
    As described in Sect. 1.7.6, the key for a public key (or asymmetric) cryp-
tosystem consists of two pieces, a private key kpriv and a public key kpub ,
where in practice kpub is computed by applying some key-creation algorithm
to kpriv . For each public/private key pair (kpriv , kpub ) there is an encryption
algorithm ekpub and a corresponding decryption algorithm dkpriv . The encryp-
tion algorithm ekpub corresponding to kpub is public knowledge and easy to
compute. Similarly, the decryption algorithm dkpriv must be easily computable
by someone who knows the private key kpriv , but it should be very difficult to
compute for someone who knows only the public key kpub .
    One says that the private key kpriv is trapdoor information for the func-
tion ekpub , because without the trapdoor information it is very hard to compute
the inverse function to ekpub , but with the trapdoor information it is easy to
compute the inverse. Notice that in particular, the function that is used to
create kpub from kpriv must be difficult to invert, since kpub is public knowledge
and kpriv allows efficient decryption.
     It may come as a surprise to learn that despite years of research, it is
still not known whether one-way functions exist. In fact, a proof of the exis-
tence of one-way functions would simultaneously solve the famous P = N P

problem in complexity theory.3 Various candidates for one-way functions have
been proposed, and some of them are used by modern public key encryption
algorithms. But it must be stressed that the security of these cryptosystems
rests on the assumption that inverting the underlying function (or finding the
private key from the public one) is a hard problem.
    The situation is somewhat analogous to theories in physics that gain cred-
ibility over time, as they fail to be disproved and continue to explain or gen-
erate interesting phenomena. Diffie and Hellman made several suggestions
in [38] for one-way functions, including knapsack problems and exponenti-
ation mod q, but they did not produce an example of a PKC, mainly for
lack of finding the right trapdoor information. They did, however, describe a
public key method by which certain material could be securely shared over
an insecure channel. Their method, which is now called Diffie–Hellman key
exchange, is based on the assumption that the discrete logarithm problem
(DLP) is difficult to solve. We discuss the DLP in Sect. 2.2, and then describe
Diffie–Hellman key exchange in Sect. 2.3. In their paper, Diffie and Hellman
also defined a variety of cryptanalytic attacks and introduced the important
concepts of digital signatures and one-way authentication, which we discuss
in Chap. 4 and Sect. 8.5.
    With the publication of [38] in 1976, the race was on to invent a practical
public key cryptosystem. Within 2 years, two major papers describing public
key cryptosystems were published: the RSA scheme of Rivest, Shamir, and
Adleman [110] and the knapsack scheme of Merkle and Hellman [84]. Of these
two, only RSA has withstood the test of time, in the sense that its underly-
ing hard problem of integer factorization is still sufficiently computationally
difficult to allow RSA to operate efficiently. By way of contrast, the knap-
sack system of Merkle and Hellman was shown to be insecure at practical
computational levels [124]. However, the cryptanalysis of knapsack systems
introduces important links to hard computational problems in the theory of
integer lattices that we explore in Chap. 7.

2.2      The Discrete Logarithm Problem
The discrete logarithm problem is a mathematical problem that arises in many
settings, including the mod p version described in this section and the elliptic
curve version that will be studied later, in Chap. 6. The first published public
key construction, due to Diffie and Hellman [38], is based on the discrete log-
arithm problem in a finite field Fp , where recall that Fp is a field with a prime
number of elements. (See Sect. 1.4.) For convenience, we interchangeably use
the notations Fp and Z/pZ for this field, and we use equality notation for ele-
ments of Fp and congruence notation for elements of Z/pZ (cf. Remark 1.23).

    3 The P = N P problem is one of the so-called Millennium Prizes, each of which has a

$1,000,000 prize attached. See Sect. 5.7 for more on P versus N P .
2.2. The Discrete Logarithm Problem                                                         65

    Let p be a (large) prime. Theorem 1.30 tells us that there exists a primitive
element g. This means that every nonzero element of Fp is equal to some power
of g. In particular, g p−1 = 1 by Fermat’s little theorem (Theorem 1.24), and
no smaller positive power of g is equal to 1. Equivalently, the list of elements

                                1, g, g 2 , g 3 , . . . , g p−2 ∈ F∗p

is a complete list of the elements in F∗p in some order.

Definition. Let g be a primitive root for Fp and let h be a nonzero element
of Fp . The Discrete Logarithm Problem (DLP) is the problem of finding an
exponent x such that
                             g x ≡ h (mod p).
The number x is called the discrete logarithm of h to the base g and is denoted
by logg (h).

Remark 2.1. An older term for the discrete logarithm is the index, denoted
by indg (h). The index terminology is still commonly used in number theory. It
is also convenient if there is a danger of confusion between ordinary logarithms
and discrete logarithms, since, for example, the quantity log2 frequently occurs
in both contexts.
Remark 2.2. The discrete logarithm problem is a well-posed problem, namely
to find an integer exponent x such that g x = h. However, if there is one so-
lution, then there are infinitely many, because Fermat’s little theorem (The-
orem 1.24) tells us that g p−1 ≡ 1 (mod p). Hence if x is a solution to g x = h,
then x + k(p − 1) is also a solution for every value of k, because

                  g x+k(p−1) = g x · (g p−1 )k ≡ h · 1k ≡ h (mod p).

Thus logg (h) is defined only up to adding or subtracting multiples of p − 1.
In other words, logg (h) is really defined modulo p − 1. It is not hard to verify
(Exercise 2.3(a)) that logg gives a well-defined function4

                                                        Z
                                 logg : F∗p −→                .                           (2.1)
                                                     (p − 1)Z

Sometimes, for concreteness, we refer to “the” discrete logarithm as the integer
x lying between 0 and p − 2 satisfying the congruence g x ≡ h (mod p).
Remark 2.3. It is not hard to prove (see Exercise 2.3(b)) that

                  logg (ab) = logg (a) + logg (b)             for all a, b ∈ F∗p .
    4 If you have studied complex analysis, you may have noticed an analogy with the com-

plex logarithm, which is not actually well defined on C∗ . This is due to the fact that e2πi = 1,
so log(z) is well defined only up to adding or subtracting multiples of 2πi. The complex
logarithm thus defines an isomorphism from C∗ to the quotient group C/2πiZ, analogous
to (2.1).

 n     g n mod p    n    g n mod p                h    logg (h)    h    logg (h)
  1        627      11       878                   1       0       11     429
  2        732      12        21                   2     183       12     835
  3        697      13       934                   3     469       13     279
  4        395      14       316                   4     366       14     666
  5        182      15       522                   5     356       15     825
  6        253      16       767                   6     652       16     732
  7        543      17        58                   7     483       17     337
  8        760      18       608                   8     549       18     181
  9        374      19       111                   9     938       19      43
 10        189      20       904                  10     539       20     722

Table 2.1: Powers and discrete logarithms for g = 627 modulo p = 941

Thus calling logg a “logarithm” is reasonable, since it converts multiplication
into addition in the same way as the usual logarithm function. In mathemat-
ical terminology, the discrete logarithm logg is a group isomorphism from F∗p
to Z/(p − 1)Z.
Example 2.4. The number p = 56509 is prime, and one can check that g = 2
is a primitive root modulo p. How would we go about calculating the discrete
logarithm of h = 38679? The only method that is immediately obvious is to
compute
                   22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , . . . (mod 56509)
until we find some power that equals 38679. It would be difficult to do this
by hand, but using a computer, we find that log2 (h) = 11235. You can verify
this by calculating 211235 mod 56509 and checking that it is equal to 38679.
Remark 2.5. It must be emphasized that the discrete logarithm bears lit-
tle resemblance to the continuous logarithm defined on the real or complex
numbers. The terminology is still reasonable, because in both instances the
process of exponentiation is inverted—but exponentiation modulo p varies in
a very irregular way with the exponent, contrary to the behavior of its contin-
uous counterpart. The random-looking behavior of exponentiation modulo p
is apparent from even a cursory glance at a table of values such as those in
Table 2.1, where we list the first few powers and the first few discrete loga-
rithms for the prime p = 941 and the base g = 627. The seeming randomness
is also illustrated by the scatter graph of 627i mod 941 pictured in Fig. 2.2.
Remark 2.6. Our statement of the discrete logarithm problem includes the
assumption that the base g is a primitive root modulo p, but this is not strictly
necessary. In general, for any g ∈ F∗p and any h ∈ F∗p , the discrete logarithm
problem is the determination of an exponent x satisfying g x ≡ h (mod p),
assuming that such an x exists.
   More generally, rather than taking nonzero elements of a finite field Fp and
multiplying them together or raising them to powers, we can take elements of
2.3. Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange                                                  67

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

  0
      0    30        60     90       120      150      180    210   240   270

Figure 2.2: Powers 627i mod 941 for i = 1, 2, 3, . . .

any group and use the group law instead of multiplication. This leads to the
most general form of the discrete logarithm problem. (If you are unfamiliar
with the theory of groups, we give a brief overview in Sect. 2.5.)

Definition. Let G be a group whose group law we denote by the symbol ?.
The Discrete Logarithm Problem for G is to determine, for any two given
elements g and h in G, an integer x satisfying

                                 g ? g ? g ? · · · ? g = h.
                                                      
                                       x times

2.3       Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange
The Diffie–Hellman key exchange algorithm solves the following dilemma.
Alice and Bob want to share a secret key for use in a symmetric cipher, but
their only means of communication is insecure. Every piece of information that
they exchange is observed by their adversary Eve. How is it possible for Alice
and Bob to share a key without making it available to Eve? At first glance it
appears that Alice and Bob face an impossible task. It was a brilliant insight
of Diffie and Hellman that the difficulty of the discrete logarithm problem
for F∗p provides a possible solution.
    The first step is for Alice and Bob to agree on a large prime p and a
nonzero integer g modulo p. Alice and Bob make the values of p and g public

knowledge; for example, they might post the values on their web sites, so Eve
knows them, too. For various reasons to be discussed later, it is best if they
choose g such that its order in F∗p is a large prime. (See Exercise 1.33 for a
way of finding such a g.)
    The next step is for Alice to pick a secret integer a that she does not reveal
to anyone, while at the same time Bob picks an integer b that he keeps secret.
Bob and Alice use their secret integers to compute

                   A ≡ g a (mod p)           and      B ≡ g b (mod p) .
                                                                     
                   Alice computes this                 Bob computes this

They next exchange these computed values, Alice sends A to Bob and Bob
sends B to Alice. Note that Eve gets to see the values of A and B, since they
are sent over the insecure communication channel.
   Finally, Bob and Alice again use their secret integers to compute

                  A? ≡ B a (mod p)           and      B ? ≡ Ab (mod p) .
                                                                      
                  Alice computes this                  Bob computes this

The values that they compute, A? and B ? respectively, are actually the same,
since
            A? ≡ B a ≡ (g b )a ≡ g ab ≡ (g a )b ≡ Ab ≡ B ? (mod p).
This common value is their exchanged key. The Diffie–Hellman key exchange
algorithm is summarized in Table 2.2.

                         Public parameter creation
        A trusted party chooses and publishes a (large) prime p
        and an integer g having large prime order in F∗p .
                            Private computations
                   Alice                                Bob
     Choose a secret integer a.         Choose a secret integer b.
     Compute A ≡ g a (mod p).           Compute B ≡ g b (mod p).
                          Public exchange of values
             Alice sends A to Bob −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ A
              B  ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−− Bob sends B to Alice
                     Further private computations
                 Alice                            Bob
     Compute the number B a (mod p). Compute the number Ab (mod p).
      The shared secret value is         B a ≡ (g b )a ≡ g ab ≡ (g a )b ≡ Ab (mod p).

Table 2.2: Diffie–Hellman key exchange
2.3. Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange                                                69

Example 2.7. Alice and Bob agree to use the prime p = 941 and the
primitive root g = 627. Alice chooses the secret key a = 347 and computes
A = 390 ≡ 627347 (mod 941). Similarly, Bob chooses the secret key b = 781
and computes B = 691 ≡ 627781 (mod 941). Alice sends Bob the number 390
and Bob sends Alice the number 691. Both of these transmissions are done
over an insecure channel, so both A = 390 and B = 691 should be considered
public knowledge. The numbers a = 347 and b = 781 are not transmitted and
remain secret. Then Alice and Bob are both able to compute the number

                  470 ≡ 627347·781 ≡ Ab ≡ B a     (mod 941),

so 470 is their shared secret.
    Suppose that Eve sees this entire exchange. She can reconstitute Alice’s
and Bob’s shared secret if she can solve either of the congruences

         627a ≡ 390    (mod 941)       or     627b ≡ 691   (mod 941),

since then she will know one of their secret exponents. As far as is known,
this is the only way for Eve to find the secret shared value without Alice’s or
Bob’s assistance.
    Of course, our example uses numbers that are much too small to afford Al-
ice and Bob any real security, since it takes very little time for Eve’s computer
to check all possible powers of 627 modulo 941. Current guidelines suggest
that Alice and Bob choose a prime p having approximately 1000 bits (i.e.,
p ≈ 21000 ) and an element g whose order is prime and approximately p/2.
Then Eve will face a truly difficult task.
    In general, Eve’s dilemma is this. She knows the values of A and B, so she
knows the values of g a and g b . She also knows the values of g and p, so if she
can solve the DLP, then she can find a and b, after which it is easy for her to
compute Alice and Bob’s shared secret value g ab . It appears that Alice and
Bob are safe provided that Eve is unable to solve the DLP, but this is not
quite correct. It is true that one method of finding Alice and Bob’s shared
value is to solve the DLP, but that is not the precise problem that Eve needs
to solve. The security of Alice’s and Bob’s shared key rests on the difficulty
of the following, potentially easier, problem.
Definition. Let p be a prime number and g an integer. The Diffie–Hellman
Problem (DHP) is the problem of computing the value of g ab (mod p) from
the known values of g a (mod p) and g b (mod p).
    It is clear that the DHP is no harder than the DLP. If Eve can solve the
DLP, then she can compute Alice and Bob’s secret exponents a and b from the
intercepted values A = g a and B = g b , and then it is easy for her to compute
their shared key g ab . (In fact, Eve needs to compute only one of a and b.) But
the converse is less clear. Suppose that Eve has an algorithm that efficiently
solves the DHP. Can she use it to also efficiently solve the DLP? The answer
is not known.

2.4       The Elgamal Public Key Cryptosystem
Although the Diffie–Hellman key exchange algorithm provides a method of
publicly sharing a random secret key, it does not achieve the full goal of being
a public key cryptosystem, since a cryptosystem permits exchange of specific
information, not just a random string of bits. The first public key cryptosys-
tem was the RSA system of Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman [110], which they
published in 1978. RSA was, and still is, a fundamentally important discovery,
and we discuss it in detail in Chap. 3. However, although RSA was historically
first, the most natural development of a public key cryptosystem following the
Diffie–Hellman paper [38] is a system described by Taher Elgamal in 1985 [41].
The Elgamal public key encryption algorithm is based on the discrete log prob-
lem and is closely related to Diffie–Hellman key exchange from Sect. 2.3. In
this section we describe the version of the Elgamal PKC that is based on the
discrete logarithm problem for F∗p , but the construction works quite generally
using the DLP in any group. In particular, in Sect. 6.4.2 we discuss a version
of the Elgamal PKC based on elliptic curve groups.
    The Elgamal PKC is our first example of a public key cryptosystem, so
we proceed slowly and provide all of the details. Alice begins by publishing
information consisting of a public key and an algorithm. The public key is
simply a number, and the algorithm is the method by which Bob encrypts
his messages using Alice’s public key. Alice does not disclose her private key,
which is another number. The private key allows Alice, and only Alice, to
decrypt messages that have been encrypted using her public key.
    This is all somewhat vague and applies to any public key cryptosystem. For
the Elgamal PKC, Alice needs a large prime number p for which the discrete
logarithm problem in F∗p is difficult, and she needs an element g modulo p of
large (prime) order. She may choose p and g herself, or they may have been
preselected by some trusted party such as an industry panel or government
agency.
    Alice chooses a secret number a to act as her private key, and she computes
the quantity
                                A ≡ g a (mod p).
Notice the resemblance to Diffie–Hellman key exchange. Alice publishes her
public key A and she keeps her private key a secret.
    Now suppose that Bob wants to encrypt a message using Alice’s pub-
lic key A. We will assume that Bob’s message m is an integer between 2
and p. (Recall that we discussed how to convert messages into numbers in
Sect. 1.7.2.) In order to encrypt m, Bob first randomly chooses another num-
ber k modulo p.5 Bob uses k to encrypt one, and only one, message, and then

    5 Most public key cryptosystems require the use of random numbers in order to operate

securely. The generation of random or random-looking integers is actually a delicate process.
We discuss the problem of generating pseudorandom numbers in Sect. 8.2, but for now we
ignore this issue and assume that Bob has no trouble generating random numbers modulo p.
2.4. The Elgamal Public Key Cryptosystem                                          71

he discards it. The number k is called a random element; it exists for the sole
purpose of encrypting a single message.
   Bob takes his plaintext message m, his random element k, and Alice’s
public key A and uses them to compute the two quantities

              c1 ≡ g k    (mod p)      and      c2 ≡ mAk     (mod p).

(Remember that g and p are public parameters, so Bob also knows their val-
ues.) Bob’s ciphertext, i.e., his encryption of m, is the pair of numbers (c1 , c2 ),
which he sends to Alice.
   How does Alice decrypt Bob’s ciphertext (c1 , c2 )? Since Alice knows a, she
can compute the quantity

                               x ≡ (ca1 )−1   (mod p).

She can this by first computing c11 (mod p) using the fast power algorithm, and
then computing the inverse using the extended Euclidean algorithm. Alterna-
tively, she can just use fast powering to compute cp−1−a
                                                    1      (mod p). Alice next
multiplies c2 by x, and lo and behold, the resulting value is the plaintext m.
To see why, we expand the value of x · c2 and find that

 x · c2 ≡ (ca1 )−1 · c2        (mod p),        since x ≡ (ca1 )−1 (mod p),
       ≡ (g ak )−1 · (mAk )    (mod p),        since c1 ≡ g k , c2 ≡ mAk (mod p),
       ≡ (g ak )−1 · (m(g a )k ) (mod p),      since A ≡ g a (mod p),
       ≡m                      (mod p),        since the g ak terms cancel out.

The Elgamal public key cryptosystem is summarized in Table 2.3.
    What is Eve’s task in trying to decrypt the message? Eve knows the pub-
lic parameters p and g, and she also knows the value of A ≡ g a (mod p),
since Alice’s public key A is public knowledge. If Eve can solve the dis-
crete logarithm problem, then she can find a and decrypt the message. More
precisely, it’s enough for Eve to solve the Diffie–Hellman problem; see Exer-
cise 2.9. Otherwise it appears difficult for Eve to find the plaintext, although
there are subtleties, some of which we’ll discuss after doing an example with
small numbers.
Example 2.8. Alice uses the prime p = 467 and the primitive root g = 2. She
chooses a = 153 to be her private key and computes her public key

                          A ≡ g a ≡ 2153 ≡ 224 (mod 467).

Bob decides to send Alice the message m = 331. He chooses a random element,
say he chooses k = 197, and he computes the two quantities

  c1 ≡ 2197 ≡ 87 (mod 467)          and       c2 ≡ 331 · 224197 ≡ 57 (mod 467).

The pair (c1 , c2 ) = (87, 57) is the ciphertext that Bob sends to Alice.

                           Public parameter creation
             A trusted party chooses and publishes a large prime p
               and an element g modulo p of large (prime) order.
                   Alice                                Bob
                                  Key creation
     Choose private key 1 ≤ a ≤ p − 1.
     Compute A = g a (mod p).
     Publish the public key A.
                                   Encryption
                                         Choose plaintext m.
                                         Choose random element k.
                                         Use Alice’s public key A
                                             to compute c1 = g k (mod p)
                                             and c2 = mAk (mod p).
                                         Send ciphertext (c1 , c2 ) to Alice.
                                   Decryption
     Compute (ca1 )−1 · c2 (mod p).
     This quantity is equal to m.

Table 2.3: Elgamal key creation, encryption, and decryption

     Alice, knowing a = 153, first computes

                  x ≡ (ca1 )−1 ≡ cp−1−a
                                  1     ≡ 87313 ≡ 14 (mod 467).

Finally, she computes

                          c2 x ≡ 57 · 14 ≡ 331 (mod 467)

and recovers the plaintext message m.
Remark 2.9. In the Elgamal cryptosystem, the plaintext is an integer m be-
tween 2 and p − 1, while the ciphertext consists of two integers c1 and c2 in
the same range. Thus in general it takes twice as many bits to write down the
ciphertext as it does to write down the plaintext. We say that Elgamal has a
2-to-1 message expansion.
    It’s time to raise an important question. Is the Elgamal system as hard for
Eve to attack as the Diffie–Hellman problem? Or, by introducing a clever way
of encrypting messages, have we unwittingly opened a back door that makes
it easy to decrypt messages without solving the Diffie–Hellman problem? One
of the goals of modern cryptography is to identify an underlying hard problem
like the Diffie–Hellman problem and to prove that a given cryptographic con-
struction like Elgamal is at least as hard to attack as the underlying problem.
    In this case we would like to prove that anyone who can decrypt arbitrary
ciphertexts created by Elgamal encryption, as summarized in Table 2.3, must
2.4. The Elgamal Public Key Cryptosystem                                      73

also be able to solve the Diffie–Hellman problem. Specifically, we would like
to prove the following:
Proposition 2.10. Fix a prime p and base g to use for Elgamal encryption.
Suppose that Eve has access to an oracle that decrypts arbitrary Elgamal ci-
phertexts encrypted using arbitrary Elgamal public keys. Then she can use the
oracle to solve the Diffie–Hellman problem described on page 69.
    Conversely, if Eve can solve the Diffie–Hellman problem, then she can
break the Elgamal PKC.
Proof. Rather than giving a compact formal proof, we will be more discursive
and explain how one might approach the problem of using an Elgamal oracle to
solve the Diffie–Hellman problem. Recall that in the Diffie–Hellman problem,
Eve is given the two values
                 A ≡ g a (mod p)        and       B ≡ g b (mod p),
and she is required to compute the value of g ab (mod p). Keep in mind that
she knows both of the values of A and B, but she does not know either of the
values a and b.
   Now suppose that Eve can consult an Elgamal oracle. This means that
Eve can send the oracle a prime p, a base g, a purported public key A, and
a purported cipher text (c1 , c2 ). Referring to Table 2.3, the oracle returns to
Eve the quantity
                              (ca1 )−1 · c2 (mod p).
If Eve wants to solve the Diffie–Hellman problem, what values of c1 and c2
should she choose? A little thought shows that c1 = B = g b and c2 = 1 are
good choices, since with this input, the oracle returns (g ab )−1 (mod p), and
then Eve can take the inverse modulo p to obtain g ab (mod p), thereby solving
the Diffie–Hellman problem.
    But maybe the oracle is smart enough to know that it should never decrypt
ciphertexts having c2 = 1. Eve can still fool the oracle by sending it random-
looking ciphertexts as follows. She chooses an arbitrary value for c2 and tells
the oracle that the public key is A and that the ciphertext is (B, c2 ). The
oracle returns to her the supposed plaintext m that satisfies
            m ≡ (ca1 )−1 · c2 ≡ (B a )−1 · c2 ≡ (g ab )−1 · c2   (mod p).
After the oracle tells Eve the value of m, she simply computes
                             m−1 · c2 ≡ g ab    (mod p)
to find the value of g ab (mod p). It is worth noting that although, with the
oracle’s help, Eve has computed g ab (mod p), she has done so without knowl-
edge of a or b, so she has solved only the Diffie–Hellman problem, not the
discrete logarithm problem.
    We leave the proof of the converse, i.e., that a Diffie–Hellman oracle breaks
the Elgamal PKC, as an exercise; see Exercise 2.9.

2.5       An Overview of the Theory of Groups
For readers unfamiliar with the theory of groups, we briefly introduce a few
basic concepts that should help to place the study of discrete logarithms, both
here and in Chap. 6, into a broader context.
   We’ve just spent some time talking about exponentiation of elements in F∗p .
Since exponentiation is simply repeated multiplication, this seems like a good
place to start. What we’d like to do is to underline some important properties
of multiplication in F∗p and to point out that these attributes appear in many
other contexts.
   The properties are:
     • There is an element 1 ∈ F∗p satisfying 1 · a = a for every a ∈ F∗p .
     • Every a ∈ F∗p has an inverse a−1 ∈ F∗p satisfying a · a−1 = a−1 · a = 1.
     • Multiplication is associative: a · (b · c) = (a · b) · c for all a, b, c ∈ F∗p .
     • Multiplication is commutative: a · b = b · a for all a, b ∈ F∗p .
Suppose that instead of multiplication in F∗p , we substitute addition in Fp . We
also use 0 in place of 1 and −a in place of a−1 . Then all four properties are
still true:
     • 0 + a = a for every a ∈ Fp .
     • Every a ∈ Fp has an inverse −a ∈ Fp with a + (−a) = (−a) + a = 0.
     • Addition is associative, a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c for all a, b, c ∈ Fp .
     • Addition is commutative, a + b = b + a for all a, b ∈ Fp .
   Sets and operations that behave similarly to multiplication or addition are
so widespread that it is advantageous to abstract the general concept and talk
about all such systems at once. The leads to the notion of a group.
Definition. A group consists of a set G and a rule, which we denote by ?,
for combining two elements a, b ∈ G to obtain an element a ? b ∈ G. The
composition operation ? is required to have the following three properties:
 [Identity Law]                There is an e ∈ G such that
                                   e ? a = a ? e = a for every a ∈ G.
 [Inverse Law]                 For every a ∈ G there is a (unique) a−1 ∈ G
                                      satisfying a ? a−1 = a−1 ? a = e.
 [Associative Law]             a ? (b ? c) = (a ? b) ? c    for all a, b, c ∈ G.
 If, in addition, composition satisfies the
 [Commutative Law]             a?b=b?a           for all a, b ∈ G,
 then the group is called a commutative group or an abelian group.
If G has finitely many elements, we say that G is a finite group. The order
of G is the number of elements in G; it is denoted by |G| or #G.
2.5. An Overview of the Theory of Groups                                        75

Example 2.11. Groups are ubiquitous in mathematics and in the physical
sciences. Here are a few examples, the first two repeating those mentioned
earlier:

 (a) G = F∗p and ? = multiplication. The identity element is e = 1. Propo-
     sition 1.21 tells us that inverses exist. Then G is a finite group of or-
     der p − 1.
 (b) G = Z/N Z and ? = addition. The identity element is e = 0 and the
     inverse of a is −a. This G is a finite group of order N .
 (c) G = Z and ? = addition. The identity element is e = 0 and the inverse
     of a is −a. This group G is an infinite group.
 (d) Note that G = Z and ? = multiplication is not a group, since most
     elements do not have multiplicative inverses inside Z.
 (e) However, G = R∗ and ? = multiplication is a group, since all elements
     have multiplicative inverses inside R∗ .
 (f) An example of a noncommutative group is

                            ab
                   G=              : a, b, c, d ∈ R and ad − bc ?= 0
                            cd

     with operation ? = matrix multiplication. The identity element is
     e = ( 10 01 ) and the inverse is given by the familiar formula
                                    −1         d    −b
                              ab             ad−bc ad−bc
                                         =    −c     a     .
                              cd             ad−bc ad−bc

     Notice that G is noncommutative, since for example, ( 10 11 ) ( 11 10 ) is not
     equal to ( 11 10 ) ( 10 11 ).
 (g) More generally, we can use matrices of any size. This gives the general
     linear group
                                                                          
       GLn (R) = n-by-n matrices A with real coefficients and det(A) ?= 0

     and operation ? = matrix multiplication. We can form other groups
     by replacing R with some other field, for example, the finite field Fp .
     (See Exercise 2.15.) The group GLn (Fp ) is clearly a finite group, but
     computing its order is an interesting exercise.

  Let g be an element of a group G and let x be a positive integer. Then g x
means that we apply the group operation to x copies of the element g,

                            gx = g ? g ? g ? · · · ? g .
                                                      
                                      x repetitions

For example, exponentiation g x in the group F∗p has the usual meaning, multi-
ply x copies of g. But “exponentiation” g x in the group Z/N Z means to add x
copies of g. Admittedly, it is more common to write the quantity “add x copies
of g” as x · g, but this is just a matter of notation. The key concept underlying
exponentiation in a group is repeated application of the group operation to
an element of the group.
    It is also convenient to give a meaning to g x when x is not positive. So if x
is a negative integer, we define g x to be (g −1 )|x| . For x = 0, we set g 0 = e,
the identity element of G.
    We now introduce a key concept used in the study of groups.
Definition. Let G be a group and let a ∈ G be an element of the group.
Suppose there exists a positive integer d with the property that ad = e. The
smallest such d is called the order of a. If there is no such d, then a is said to
have infinite order.
     We next prove two propositions describing important properties of the
orders of group elements. These are generalizations of Theorem 1.24 (Fermat’s
little theorem) and Proposition 1.29, which deal with the group G = F∗p . The
proofs are essentially the same.
Proposition 2.12. Let G be a finite group. Then every element of G has
finite order. Further, if a ∈ G has order d and if ak = e, then d | k.
Proof. Since G is finite, the sequence

                                 a, a2 , a3 , a4 , . . .

must eventually contain a repetition. That is, there exist positive integers i
and j with j < i such that ai = aj . Multiplying both sides by a−j and applying
the group laws leads to ai−j = e. Since i − j > 0, this proves that some power
of a is equal to e. We let d be the smallest positive exponent satisfying ad = e.
    Now suppose that k ≥ d also satisfies ak = e. We divide k by d to obtain

                        k = dq + r          with 0 ≤ r < d.

Using the fact that ak = ad = e, we find that

                  e = ak = adq+r = (ad )q ? ar = eq ? ar = ar .

But d is the smallest positive power of a that is equal to e, so we must
have r = 0. Therefore k = dq, so d | k.
Proposition 2.13 (Lagrange’s Theorem). Let G be a finite group and let
a ∈ G. Then the order of a divides the order G.
    More precisely, let n = |G| be the order of G and let d be the order of a,
i.e., ad is the smallest positive power of a that is equal to e. Then

                           an = e         and          d | n.
2.6. How Hard Is the Discrete Logarithm Problem?                                             77

Proof. We give a simple proof in the case that G is commutative. For a proof
in the general case, see any basic algebra textbook, for example [40, §3.2]
or [45, §2.3].
    Since G is finite, we can list its elements as

                                    G = {g1 , g2 , . . . , gn }.

We now multiply each element of G by a to obtain a new set, which we call Sa ,

                            Sa = {a ? g1 , a ? g2 , . . . , a ? gn }.

We claim that the elements of Sa are distinct. To see this, suppose that
a ? gi = a ? gj . Multiplying both sides by a−1 yields gi = gj .6 Thus Sa
contains n distinct elements, which is the same as the number of elements
of G. Therefore Sa = G, so if we multiply together all of the elements of Sa ,
we get the same answer as multiplying together all of the elements of G. (Note
that we are using the assumption that G is commutative.) Thus

                (a ? g1 ) ? (a ? g2 ) ? · · · ? (a ? gn ) = g1 ? g2 ? · · · ? gn .

We can rearrange the order of the product on the left-hand side (again using
the commutativity) to obtain

                       an ? g 1 ? g 2 ? · · · ? g n = g 1 ? g 2 ? · · · ? g n .

Now multiplying by (g1 ? g2 ? · · · ? gn )−1 yields an = e, which proves the
first statement, and then the divisibility of n by d follows immediately from
Proposition 2.12.

2.6       How Hard Is the Discrete Logarithm
          Problem?
Given a group G and two elements g, h ∈ G, the discrete logarithm prob-
lem asks for an exponent x such that g x = h. What does it mean to talk
about the difficulty of this problem? How can we quantify “hard”? A natural
measure of hardness is the approximate number of operations necessary for
a person or a computer to solve the problem using the most efficient method
currently known. For example, we can solve the discrete logarithm problem
by computing the list of values g, g 2 , g 3 , . . . until we find one that is equal
to h. If g has order n, then this algorithm is guaranteed to find the solution

   6 We are being somewhat informal here, as is usually done when one is working with

groups. Here is a more formal proof. We are given that a?gi = a?gj . We use this assumption
and the group law axioms to compute
gi = e ? gi = (a−1 ? a) ? gi = a−1 ? (a ? gi ) = a−1 ? (a ? gj ) = (a−1 ? a) ? gj = e ? gj = gj .

in at most n multiplications, but if n is large, say n > 280 , then it is not a
practical algorithm with the computing power available today.
    Alternatively, we might try choosing random values of x, compute g x , and
check if g x = h. Using the fast exponentiation method described in Sect. 1.3.2,
it takes a small multiple of log2 (x) modular multiplications to compute g x .
If n and x are k-bit numbers, that is, they are each approximately 2k , then this
trial-and-error approach requires about k·2k multiplications. If we are working
in the group F∗p and if we treat modular addition as our basic operation,
then modular multiplication of two k-bit numbers takes (approximately) k 2
basic operations, so solving the DLP by trial-and-error takes a small multiple
of k 2 · 2k basic operations.
    We are being somewhat imprecise when we talk about “small multiples”
of 2k or k · 2k or k 2 · 2k . This is because when we want to know whether a
computation is feasible, numbers such as 3 · 2k and 10 · 2k and 100 · 2k mean
pretty much the same thing if k is large. The important property is that
the constant multiple is fixed as k increases. Order notation was invented
to make these ideas precise.7 It is prevalent throughout mathematics and
computer science and provides a handy way to get a grip on the magnitude
of quantities.
Definition (Order Notation). Let f (x) and g(x) be functions of x taking
values that are positive. We say that “f is big-O of g” and write
                                               
                               f (x) = O g(x)

if there are positive constants c and C such that

                          f (x) ≤ cg(x)        for all x ≥ C.

In particular, we write f (x) = O(1) if f (x) is bounded for all x ≥ C.
   The next proposition
                        gives a method that can sometimes be used to prove
that f (x) = O g(x) .
Proposition 2.14. If the limit
                                             f (x)
                                       lim
                                       x→∞ g(x)

                                           
exists (and is finite), then f (x) = O g(x) .
Proof. Let L be the limit. By definition of limit, for any ? > 0 there is a
constant C? such that
                                
                       f (x)   ?
                                
                       g(x) − L? < ?   for all x > C? .

    7 Although we use the same word for the order of a finite group and the order of growth

of a function, they are two different concepts. Make sure that you don’t confuse them.
2.6. How Hard Is the Discrete Logarithm Problem?                               79

In particular, taking ? = 1, we find that

                      f (x)
                            <L+1      for all x > C1 .
                      g(x)
                                   
Hence by definition, f (x) = O g(x) with c = L + 1 and C = C1 .
Example 2.15. We have 2x3 − 3x2 + 7 = O(x3 ), since

                               2x3 − 3x2 + 7
                            lim              = 2.
                           x→∞      x3
Similarly, we have x2 = O(2x ), since

                                       x2
                                    lim   = 0.
                                   x→∞ 2x

(If you don’t know the value of this limit, use L’Hôpital’s
                                                           rule twice.)
    However, note that we may have f (x) = O g(x) even if the limit of
f (x)/g(x) does not exist. For example, the limit

                                 (x + 2) cos2 (x)
                              lim
                             x→∞        x
does not exist, but

(x + 2) cos2 (x) = O(x),   since    (x + 2) cos2 (x) ≤ x + 2 ≤ 2x   for all x ≥ 2.

Example 2.16. Here are a few more examples of big-O notation. We leave the
verification as an exercise.
                 √        ? ?                              ?      ?
(a)         x2 + x = O x 2 .           (d) (ln k)375 = O k 0.001 .
                                                              
(b) 5 + 6x2 − 37x5 = O x5 .            (e)       k 2 2k = O e2k .
                                                              
(c)             k 300 = O 2k .         (f)    N 10 2N = O eN .
   Order notation allows us to define several fundamental concepts that are
used to get a rough handle on the computational complexity of mathematical
problems.
Definition. Suppose that we are trying to solve a certain type of mathemat-
ical problem, where the input to the problem is a number whose size may
vary. As an example, consider the Integer Factorization Problem, whose input
is a number N and whose output is a prime factor of N . We are interested
in knowing how long it takes to solve the problem in terms of the size of the
input. Typically, one measures the size of the input by its number of bits,
since that is how much storage it takes to record the input.
    Suppose that there is a constant A ≥ 0, independent of the size of the
input, such that if the input is O(k) bits long, then it takes O(k A ) steps to
solve the problem. Then the problem is said to be solvable in polynomial time.

If we can take A = 1, then the problem is solvable in linear time, and if we can
take A = 2, then the problem is solvable in quadratic time. Polynomial-time
algorithms are considered to be fast algorithms.
    On the other hand, if there is a constant c > 0 such that for   ? inputs
                                                                               of
size O(k) bits, there is an algorithm to solve the problem in O eck steps,
then the problem is solvable in exponential time. Exponential-time algorithms
are considered to be slow algorithms.
    Intermediate between polynomial-time algorithms and exponential-time
algorithms are subexponential-time algorithms. These? ?have the property that
for every ? > 0, they solve the problem in O? e?k steps. This notation
means that the constants c and C appearing in the definition of order no-
tation are allowed to depend on ?. For example, in Chap. 3 we will study
a subexponential-time
                    √ algorithm
                                  for the integer factorization problem whose
running time is O ec k log k steps.
     As a general rule of thumb in cryptography, problems solvable in polyno-
mial time are considered to be “easy” and problems that require exponential
time are viewed as “hard,” with subexponential time lying somewhere in be-
tween. However, bear in mind that these are asymptotic descriptions that are
applicable only as the variables become very large. Depending on the big-O
constants and on the size of the input, an exponential problem may be easier
than a polynomial problem. We illustrate these general concepts by consider-
ing the discrete logarithm problem in various groups.
Example 2.17. We start with our original discrete logarithm problem g x = h
in G = F∗p . If the prime p is chosen between 2k and 2k+1 , then g, h, and p
all require at most k bits, so the problem can be stated in O(k)-bits. (Notice
that O(k) is the same as O(log2 p).)
     If we try to solve the DLP using the trial-and-error method mentioned
earlier, then it takes O(p) steps to solve the problem. Since O(p) = O(2k ),
this algorithm takes exponential time. (If we consider instead multiplication
or addition to be the basic operation, then the algorithm takes O(k · 2k )
or O(k 2 · 2k ) steps, but these distinctions are irrelevant; the running time is
still exponential, since for example it is O(3k ).)
     However, there are faster ways to solve the DLP in F∗p , some of which
are very fast but work only for some primes, while others are less fast, but
work for all primes. For example, the Pohlig–Hellman algorithm described in
Sect. 2.9 shows that if p − 1 factors entirely into a product of small primes,
then the DLP is quite easy. For arbitrary primes, the algorithm described in
                                √
Sect. 2.7 solves the DLP in O( p log p) steps, which is much faster than O(p),
but still exponential. Even better is the index calculus √ algorithm described in
Sect. 3.8. The index calculus solves the DLP in O(e     c (log p)(log log p)
                                                                             ) steps, so
it is a subexponential algorithm.
Example 2.18. We next consider the DLP in the group G = Fp , where now
the group operation is addition. The DLP in this context asks for a solution x
to the congruence
2.7. A Collision Algorithm for the DLP                                        81

                              x·g ≡h     (mod p),
where g and h are given elements of Z/pZ. As described in Sect. 1.3, we
can solve this congruence using the extended Euclidean algorithm (Theo-
rem 1.11) to compute g −1 (mod p) and setting x ≡ g −1 · h (mod p). This
takes O(log p) steps (see Remark 1.15), so there is a linear-time algorithm to
solve the DLP in the additive group Fp . This is a very fast algorithm, so the
DLP in Fp with addition is not a good candidate for use as a one-way function
in cryptography.
   This is an important lesson to learn. The discrete logarithm problems in
different groups may display different levels of difficulty for their solution.
Thus the DLP in Fp with addition has a linear-time solution, while the best
known general algorithm to solve the DLP in F∗p with multiplication is subex-
ponential. In Chap. 6 we discuss another sort of group called an elliptic curve.
The discrete logarithm problem for elliptic curves is believed to be even more
difficult than the DLP for F∗p . In particular, if the elliptic curve group is cho-
sen carefully and√ has N elements, then the best known algorithm to solve the
DLP requires O( N ) steps. Thus it currently takes exponential time to solve
the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem (ECDLP).

2.7     A Collision Algorithm for the DLP
In this section we describe a discrete logarithm algorithm due to Shanks. It
is an example of a collision, or meet-in-the-middle, algorithm. Algorithms of
this type are discussed in more detail in Sects. 5.4 and 5.5. Shanks’s algorithm
works in any group, not just F∗p , and the proof that it works is no more difficult
for arbitrary groups, so we state and prove it in full generality.
    We begin by recalling the running time of the trivial brute-force algorithm
to solve the DLP.

Proposition 2.19 (Trivial Bound for DLP). Let G be a group and let g ∈ G
be an element of order N . (Recall that this means that g N = e and that
no smaller positive power of g is equal to the identity element e.) Then the
discrete logarithm problem
                                   gx = h                              (2.2)
can be solved in O(N ) steps and O(1) storage, where each step consists of
multiplication by g.

Proof. We simply compute g, g 2 , g 3 , . . ., where each successive value is ob-
tained by multiplying the previous value by g, so we only need to store two
values at a time. If a solution to g x = h exists, then h will appear before we
reach g N .

Remark 2.20. If we work in F∗p , then each computation of g x (mod p) re-
quires O((log p)k ) computer operations, where the constant k and the implied

big-O constant depend on the computer and the algorithm used for modular
multiplication. Then the total number of computer steps, or running time,
is O(N (log p)k ). In general, the factor contributed by the O((log p)k ) is neg-
ligible, so we will suppress it and simply refer to the running time as O(N ).
     The idea behind a collision algorithm is to make two lists and look for
an element that appears in both lists. For the discrete logarithm problem
described in Proposition
                    √    2.19, the running time of a collision algorithm is a
little more than O( N ) steps, which is a huge savings over O(N ) if N is
large.

Proposition 2.21 (Shanks’s Babystep–Giantstep Algorithm). Let G be a
group and let g ∈ G be an element of order N ≥ 2. The      √ following algo-
rithm solves
         √   the discrete logarithm problem  g x
                                                 = h in O(  N · log N ) steps
using O( N ) storage.
                   √                             √
  (1) Let n = 1 + ? N ?, so in particular, n > N .

 (2) Create two lists,

                   List 1:   e, g, g 2 , g 3 , . . . , g n ,
                             h, h · g −n , h · g −2n , h · g −3n , . . . , h · g −n .
                                                                                  2
                   List 2:

 (3) Find a match between the two lists, say g i = hg −jn .

 (4) Then x = i + jn is a solution to g x = h.

Proof. We begin with a couple of observations. First, when creating List 2,
we start by computing the quantity u = g −n and then compile List 2 by
computing h, h · u, h · u2 , . . . , h · un . Thus creating the two lists takes approx-
imately 2n multiplications.8 Second, assuming that a match exists, we can
find a match in a small multiple of n log(n) steps using standard sorting and
searching algorithms, so Step (3) takes O(n log √        n) steps. Hence the total run-
ning time for the algorithm is O(n      √    log n) = O(  N log N ). For this last step
we have used the fact that n ≈ N , so
                               √       √       1√
                        n log n ≈N log N =        N log N.
                                               2
                                                         √
Third, the lists in Step (2) have length n, so require O( N ) storage.
    In order to prove that the algorithm works, we must show that Lists 1
and 2 always have a match. To see this, let x be the unknown solution to
g x = h and write x as

                             x = nq + r         with 0 ≤ r < n.

   8 Multiplication by g is a “baby step” and multiplication by u = g −n is a “giant step,”

whence the name of the algorithm.
2.8. The Chinese Remainder Theorem                                                                      83

  k     gk     h · uk         k       gk       h · uk    k       gk      h · uk     k       gk     h · uk
  1     9704     347           9     15774     16564     17     10137    10230      25     4970    12260
  2     6181    13357         10     12918     11741     18     17264    3957       26     9183     6578
  3     5763    12423         11     16360     16367     19     4230     9195       27     10596    7705
  4     1128    13153         12     13259      7315     20     9880     13628      28     2427     1425
  5     8431    7928          13      4125      2549     21     9963     10126      29     6902     6594
  6    16568    1139          14     16911     10221     22     15501    5416       30     11969   12831
  7    14567    6259          15      4351     16289     23     6854     13640      31     6045     4754
  8     2987    12013         16      1612      4062     24     15680    5276       32     7583    14567

Table 2.4: Babystep–giantstep to solve 9704x ≡ 13896 (mod 17389)

We know that 1 ≤ x < N , so
                                    x−r   N              √
                          q=            <   < n since n > N .
                                     n    n
Hence we can rewrite the equation g x = h as

                 g r = h · g −qn               with 0 ≤ r < n and 0 ≤ q < n.

Thus g r is in List 1 and h · g −qn is in List 2, which shows that Lists 1 and 2
have a common element.

Example 2.22. We illustrate Shanks’s babystep–giantstep method by using it
to solve the discrete logarithm problem

      gx = h     in     F∗p        with      g = 9704,        h = 13896,      and        p = 17389.
                                                      √
The number 9704 has order 1242 in F∗17389 .9 Set n = ? 1242 ? + 1 = 36 and
u = g −n = 9704−36 = 2494. Table 2.4 lists the values of g k and h · uk for
k = 1, 2, . . . . From the table we find the collision

                      97047 = 14567 = 13896 · 249432                    in F17389 .

Using the fact that 2494 = 9704−36 , we compute

      13896 = 97047 · 2494−32 = 97047 · (970436 )32 = 97041159                            in F17389 .

Hence x = 1159 solves the problem 9704x = 13896 in F17389 .

2.8       The Chinese Remainder Theorem
The Chinese remainder theorem describes the solutions to a system of simul-
taneous linear congruences. The simplest situation is a system of two congru-
ences,
     9 Lagrange’s theorem (Proposition 2.13) says that the order of g divides 17388 = 22 ·

33 · 7 · 23. So we can determine the order of g by computing g n for the 48 distinct divisors
of 17388, although in practice there are more efficient methods.

                x≡a     (mod m)       and      x≡b      (mod n),           (2.3)
with gcd(m, n) = 1, in which case the Chinese remainder theorem says that
there is a unique solution modulo mn.
   The first recorded instance of a problem of this type appears in a Chinese
mathematical work from the late third or early fourth century. It actually
deals with the harder problem of three simultaneous congruences.
      We have a number of things, but we do not know exactly how
      many. If we count them by threes, we have two left over. If we
      count them by fives, we have three left over. If we count them by
      sevens, we have two left over. How many things are there? [Sun Tzu
      Suan Ching (Master Sun’s Mathematical Manual) circa 300 AD,
      volume 3, problem 26.]
    The Chinese remainder theorem and its generalizations have many appli-
cations in number theory and other areas of mathematics. In Sect. 2.9 we will
see how it can be used to solve certain instances of the discrete logarithm
problem. We begin with an example in which we solve two simultaneous con-
gruences. As you read this example, notice that it is not merely an abstract
statement that a solution exists. The method that we describe is really an
algorithm that allows us to find the solution.
Example 2.23. We look for an integer x that simultaneously solves both of
the congruences
                x ≡ 1 (mod 5)        and      x≡9      (mod 11).           (2.4)
The first congruence tells us that x ≡ 1 (mod 5), so the full set of solutions
to the first congruence is the collection of integers
                            x = 1 + 5y,      y ∈ Z.                        (2.5)
Substituting (2.5) into the second congruence in (2.4) gives
          1 + 5y ≡ 9 (mod 11),       and hence      5y ≡ 8 (mod 11).       (2.6)
We solve for y by multiplying both sides of (2.6) by the inverse of 5 mod-
ulo 11. This inverse exists because gcd(5, 11) = 1 and can be computed using
the procedure described in Proposition 1.13 (see also Remark 1.15). How-
ever, in this case the modulus is so small that we find it by trial and error;
thus 5 · 9 = 45 ≡ 1 (mod 11).
    In any case, multiplying both sides of (2.6) by 9 yields
                        y ≡ 9 · 8 ≡ 72 ≡ 6 (mod 11).
Finally, substituting this value of y into (2.5) gives the solution
                               x = 1 + 5 · 6 = 31
to the original problem.
2.8. The Chinese Remainder Theorem                                                85

    The procedure outlined in Example 2.23 can be used to derive a general
formula for the solution of two simultaneous congruences (see Exercise 2.20),
but it is much better to learn the method, rather than memorizing a for-
mula. This is especially true because the Chinese remainder theorem applies
to systems of arbitrarily many simultaneous congruences.

Theorem 2.24 (Chinese Remainder Theorem). Let m1 , m2 , . . . , mk be a col-
lection of pairwise relatively prime integers. This means that

                         gcd(mi , mj ) = 1   for all i ?= j.

Let a1 , a2 , . . . , ak be arbitrary integers. Then the system of simultaneous con-
gruences

   x ≡ a1 (mod m1 ),      x ≡ a2 (mod m2 ),       ...,    x ≡ ak (mod mk )    (2.7)

has a solution x = c. Further, if x = c and x = c? are both solutions, then

                          c ≡ c?   (mod m1 m2 · · · mk ).                     (2.8)

Proof. Suppose that for some value of i we have already managed to find a
solution x = ci to the first i simultaneous congruences,

   x ≡ a1 (mod m1 ),      x ≡ a2 (mod m2 ),       ...,    x ≡ ai (mod mi ).   (2.9)

For example, if i = 1, then c1 = a1 works. We are going to explain how to
find a solution to one more congruence,

   x ≡ a1 (mod m1 ),      x ≡ a2 (mod m2 ),       ...,    x ≡ ai+1 (mod mi+1 ).

The idea is to look for a solution having the form

                             x = ci + m1 m2 · · · mi y.

Notice that this value of x still satisfies all of the congruences (2.9), so we
need merely choose y so that it also satisfies x ≡ ai+1 (mod mi+1 ). In other
words, we need to find a value of y satisfying

                   ci + m1 m2 · · · mi y ≡ ai+1    (mod mi+1 ).

Proposition 1.13(b) and the fact that gcd(mi+1 , m1 m2 · · · mi ) = 1 imply that
we can always do this. This completes the proof of the existence of a solution.
We leave to you the task of proving that different solutions satisfy (2.8); see
Exercise 2.21.

   The proof of the Chinese remainder theorem (Theorem 2.24) is easily con-
verted into an algorithm for finding the solution to a system of simultaneous
congruences. An example suffices to illustrate the general method.

Example 2.25. We solve the three simultaneous congruences

             x ≡ 2 (mod 3),    x ≡ 3 (mod 7),    x ≡ 4 (mod 16).        (2.10)

The Chinese remainder theorem says that there is a unique solution mod-
ulo 336, since 336 = 3 · 7 · 16. We start with the solution x = 2 to the first
congruence x ≡ 2 (mod 3). We use it to form the general solution x = 2 + 3y
and substitute it into the second congruence to get

                              2 + 3y ≡ 3 (mod 7).

This simplifies to 3y ≡ 1 (mod 7), and we multiply both sides by 5 (since 5 is
the inverse of 3 modulo 7) to get y ≡ 5 (mod 7). This gives the value

                         x = 2 + 3y = 2 + 3 · 5 = 17

as a solution to the first two congruences in (2.10).
    The general solution to the first two congruences is thus x = 17 + 21z. We
substitute this into the third congruence to obtain

                          17 + 21z ≡ 4   (mod 16).

This simplifies to 5z ≡ 3 (mod 16). We multiply by 13, which is the inverse
of 5 modulo 16, to obtain

                       z ≡ 3 · 13 ≡ 39 ≡ 7   (mod 16).

Finally, we substitute this into x = 17 + 21z to get the solution

                            x = 17 + 21 · 7 = 164.

All other solutions are obtained by adding and subtracting multiples of 336
to this particular solution.

2.8.1    Solving Congruences with Composite Moduli
It is usually easiest to solve a congruence with a composite modulus by first
solving several congruences modulo primes (or prime powers) and then fitting
together the solutions using the Chinese remainder theorem. We illustrate
the principle in this section by discussing the problem of finding square roots
modulo m. It turns out that it is relatively easy to compute square roots
modulo a prime. Indeed, for primes congruent to 3 modulo 4, it is extremely
easy to find square roots, as shown by the following proposition.

Proposition 2.26. Let p be a prime satisfying p ≡ 3 (mod 4). Let a be an
integer such that the congruence x2 ≡ a (mod p) has a solution, i.e., such
that a has a square root modulo p. Then
2.8. The Chinese Remainder Theorem                                                    87

                                   b ≡ a(p+1)/4     (mod p)
is a solution, i.e., it satisfies b2 ≡ a (mod p). (N.B. This formula is valid
only if a has a square root modulo p. In Sect. 3.9 we will describe an efficient
method for checking which numbers have square roots modulo p.)
Proof. Let g be a primitive root modulo p. Then a is equal to some power
of g, and the fact that a has a square root modulo p means that a is an even
power of g, say a ≡ g 2k (mod p). (See Exercise 2.5.) Now we compute
                   p+1
           b2 ≡ a 2                 (mod p)         definition of b,
                         p+1
              ≡ (g )
                   2k     2         (mod p)         since a ≡ g 2k (mod p),
              ≡ g (p+1)k            (mod p)
              ≡g   2k+(p−1)k
                                    (mod p)
              ≡ a · (g   p−1 k
                               )    (mod p)         since a ≡ g 2k (mod p),
              ≡a                    (mod p)         since g p−1 ≡ 1 (mod p).
Hence b is indeed a square root of a modulo p.
Example 2.27. A square root of a = 2201 modulo the prime p = 4127 is
         b ≡ a(p+1)/4 = 22014128/4 ≡ 22011032 ≡ 3718              (mod 4127).
To see that a does indeed have a square root modulo 4127, we simply square b
and check that 37182 = 13823524 ≡ 2201 (mod 4127).
   Suppose now that we want to compute a square root modulo m, where m is
not necessarily a prime. An efficient method is to factor m, compute the square
root modulo each of the prime (or prime power) factors, and then combine
the solutions using the Chinese remainder theorem. An example makes the
idea clear.
Example 2.28. We look for a solution to the congruence
                                   x2 ≡ 197    (mod 437).                          (2.11)
The modulus factors as 437 = 19 · 23, so we first solve the two congruences
      y 2 ≡ 197 ≡ 7 (mod 19)               and        z 2 ≡ 197 ≡ 13   (mod 23).
Since both 19 and 23 are congruent to 3 modulo 4, we can find these square
roots using Proposition 2.26 (or by trial and error). In any case, we have
             y ≡ ±8 (mod 19)                  and     z ≡ ±6    (mod 23).
We can pick either 8 or −8 for y and either 6 or −6 for z. Choosing the two
positive solutions, we next use the Chinese remainder theorem to solve the
simultaneous congruences
              x ≡ 8 (mod 19)                  and     x ≡ 6 (mod 23).              (2.12)
We find that x ≡ 236 (mod 437), which gives the desired solution to (2.11).

Remark 2.29. The solution to Example 2.28 is not unique. In the first place,
we can always take the negative,

                           −236 ≡ 201     (mod 437),

to get a second square root of 197 modulo 437. If the modulus were prime,
there would be only these two square roots (Exercise 1.36(a)). However,
since 437 = 19 · 23 is composite, there are two others. In order to find them,
we replace one of 8 and 6 with its negative in (2.12). This leads to the val-
ues x = 144 and x = 293, so 197 has four square roots modulo 437.
Remark 2.30. It is clear from Example 2.28 (see also Exercises 2.23 and 2.24)
that it is relatively easy to compute square roots modulo m if one knows how
to factor m into a product of prime powers. However, suppose that m is so
large that we are not able to factor it. It is then a very difficult problem to
find square roots modulo m. Indeed, in a certain reasonably precise sense, it
is just as difficult to compute square roots modulo m as it is to factor m.
    In fact, if m is a large composite number whose factorization is unknown,
then it is a difficult problem to determine whether a given integer a has a
square root modulo m, even without requiring that the square root be com-
puted. The Goldwasser–Micali public key cryptosystem, which is described in
Sect. 3.10, is based on the difficulty of identifying which numbers have square
roots modulo a composite modulus m. The trapdoor information is knowledge
of the factors of m.

2.9     The Pohlig–Hellman Algorithm
In addition to being a theorem and an algorithm, we would suggest to the
reader that the Chinese remainder theorem is also a state of mind. If

                              m = m 1 · m2 · · · m t

is a product of pairwise relatively prime integers, then the Chinese remainder
theorem says that solving an equation modulo m is more or less equivalent
to solving the equation modulo mi for each i, since it tells us how to knit the
solutions together to get a solution modulo m.
    In the discrete logarithm problem (DLP), we need to solve the equation

                              g x ≡ h (mod p).

In this case, the modulus p is prime, which suggests that the Chinese remain-
der theorem is irrelevant. However, recall that the solution x is determined
only modulo p−1, so we can think of the solution as living in Z/(p−1)Z. This
hints that the factorization of p − 1 into primes may play a role in determining
the difficulty of the DLP in F∗p . More generally, if G is any group and g ∈ G
is an element of order N , then solutions to g x = h in G are determined only
2.9. The Pohlig–Hellman Algorithm                                             89

modulo N , so the prime factorization of N would appear to be relevant. This
idea is at the core of the Pohlig–Hellman algorithm.
   As in Sect. 2.7 we state and prove results in this section for an arbitrary
group G. But if you feel more comfortable working with integers modulo p,
you may simply replace G by F∗p .
Theorem 2.31 (Pohlig–Hellman Algorithm). Let G be a group, and suppose
that we have an algorithm to solve the discrete logarithm problem in G for
any element whose order is a power of a prime. To be concrete, if g ∈ G has
order q e , suppose that we can solve g x = h in O(Sqe ) steps. (For example,
Proposition 2.21 says that we can take Sqe to be q e/2 . See Remark 2.32 for a
further discussion.)
    Now let g ∈ G be an element of order N , and suppose that N factors into
a product of prime powers as

                               N = q1e1 · q2e2 · · · qtet .

Then the discrete logarithm problem g x = h can be solved in

                                
                               t
                          O          Sqei + log N          steps          (2.13)
                                          i
                               i=1

using the following procedure:
 (1) For each 1 ≤ i ≤ t, let
                                     ei                             ei
                        gi = g N/qi             and        hi = hN/qi .

     Notice that gi has prime power order qiei , so use the given algorithm to
     solve the discrete logarithm problem

                                              giy = hi .                  (2.14)

     Let y = yi be a solution to (2.14).
 (2) Use the Chinese remainder theorem (Theorem 2.24) to solve

       x ≡ y1 (mod q1e1 ), x ≡ y2 (mod q2e2 ), . . . , x ≡ yt (mod qtet ). (2.15)
                                                             
Proof. The running time is clear, since Step (1) takes O( Sqei ) steps, and
                                                                 i
Step (2), via the Chinese remainder theorem, takes O(log N ) steps. In practice,
the Chinese remainder theorem computation is usually negligible compared
to the discrete logarithm computations.
    It remains to show that Steps (1) and (2) give a solution to g x = h. Let x
be a solution to the system of congruences (2.15). Then for each i we can
write
                        x = yi + qiei zi  for some zi .                  (2.16)

This allows us to compute
        x ?N/qiei ? yi +qei zi ?N/qiei
       g         = g     i                        from (2.16),
                     N/qei ?yi N zi
                 = g i          ·g
                     N/qei ?yi
                 = g i                            since g N is the identity element,
                 = giyi                           by the definition of gi ,
                 = hi                             from (2.14)
                          e
                      N/qi i
                 =h                               by the definition of hi .

In terms of discrete logarithms to the base g, we can rewrite this as
                          N         N
                           ei · x ≡ ei · logg (h)         (mod N ),                (2.17)
                          qi       qi

where recall that the discrete logarithm to the base g is defined only modulo N ,
since g N is the identity element.
    Next we observe that the numbers
                                N        N                N
                                     ,        ,     ...
                                q1e1     q2e2             qtet

have no nontrivial common factor, i.e., their greatest common divisor is 1.
Repeated application of the extended Euclidean theorem (Theorem 1.11) (see
also Exercise 1.13) says that we can find integers c1 , c2 , . . . , ct such that
                        N          N                 N
                         e1 · c1 + e2 · c2 + · · · + et · ct = 1.                  (2.18)
                        q1        q2                qt

    Now multiply both sides of (2.17) by ci and sum over i = 1, 2, . . . , t. This
gives
               t
                  N                ?t
                                       N
                    ei · c i · x ≡         · ci · logg (h) (mod N ),
                  q
              i=1 i
                                      q ei
                                   i=1 i

and then (2.18) tells us that

                               x = logg (h)        (mod N ).

This completes the proof that x satisfies g x ≡ h.
Remark 2.32. The Pohlig–Hellman algorithm more or less reduces the discrete
logarithm problem for elements of arbitrary order to the discrete logarithm
problem for elements of prime power order. A further refinement, which we
discuss later in this section, essentially reduces the problem to elements of
prime order. More precisely, in the notation of Theorem 2.31, the running
time Sqe for elements of order q e can be reduced to O(eSq ). This is the content
of Proposition 2.33.
2.9. The Pohlig–Hellman Algorithm                                                        91

    The Pohlig–Hellman algorithm thus tells us that the discrete logarithm
problem in a group G is not secure if the order of the group is a product
of powers of small primes. More generally, g x = h is easy to solve if the
order of the element g is a product of powers of small primes. This applies, in
particular, to the discrete logarithm problem in Fp if p − 1 factors into powers
of small primes. Since p − 1 is always even, the best that we can do is take p =
2q + 1 with q prime and use an element g of order q. Then the running time
                                                                 √         √
of the collision algorithm described in Proposition 2.21 is O( q ) = O( p ).
However, the index calculus method described in Sect. 3.8 has running time
that is subexponential, so even if p = 2q + 1, the prime q must be chosen to
be quite large.
   We now explain the algorithm that reduces the discrete logarithm prob-
lem for elements of prime power order to the discrete logarithm problem for
                                                                           e−1
elements of prime order. The idea is simple: if g has order q e , then g q     has
order q. The trick is to repeat this process several times and then assemble
the information into the final answer.

Proposition 2.33. Let G be a group. Suppose that q is a prime, and suppose
that we know an algorithm that takes Sq steps to solve the discrete logarithm
problem g x = h in G whenever g has order q. Now let g ∈ G be an element of
order q e with e ≥ 1. Then we can solve the discrete logarithm problem

                                 gx = h    in O(eSq ) steps.                       (2.19)
                                                               √
Remark 2.34. Proposition 2.21 says that we can take Sq = O( q ), so Propo-
                                                            √
sition 2.33 says that we can solve the DLP (2.19) in O(e q ) steps. Notice
that if we apply Proposition 2.21 directly to the DLP (2.19), the running time
is O(q e/2 ), which is much slower if e ≥ 2.

Proof of Proposition 2.33. The key idea to proving the proposition is to write
the unknown exponent x in the form

          x = x0 + x1 q + x2 q 2 + · · · + xe−1 q e−1     with 0 ≤ xi < q,         (2.20)

and then determine successively x0 , x1 , x2 , . . . . We begin by observing that
                e−1
the element g q     is of order q. This allows us to compute
        e−1               e−1
   hq         = (g x )q                                   raising both sides of (2.19)
                                                 e−1             to the q e−1 power
                                2           e−1 q
              = g x0 +x1 q+x2 q +···+xe−1 q               from (2.20)
                       e−1
                              e ?x1 +x2 q+···+xe−1 qe−2
              = g x0 q     · gq
                  e−1 ?x0                                        e
              = gq                                        since g q = 1.

                 e−1
     Since g q         is an element of order q in G, the equation
                                                     qe−1 ?x0      e−1
                                                    g         = hq

is a discrete logarithm problem whose base is an element of order q. By as-
sumption, we can solve this problem in Sq steps. Once this is done, we know
an exponent x0 with the property that
                                                      e−1              e−1
                                             g x0 q          = hq              in G.

    We next do a similar computation, this time raising both sides of (2.19)
to the q e−2 power, which yields
                          e−2                e−2
                     hq          = (g x )q
                                                       2
                                                                       e−2
                                                                 e−1 q
                                 = g x0 +x1 q+x2 q +···+xe−1 q
                                          e−2          e−1
                                                              e ?x2 +x3 q+···+xe−1 qe−3
                                 = g x0 q     · g x1 q     · gq
                                            e−2              e−1
                                 = g x0 q         · g x1 q         .

Keep in mind that we have already determined the value of x0 and that the
            e−1
element g q     has order q in G. In order to find x1 , we must solve the discrete
logarithm problem          ? e−1 ?x1 ?            ?qe−2
                             gq       = h · g −x0

for the unknown quantity x1 . Again applying the given algorithm, we can
solve this in Sq steps. Hence in O(2Sq ) steps, we have determined values
for x0 and x1 satisfying
                                                            e−2              e−2
                                         g (x0 +x1 q)q             = hq            in G.

     Similarly, we find x2 by solving the discrete logarithm problem
                          e−1 ?x2 ?                  ?qe−3
                         gq        = h · g −x0 −x1 q       ,

and in general, after we have determined x0 , . . . , xi−1 , then the value of xi is
obtained by solving
                                 x i    ?                              ? e−i−1
                                                                    i−1 q
                                       = h · g −x0 −x1 q−···−xi−1 q
                          e−1
                     gq                                                                    in G.

Each of these is a discrete logarithm problem whose base is of order q, so each
of them can be solved in Sq steps. Hence after O(eSq ) steps, we obtain an
exponent x = x0 + x1 q + · · · + xe−1 q e−1 satisfying g x = h, thus solving the
original discrete logarithm problem.
2.9. The Pohlig–Hellman Algorithm                                             93

Example 2.35. We do an example to clarify the algorithm described in the
proof of Proposition 2.33. We solve

                           5448x = 6909    in F∗11251 .                   (2.21)

The prime p = 11251 has the property that p − 1 is divisible by 54 , and it
is easy to check that 5448 has order exactly 54 in F11251 . The first step is to
solve
                                      
                                    3 x0        3
                              54485      = 69095 ,

which reduces to 11089x0 = 11089. This one is easy; the answer is x0 = 1, so
our initial value of x is x = 1.
   The next step is to solve
                       
                     3 x1
                          = (6909 · 5448−x0 )5 = (6909 · 5448−1 )5 ,
                                              2                   2
               54485

which reduces to 11089x1 = 3742. Note that we only need to check values
of x1 between 1 and 4, although if q were large, it would pay to use a faster
algorithm such as Proposition 2.21 to solve this discrete logarithm problem.
In any case, the solution is x1 = 2, so the value of x is now x = 11 = 1 + 2 · 5.
    Continuing, we next solve
                    
                  3 x2   ?                     ?5 ?                ?5
            54485      = 6909 · 5448−x0 −x1 ·5 = 6909 · 5448−11 ,

which reduces to 11089x2 = 1. Thus x2 = 0, which means that the value of x
remains at x = 11.
   The final step is to solve
                   
                 3 x3
                      = 6909 · 5448−x0 −x1 ·5−x2 ·5 = 6909 · 5448−11 .
                                                   2
           54485

This reduces to solving 11089x3 = 6320, which has the solution x3 = 4. Hence
our final answer is
                         x = 511 = 1 + 2 · 5 + 4 · 53 .
As a check, we compute

                        5448511 = 6909    in F11251 .     ?

    The Pohlig–Hellman algorithm (Theorem 2.31) for solving the discrete log-
arithm problem uses the Chinese remainder theorem (Theorem 2.24) to knot
together the solutions for prime powers from Proposition 2.33. The following
example illustrates the full Pohlig–Hellman algorithm.
Example 2.36. Consider the discrete logarithm problem

                            23x = 9689    in F11251 .                     (2.22)

The base 23 is a primitive root in F11251 , i.e., it has order 11250. Since
11250 = 2 · 32 · 54 is a product of small primes, the Pohlig–Hellman algorithm
should work well. In the notation of Theorem 2.31, we set

      p = 11251,      g = 23,       h = 9689,       N = p − 1 = 2 · 32 · 54 .

   The first step is solve three subsidiary discrete logarithm problems, as
indicated in the following table.
                      e            e      ?          e ?x           e
     q e g (p−1)/q        h(p−1)/q   Solve g (p−1)/q      = h(p−1)/q for x
     2 1       11250       11250                        1
     3 2        5029       10724                        4
     5 4        5448        6909                       511

Notice that the first problem is trivial, while the third one is the problem that
we solved in Example 2.35. In any case, the individual problems in this step
of the algorithm may be solved as described in the proof of Proposition 2.33.
    The second step is to use the Chinese remainder theorem to solve the
simultaneous congruences

         x ≡ 1 (mod 2),         x ≡ 4 (mod 32 ),        x ≡ 511 (mod 54 ).

The smallest solution is x = 4261. We check our answer by computing

                        234261 = 9689     in F11251 .    ?

2.10      Rings, Quotient Rings, Polynomial
          Rings, and Finite Fields
Note to the Reader: In this section we describe some topics that are typ-
ically covered in an introductory course in abstract algebra. This material
is somewhat more mathematically sophisticated than the material that we
have discussed up to this point. For cryptographic applications, the most im-
portant topics in this section are the theory of finite fields of prime power
order, which in this book are used primarily in Sects. 6.7 and 6.8 in studying
elliptic curve cryptography, and the theory of quotients of polynomial rings,
which are used in Sect. 7.10 to describe the lattice-based NTRU public key
cryptosystem. The reader interested in proceeding more rapidly to additional
cryptographic topics may wish to omit this section at first reading and return
to it when arriving at the relevant sections of Chaps. 6 and 7.
    As we have seen, groups are fundamental objects that appear in many
areas of mathematics. A group G is a set and an operation that allows us to
“multiply” two elements to obtain a third element. We gave a brief overview
of the theory of groups in Sect. 2.5. Another fundamental object in mathe-
matics, called a ring, is a set having two operations. These two operations

are analogous to ordinary addition and multiplication, and they are linked by
the distributive law. In this section we begin with a brief discussion of the
general theory of rings, then we discuss how to form one ring from another
by taking quotients, and we conclude by examining in some detail the case of
polynomial rings.

2.10.1      An Overview of the Theory of Rings
You are already familiar with many rings, for example the ring of integers
with the operations of addition and multiplication. We abstract the funda-
mental properties of these operations and use them to formulate the following
fundamental definition.
Definition. A ring is a set R that has two operations, which we denote by +
and ?,10 having the following properties:
Properties of +
 [Identity Law ]               There is an additive identity 0 ∈ R such that
                                    0 + a = a + 0 = a for every a ∈ R.
  [Inverse Law ]               For every element a ∈ R there is an additive
                                inverse b ∈ R such that a + b = b + a = 0.
  [Associative Law ]           a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c for all a, b, c ∈ R.
  [Commutative Law ]                a + b = b + a for all a, b ∈ R,
  Briefly, if we look at R with only the operation +, then it is a commutative
  group with (additive) identity element 0.
Properties of ?
 [Identity Law ]            There is a multiplicative identity 1 ∈ R such that
                                    1 ? a = a ? 1 = a for every a ∈ R.
  [Associative Law ]           a ? (b ? c) = (a ? b) ? c for all a, b, c ∈ R.
  [Commutative Law ]                a ? b = b ? a for all a, b ∈ R,
  Thus if we look at R with only the operation ?, then it is almost a commu-
  tative group with (multiplicative) identity element 1, except that elements
  are not required to have multiplicative inverses.
Property Linking + and ?
 [Distributive Law ] a ? (b + c) = a ? b + a ? c         for all a, b, c ∈ R.
Remark 2.37. More generally, people sometimes work with rings that do not
contain a multiplicative identity, and also with rings for which ? is not com-
mutative, i.e., a ? b might not be equal to b ? a. So to be formal, our rings
are really commutative rings with (multiplicative) identity. However, all of the
rings that we use will be of this type, so we will just call them rings.
  10 Addition in a ring is virtually always denoted by +, but there are many different

notations for multiplication. In this book use a ? b, aḃ, or simply ab, depending on the
context.

    Every element of a ring has an additive inverse, but there may be many
nonzero elements that do not have multiplicative inverses. For example, in the
ring of integers Z, the only elements that have multiplicative inverses are 1
and −1.
Definition. A (commutative) ring in which every nonzero element has a
multiplicative inverse is called a field.
Example 2.38. Here are a few examples of rings and fields with which you are
probably already familiar.
 (a) R = Q, ? = multiplication, and addition is as usual. The multiplicative
     identity element is 1. Every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse,
     so Q is a field.
 (b) R = Z, ? = multiplication, and addition is as usual. The multiplicative
     identity element is 1. The only elements that have multiplicative inverses
     are 1 and −1, so Z is a ring, but it is not a field.
 (c) R = Z/nZ, n is any positive integer, ? = multiplication, and addition
     is as usual. The multiplicative identity element is 1. Here R is always a
     ring, and it is a field if and only if n is prime.
 (d) R = Fp , p is any prime integer, ? = multiplication, and addition is
     as usual. The multiplicative identity element is 1. By Proposition 1.21,
     every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse, so Fp is a field.
 (e) The collection of all polynomials with coefficients taken from Z forms a
     ring under the usual operations of polynomial addition and multiplica-
     tion. This ring is denoted by Z[x]. Thus we write

       Z[x] = {a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + · · · + an xn : n ≥ 0 and a0 , a1 , . . . , an ∈ Z}.

      For example, 1 + x2 and 3 − 7x4 + 23x9 are polynomials in the ring Z[x],
      as are 17 and −203.
  (f) More generally, if R is any ring, we can form a ring of polynomials whose
      coefficients are taken from the ring R. For example, the ring R might
      be Z/qZ or a finite field Fp . We discuss these general polynomial rings,
      denoted by R[x], in Sect. 7.9.

2.10.2      Divisibility and Quotient Rings
The concept of divisibility, originally introduced for the integers Z in Sect. 1.2,
can be generalized to any ring.
Definition. Let a and b be elements of a ring R with b ?= 0. We say that b
divides a, or that a is divisible by b, if there is an element c ∈ R such that

                                      a = b ? c.

As before, we write b | a to indicate that b divides a. If b does not divide a,
then we write b ? a.
Remark 2.39. The basic properties of divisibility given in Proposition 1.4
apply to rings in general. The proof for Z works for any ring. Similarly, it is
true in every ring that b | 0 for any b ?= 0. (See Exercise 2.30.) However, note
that not every ring is as nice as Z. For example, there are rings with nonzero
elements a and b whose product a ? b is 0. An example of such a ring is Z/6Z,
in which 2 and 3 are nonzero, but 2 · 3 = 6 = 0.
    Recall that an integer is called a prime if it has no nontrivial factors. What
is a trivial factor? We can “factor” any integer by writing it as a = 1 · a and
as a = (−1)(−a), so these are trivial factorizations. What makes them trivial
is the fact that 1 and −1 have multiplicative inverses. In general, if R is a ring
and if u ∈ R is an element that has a multiplicative inverse u−1 ∈ R, then we
can factor any element a ∈ R by writing it as a = u−1 · (ua). Elements that
have multiplicative inverses and elements that have only trivial factorizations
are special elements of a ring, so we give them special names.
Definition. Let R be a ring. An element u ∈ R is called a unit if it has a
multiplicative inverse, i.e., if there is an element v ∈ R such that u ? v = 1.
   An element a of a ring R is said to be irreducible if a is not itself a unit
and if in every factorization of a as a = b ? c, either b is a unit or c is a unit.
Remark 2.40. The integers have the property that every integer factors
uniquely into a product of irreducible integers, up to rearranging the order
of the factors and throwing in some extra factors of 1 and −1. (Note that a
positive irreducible integer is simply another name for a prime.) Not every
ring has this important unique factorization property, but in the next section
we prove that the ring of polynomials with coefficients in a field is a unique
factorization ring.
    We have seen that congruences are a very important and powerful mathe-
matical tool for working with the integers. Using the definition of divisibility,
we can extend the notion of congruence to arbitrary rings.
Definition. Let R be a ring and choose a nonzero element m ∈ R. We say
that two elements a and b of R are congruent modulo m if their difference
a − b is divisible by m. We write
                                a≡b     (mod m)
to indicate that a and b are congruent modulo m.
    Congruences for arbitrary rings satisfy the same equation-like properties
as they do in the original integer setting.
Proposition 2.41. Let R be a ring and let m ∈ R with m ?= 0. If
            a1 ≡ a2 (mod m)                and             b1 ≡ b2 (mod m),
then
       a1 ± b1 ≡ a2 ± b2 (mod m)           and        a1 ? b1 ≡ a2 ? b2 (mod m).

Proof. We leave the proof as an exercise; see Exercise 2.32.

Remark 2.42. Our definition of congruence captures all of the properties that
we need in this book. However, we must observe that there exists a more
general notion of congruence modulo ideals. For our purposes, it is enough
to work with congruences modulo principal ideals, which are ideals that are
generated by a single element.
    An important consequence of Proposition 2.41 is a method for creating new
rings from old rings, just as we created Z/qZ from Z by looking at congruences
modulo q.

Definition. Let R be a ring and let m ∈ R with m ?= 0. For any a ∈ R,
we write a for the set of all a? ∈ R such that a? ≡ a (mod m). The set a is
called the congruence class of a, and we denote the collection of all congruence
classes by R/(m) or R/mR. Thus

                           R/(m) = R/mR = {a : a ∈ R}.

We add and multiply congruence classes using the obvious rules

                       a+b=a+b             and      a ? b = a ? b.                (2.23)

We call R/(m) the quotient ring of R by m. This name is justified by the next
proposition.

Proposition 2.43. The formulas (2.23) give well-defined addition and multi-
plication rules on the set of congruence classes R/(m), and they make R/(m)
into a ring.

Proof. We leave the proof as an exercise; see Exercise 2.43.

2.10.3       Polynomial Rings and the Euclidean Algorithm
In Example 2.38(f) we observed that if R is any ring, then we can create a
polynomial ring with coefficients taken from R. This ring is denoted by

     R[x] = {a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + · · · + an xn : n ≥ 0 and a0 , a1 , . . . , an ∈ R}.

The degree of a nonzero polynomial is the exponent of the highest power of x
that appears. Thus if

                       a(x) = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + · · · + an xn

with an ?= 0, then a(x) has degree n. We denote the degree of a by deg(a),
and we call an the leading coefficient of a(x). A nonzero polynomial whose
leading coefficient is equal to 1 is called a monic polynomial. For example,
3 + x2 is a monic polynomial, but 1 + 3x2 is not.

     Especially important are those polynomial rings in which the ring R is a
field; for example, R could be Q or R or C or a finite field Fp . (For cryptogra-
phy, by far the most important case is the last named one.) One reason why
it is so useful to take R to be a field F is because virtually all of the properties
of Z that we proved in Sect. 1.2 are also true for the polynomial ring F[x].
This section is devoted to a discussion of the properties of F[x].
     Back in high school you undoubtedly learned how to divide one polynomial
by another. We recall the process by doing an example. Here is how one divides
x5 + 2x4 + 7 by x3 − 5:

                                             x2 + 2x         R 5x2 + 10x + 7
        x − 5 ) x + 2x
          3         5      4
                                                   +7
                x5                   − 5x2
                    2x4              + 5x2       +7
                    2x4                    − 10x
                                        5x2 + 10x + 7

In other words, x5 + 2x4 + 7 divided by x3 − 5 gives a quotient of x2 + 2x with
a remainder of 5x2 + 10x + 7. Another way to say this is to write11

              x5 + 2x4 + 7 = (x2 + 2x) · (x3 − 5) + (5x2 + 10x + 7).

Notice that the degree of the remainder 5x2 + 10x + 7 is strictly smaller than
the degree of the divisor x3 − 5.
    We can do the same thing for any polynomial ring F[x] as long as F is a
field. Rings of this sort that have a “division with remainder” algorithm are
called Euclidean rings.
Proposition 2.44 (The ring F[x] is Euclidean). Let F be a field and let a
and b be polynomials in F[x] with b ?= 0. Then it is possible to write

                a=b·k+r              with k and r polynomials, and
                                     either r = 0 or deg r < deg b.
We say that a divided by b has quotient k and remainder r.

Proof. We start with any values for k and r that satisfy

                                     a = b · k + r.

(For example, we could start with k = 0 and r = a.) If deg r < deg b, then
we’re done. Otherwise we write

        b = b0 + b1 x + · · · + bd xd      and       r = r0 + r1 x + · · · + re xe
   11 For notational convenience, we drop the ? for multiplication and just write a · b, or

even simply ab.

with bd ?= 0 and re ?= 0 and e ≥ d. We rewrite the equation a = b · k + r as

                           re e−d               re e−d
            a=b· k+           x       + r−         x   ·b     = b · k? + r ? .
                           bd                   bd

Notice that we have canceled the top degree term of r, so deg r ? < deg r.
If deg r ? < deg b, then we’re done. If not, we repeat the process. We can do
this as long as the r term satisfies deg r ≥ deg b, and every time we apply this
process, the degree of our r term gets smaller. Hence eventually we arrive at
an r term whose degree is strictly smaller than the degree of b.

   We can now define common divisors and greatest common divisors in F[x].

Definition. A common divisor of two elements a, b ∈ F[x] is an element d ∈
F[x] that divides both a and b. We say that d is a greatest common divisor
of a and b if every common divisor of a and b also divides d.
    We will see below that every pair of elements in F[x] has a greatest common
divisor,12 which is unique up to multiplying it by a nonzero element of F. We
write gcd(a, b) for the unique monic polynomial that is a greatest common
divisor of a and b.

Example 2.45. The greatest common divisor of x2 − 1 and x3 + 1 is x + 1.
Notice that

      x2 − 1 = (x + 1)(x − 1)          and      x3 + 1 = (x + 1)(x2 − x + 1),

so x + 1 is a common divisor. We leave it to you to check that it is the greatest
common divisor.
    It is not clear, a priori, that every pair of elements has a greatest common
divisor. And indeed, there are many rings in which greatest common divisors
do not exist, for example in the ring Z[x]. But greatest common divisors do
exist in the polynomial ring F[x] when F is a field.

Proposition 2.46 (The extended Euclidean algorithm for F[x]). Let F be
a field and let a and b be polynomials in F[x] with b ?= 0. Then the greatest
common divisor d of a and b exists, and there are polynomials u and v in F[x]
such that
                             a · u + b · v = d.

Proof. Just as in the proof of Theorem 1.7, the polynomial gcd(a, b) can
be computed by repeated application of Proposition 2.44, as described in
Fig. 2.3. Similarly, the polynomials u and v can be computed by substituting
one equation into another in Fig. 2.3, exactly as described in the proof of
Theorem 1.11.

   12 According to our definition, even if both a and b are 0, they have a greatest common

divisor, namely 0. However, some authors prefer to leave gcd(0, 0) undefined.

                  a = b · k1 + r2        with 0 ≤ deg r2 < deg b,
                  b = r2 · k2 + r3       with 0 ≤ deg r3 < deg r2,
                 r2 = r3 · k3 + r4       with 0 ≤ deg r4 < deg r3,
                 r3 = r4 · k4 + r5       with 0 ≤ deg r5 < deg r4,
                  ..           ..                      ..
                   .            .                       .
              rt−2 = rt−1 · kt−2 + rt    with 0 ≤ deg rt < deg rt−1,
              rt−1 = rt · kt
                             Then d = rt = gcd(a, b).

Figure 2.3: The Euclidean algorithm for polynomials

Example 2.47. We use the Euclidean algorithm in the ring F13 [x] to compute
gcd(x5 − 1, x3 + 2x − 3):
         x5 − 1 = (x3 + 2x − 3) · (x2 + 11) + (3x2 + 4x + 6)
    x3 + 2x − 3 = (3x2 + 4x + 6) · (9x + 1) + (9x + 4)       ← gcd = 9x + 4
   3x + 4x + 6 = (9x + 4) · (9x + 8) + 0
     2

Thus 9x + 4 is a greatest common divisor of x5 − 1 and x3 + 2x − 3 in F13 [x].
In order to get a monic polynomial, we multiply by 3 ≡ 9−1 (mod 13). This
gives
                gcd(x5 − 1, x3 + 2x − 3) = x − 1    in F13 [x].
     We recall from Sect. 2.10.2 that an element u of a ring is a unit if it has
a multiplicative inverse u−1 , and that an element a of a ring is irreducible
if it is not a unit and if the only way to factor a is as a = bc with either b
or c a unit. It is not hard to see that the units in a polynomial ring F[x] are
precisely the nonzero constant polynomials, i.e., the nonzero elements of F;
see Exercise 2.34. The question of irreducibility is subtler, as shown by the
following examples.
Example 2.48. The polynomial x5 − 4x3 + 3x2 − x + 2 is irreducible as a
polynomial in Z[x], but if we view it as an element of F3 [x], then it factors as
                                                          
       x5 − 4x3 + 3x2 − x + 2 ≡ (x + 1) x4 + 2x3 + 2          (mod 3).
It also factors if we view it as a polynomial in F5 [x], but this time as a product
of a quadratic polynomial and a cubic polynomial,
                                                                 
       x5 − 4x3 + 3x2 − x + 2 ≡ x2 + 4x + 2 x3 + x2 + 1              (mod 5).
On the other hand, if we work in F13 [x], then x5 − 4x3 + 3x2 − x + 2 is
irreducible.
    Every integer has an essentially unique factorization as a product of
primes. The same is true of polynomials with coefficients in a field. And just
as for the integers, the key to proving unique factorization is the extended
Euclidean algorithm.

Proposition 2.49. Let F be a field. Then every nonzero polynomial in F[x]
can be uniquely factored as a product of monic irreducible polynomials, in the
following sense. If a ∈ F[x] is factored as
               a = αp1 · p2 · · · pm         and       a = βq 1 · q 2 · · · q n ,
where α, β ∈ F are constants and p1 , . . . , pm , q 1 , . . . , q n are monic irreducible
polynomials, then after rearranging the order of q 1 , . . . , q n , we have
          α = β,       m = n,          and         pi = q i   for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m.
Proof. The existence of a factorization into irreducibles follows easily from the
fact that if a = b·c, then deg a = deg b+deg c. (See Exercise 2.34.) The proof
that the factorization is unique is exactly the same as the proof for integers, cf.
Theorem 1.20. The key step in the proof is the statement that if p ∈ F[x] is
irreducible and divides the product a · b, then either p | a or p | b (or both).
This statement is the polynomial analogue of Proposition 1.19 and is proved
in the same way, using the polynomial version of the extended Euclidean
algorithm (Proposition 2.46).

2.10.4      Quotients of Polynomial Rings and Finite Fields
            of Prime Power Order
In Sect. 2.10.3 we studied polynomial rings and in Sect. 2.10.2 we studied
quotient rings. In this section we combine these two constructions and consider
quotients of polynomial rings.
    Recall that in working with the integers modulo m, it is often convenient
to represent each congruence class modulo m by an integer between 0 and m−
1. The division-with-remainder algorithm (Proposition 2.44) allows us to do
something similar for the quotient of a polynomial ring.
Proposition 2.50. Let F be field and let m ∈ F[x] be a nonzero polynomial.
Then every nonzero congruence class a ∈ F[x]/(m) has a unique representa-
tive r satisfying
                   deg r < deg m         and          a ≡ r (mod m).
Proof. We use Proposition 2.44 to find polynomials k and r such that
                                    a=m·k+r
with either r = 0 or deg r < deg m. If r = 0, then a ≡ 0 (mod m), so a = 0.
Otherwise, reducing modulo m gives a ≡ r (mod m) with deg r < deg m.
This shows that r exists. To show that it is unique, suppose that r ? has the
same properties. Then
                          r − r ? ≡ a − a ≡ 0 (mod m),
so m divides r − r ? . But r − r ? has degree strictly smaller than the degree
of m, so we must have r − r ? = 0.

Example 2.51. Consider the ring F[x]/(x2 + 1). Proposition 2.50 says that
every element of this quotient ring is uniquely represented by a polynomial of
the form
                           α + βx with α, β ∈ F.
Addition is performed in the obvious way,

              α1 + β1 x + α2 + β2 x = (α1 + α2 ) + (β1 + β2 )x.

Multiplication is similar, except that we have to divide the final result by
x2 + 1 and take the remainder. Thus

          α1 + β1 x · α2 + β2 x = α1 α2 + (α1 β2 + α2 β1 )x + β1 β2 x2
                                 = (α1 α2 − β1 β2 ) + (α1 β2 + α2 β1 )x.

Notice that the effect of dividing by x2 +1 is the same as replacing x2 with −1.
The intuition is that in the quotient ring F[x]/(x2 + 1), we have made the
quantity x2 + 1 equal to 0. Notice that if we take F = R in this example,
then R[x]/(x2 + 1) is simply the field of complex numbers C.
   We can use Proposition 2.50 to count the number of elements in a poly-
nomial quotient ring when F is a finite field.

Corollary 2.52. Let Fp be a finite field and let m ∈ Fp [x] be a nonzero poly-
nomial of degree d ≥ 1. Then the quotient ring Fp [x]/(m) contains exactly pd
elements.

Proof. From Proposition 2.50 we know that every element of Fp [x]/(m) is
represented by a unique polynomial of the form

       a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + · · · + ad−1 xd−1   with a0 , a1 , . . . , ad−1 ∈ Fp .

There are p choices for a0 , and p choices for a1 , and so on, leading to a total
of pd choices for a0 , a1 , . . . , ad .

   We next give an important characterization of the units in a polynomial
quotient ring. This will allow us to construct new finite fields.

Proposition 2.53. Let F be a field and let a, m ∈ F[x] be polynomials
with m ?= 0. Then a is a unit in the quotient ring F[x]/(m) if and only if

                                 gcd(a, m) = 1.

Proof. Suppose first that a is a unit in F[x]/(m). By definition, this means
that we can find some b ∈ F[x](m) satisfying a·b = 1. In terms of congruences,
this means that a · b ≡ 1 (mod m), so there is some c ∈ F[x] such that

                               a · b − 1 = c · m.

It follows that any common divisor of a and m must also divide 1. There-
fore gcd(a, m) = 1.
    Next suppose that gcd(a, m) = 1. Then Proposition 2.46 tells us that
there are polynomials u, v ∈ F[x] such that

                               a · u + m · v = 1.

Reducing modulo m yields

                             a·u≡1        (mod m),

so u is an inverse for a in F[x]/(m).
   An important instance of Proposition 2.53 is the case that the modulus is
an irreducible polynomial.
Corollary 2.54. Let F be a field and let m ∈ F[x] be an irreducible polyno-
mial. Then the quotient ring F[x]/(m) is a field, i.e., every nonzero element
of F[x]/(m) has a multiplicative inverse.
Proof. Replacing m by a constant multiple, we may assume that m is a monic
polynomial. Let a ∈ F[x]/(m). There are two cases to consider. First, sup-
pose that gcd(a, m) = 1. Then Proposition 2.53 tells us that a is a unit, so
we are done. Second, suppose that d = gcd(a, m) ?= 1. Then in particular,
we know that d | m. But m is monic and irreducible, and d ?= 1, so we must
have d = m. We also know that d | a, so m | a. Hence a = 0 in F[x]/(m).
This completes the proof that every nonzero element of F[x]/(m) has a mul-
tiplicative inverse.
Example 2.55. The polynomial x2 + 1 is irreducible in R[x]. The quotient
                                        √ the field of complex numbers C, where
ring R[x]/(x2 +1) is a field. Indeed, it is
the “variable” x plays the role of i = −1, since in the ring R[x]/(x2 + 1) we
have x2 = −1.
    By way of contrast, the polynomial x2 − 1 is clearly not irreducible in R[x].
The quotient ring R[x]/(x2 − 1) is not a field. In fact,

                  (x − 1) · (x + 1) = 0     in R[x]/(x2 − 1).

Thus ring R[x]/(x2 −1) has nonzero elements whose product is 0, which means
that they certainly cannot be units. (Nonzero elements of a ring whose product
is 0 are called zero divisors.)
   If we apply Corollary 2.54 to a polynomial ring with coefficients in a finite
field Fp , we can create new finite fields with a prime power number of elements.
Corollary 2.56. Let Fp be a finite field and let m ∈ Fp [x] be an irreducible
polynomial of degree d ≥ 1. Then Fp [x]/(m) is a field with pd elements.
Proof. We combine Corollary 2.54, which says that Fp [x]/(m) is a field, with
Corollary 2.52, which says that Fp [x]/(m) has pd elements.

Example 2.57. It is not hard to check that the polynomial x3 + x + 1 is
irreducible in F2 [x] (see Exercise 2.37), so F2 [x]/(x3 + x + 1) is a field with
eight elements. Proposition 2.50 tells us that the following are representatives
for the eight elements in this field:

                  0, 1, x, x2 , 1 + x, 1 + x2 , x + x2 , 1 + x + x2 .

Addition is easy as long as you remember to treat the coefficients modulo 2,
so for example,
                        (1 + x) + (x + x2 ) = 1 + x2 .
Multiplication is also easy, just multiply the polynomials, divide by x3 + x + 1,
and take the remainder. For example,

                    (1 + x) · (x + x2 ) = x + 2x2 + x3 = 1,

so 1 + x and x + x2 are multiplicative inverses. The complete multiplication
table for F2 [x]/(x3 + x + 1) is described in Exercise 2.38.
Example 2.58. When is the polynomial x2 + 1 irreducible in the ring Fp [x]?
If it is reducible, then it factors as

               x2 + 1 = (x + α)(x + β)           for some α, β ∈ Fp .

Comparing coefficients, we find that α + β = 0 and αβ = 1; hence

                          α2 = α · (−β) = −αβ = −1.

In other words, the field Fp has an element whose square is −1. Conversely,
if α ∈ Fp satisfies α2 = −1, then x2 + 1 = (x − α)(x + α) factors in Fp [x].
This proves that

  x2 + 1 is irreducible in Fp [x]     if and only if    −1 is not a square in Fp .

Quadratic reciprocity, which we study later in Sect. 3.9, then tells us that

       x2 + 1 is irreducible in Fp [x]     if and only if      p ≡ 3 (mod 4).

    Let p be a prime satisfying p ≡ 3 (mod 4). Then the quotient field
Fp [x]/(x2 + 1) is a field containing p2 elements. It contains an element x that
is a square root of −1. So we can view Fp [x]/(x2 + 1) as a sort of analogue of
the complex numbers and can write its elements in the form

                             a + bi    with a, b ∈ Fp ,

where i is simply a symbol with the property that i2 = −1. Addition, sub-
traction, multiplication, and division are performed just as in the complex
numbers, with the understanding that instead of real numbers as coefficients,
we are using integers modulo p. So for example, division is done by the usual
“rationalizing the denominator” trick,

              a + bi   a + bi c − di   (ac + bd) + (bc − ad)i
                     =       ·       =                        .
              c + di   c + di c − di          c 2 + d2
Note that there is never a problem of 0 in the denominator, since the assump-
tion that p ≡ 3 (mod 4) ensures that c2 + d2 ?= 0 (as long as at least one of c
and d is nonzero). These fields of order p2 will be used in Sect. 6.9.3.
    In order to construct a field with pd elements, we need to find an irreducible
polynomial of degree d in Fp [x]. It is proven in more advanced texts that there
is always such a polynomial, and indeed generally many such polynomials.
Further, in a certain abstract sense it doesn’t matter which irreducible poly-
nomial we choose: we always get the same field. However, in a practical sense
it does make a difference, because practical computations in Fp [x]/(m) are
more efficient if m does not have very many nonzero coefficients.
    We summarize some of the principal properties of finite fields in the fol-
lowing theorem.

Theorem 2.59. Let Fp be a finite field.
(a) For every d ≥ 1 there exists an irreducible polynomial m ∈ Fp [x] of
    degree d.
(b) For every d ≥ 1 there exists a finite field with pd elements.
(c) If F and F? are finite fields with the same number of elements, then there
    is a way to match the elements of F with the elements of F? so that
    the addition and multiplication tables of F and F? are the same. (The
    mathematical terminology is that F and F? are isomorphic.)

Proof. We know from Proposition 2.56 that (a) implies (b). For proofs of (a)
and (c), see any basic algebra or number theory text, for example [40,
§§13.5, 14.3], [53, Section 7.1], or [59, Chapter 7].

Definition. We write Fpd for a field with pd elements. Theorem 2.59 assures
us that there is at least one such field and that any two fields with pd elements
are essentially the same, up to relabeling their elements. These fields are
also sometimes called Galois fields and denoted by GF(pd ) in honor of the
nineteenth-century French mathematician Évariste Galois, who studied them.

Remark 2.60. It is not difficult to prove that if F is a finite field, then F has pd
elements for some prime p and some d ≥ 1. (The proof uses linear algebra;
see Exercise 2.41.) So Theorem 2.59 describes all finite fields.
Remark 2.61. For cryptographic purposes, it is frequently advantageous to
work in a field F2d , rather than in a field Fp with p large. This is due to the
fact that the binary nature of computers often enables them to work more
efficiently with F2d . A second reason is that sometimes it is useful to have
a finite field that contains smaller fields. In the case of Fpd , one can show
that every field Fpe with e | d is a subfield of Fpd . Of course, if one is going to
use F2d for Diffie–Hellman key exchange or Elgamal encryption, it is necessary
to choose 2d to be of approximately the same size as one typically chooses p.

   Let F be a finite field having q elements. Every nonzero element of F has an
inverse, so the group of units F∗ is a group of order q − 1. Lagrange’s theorem
(Theorem 2.13) tells us that every element of F∗ has order dividing q − 1, so

                             aq−1 = 1 for all a ∈ F.

This is a generalization of Fermat’s little theorem (Theorem 1.24) to arbitrary
finite fields. The primitive root theorem (Theorem 1.30) is also true for all
finite fields.

Theorem 2.62. Let F be a finite field having q elements. Then F has a
primitive root, i.e., there is an element g ∈ F such that

                           F∗ = {1, g, g 2 , g 3 , . . . , g q−2 }.

Proof. You can find a proof of this theorem in any basic number theory text-
book; see for example [59, §4.1] or [137, Chapter 28].

Exercises
Section 2.1. Diffie–Hellman and RSA
2.1. Write a one page essay giving arguments, both pro and con, for the following
assertion:
      If the government is able to convince a court that there is a valid reason
      for their request, then they should have access to an individual’s private
      keys (even without the individual’s knowledge), in the same way that
      the government is allowed to conduct court authorized secret wiretaps
      in cases of suspected criminal activity or threats to national security.
Based on your arguments, would you support or oppose the government being given
this power? How about without court oversight? The idea that all private keys should
be stored at a secure central location and be accessible to government agencies (with
or without suitably stringent legal conditions) is called key escrow.

2.2. Research and write a one to two page essay on the classification of cryptographic
algorithms as munitions under ITAR (International Traffic in Arms Regulations).
How does that act define “export”? What are the potential fines and jail terms for
those convicted of violating the Arms Export Control Act? Would teaching non-
classified cryptographic algorithms to a college class that includes non-US citizens
be considered a form of export? How has US government policy changed from the
early 1990s to the present?

Section 2.2. The Discrete Logarithm Problem
2.3. Let g be a primitive root for Fp .
 (a) Suppose that x = a and x = b are both integer solutions to the congruence
     g x ≡ h (mod p). Prove that a ≡ b (mod p − 1). Explain why this implies that
     the map (2.1) on page 65 is well-defined.

(b) Prove that    logg (h1 h2 ) = logg (h1 ) + logg (h2 )    for all h1 , h2 ∈ F∗p .
                                                             ∗
(c) Prove that           n
                  logg (h ) = n logg (h)        for all h ∈ Fp and n ∈ Z.

2.4. Compute the following discrete logarithms.
 (a) log2 (13) for the prime 23, i.e., p = 23, g = 2, and you must solve the congruence
     2x ≡ 13 (mod 23).
(b) log10 (22) for the prime p = 47.
 (c) log627 (608) for the prime p = 941. (Hint. Look in the second column of Table 2.1
     on page 66.)

2.5. Let p be an odd prime and let g be a primitive root modulo p. Prove that a
has a square root modulo p if and only if its discrete logarithm logg (a) modulo p − 1
is even.

Section 2.3. Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange
2.6. Alice and Bob agree to use the prime p = 1373 and the base g = 2 for a
Diffie–Hellman key exchange. Alice sends Bob the value A = 974. Bob asks your
assistance, so you tell him to use the secret exponent b = 871. What value B should
Bob send to Alice, and what is their secret shared value? Can you figure out Alice’s
secret exponent?

2.7. Let p be a prime and let g be an integer. The Decision Diffie–Hellman Problem
is as follows. Suppose that you are given three numbers A, B, and C, and suppose
that A and B are equal to

                   A ≡ g a (mod p)         and       B ≡ g b (mod p),

but that you do not necessarily know the values of the exponents a and b. Determine
whether C is equal to g ab (mod p). Notice that this is different from the Diffie–
Hellman problem described on page 69. The Diffie–Hellman problem asks you to
actually compute the value of g ab .
 (a) Prove that an algorithm that solves the Diffie–Hellman problem can be used to
      solve the decision Diffie–Hellman problem.
 (b) Do you think that the decision Diffie–Hellman problem is hard or easy? Why?
See Exercise 6.40 for a related example in which the decision problem is easy, but
it is believed that the associated computational problem is hard.

Section 2.4. The Elgamal Public Key Cryptosystem
2.8. Alice and Bob agree to use the prime p = 1373 and the base g = 2 for
communications using the Elgamal public key cryptosystem.
 (a) Alice chooses a = 947 as her private key. What is the value of her public key A?
 (b) Bob chooses b = 716 as his private key, so his public key is

                                B ≡ 2716 ≡ 469 (mod 1373).

    Alice encrypts the message m = 583 using the random element k = 877. What
    is the ciphertext (c1 , c2 ) that Alice sends to Bob?
(c) Alice decides to choose a new private key a = 299 with associated public key
    A ≡ 2299 ≡ 34 (mod 1373). Bob encrypts a message using Alice’s public key
    and sends her the ciphertext (c1 , c2 ) = (661, 1325). Decrypt the message.

(d) Now Bob chooses a new private key and publishes the associated public key B =
    893. Alice encrypts a message using this public key and sends the ciphertext
    (c1 , c2 ) = (693, 793) to Bob. Eve intercepts the transmission. Help Eve by
    solving the discrete logarithm problem 2b ≡ 893 (mod 1373) and using the value
    of b to decrypt the message.

2.9. Suppose that Eve is able to solve the Diffie–Hellman problem described on
page 69. More precisely, assume that if Eve is given two powers g u and g v mod p,
then she is able to compute g uv mod p. Show that Eve can break the Elgamal PKC.

2.10. The exercise describes a public key cryptosystem that requires Bob and Alice
to exchange several messages. We illustrate the system with an example.
    Bob and Alice fix a publicly known prime p = 32611, and all of the other numbers
used are private. Alice takes her message m = 11111, chooses a random exponent
a = 3589, and sends the number u = ma (mod p) = 15950 to Bob. Bob chooses a
random exponent b = 4037 and sends v = ub (mod p) = 15422 back to Alice. Al-
ice then computes w = v 15619 ≡ 27257 (mod 32611) and sends w = 27257 to Bob.
Finally, Bob computes w31883 (mod 32611) and recovers the value 11111 of Alice’s
message.
 (a) Explain why this algorithm works. In particular, Alice uses the numbers
     a = 3589 and 15619 as exponents. How are they related? Similarly, how are
     Bob’s exponents b = 4037 and 31883 related?
 (b) Formulate a general version of this cryptosystem, i.e., using variables, and show
     that it works in general.
 (c) What is the disadvantage of this cryptosystem over Elgamal? (Hint. How many
     times must Alice and Bob exchange data?)
 (d) Are there any advantages of this cryptosystem over Elgamal? In particular, can
     Eve break it if she can solve the discrete logarithm problem? Can Eve break it
     if she can solve the Diffie–Hellman problem?

Section 2.5. An Overview of the Theory of Groups
2.11. The group S3 consists of the following six distinct elements

                                e, σ, σ 2 , τ, στ, σ 2 τ,

where e is the identity element and multiplication is performed using the rules

                         σ 3 = e,     τ 2 = e,       τ σ = σ 2 τ.

Compute the following values in the group S3 :
 (a) τ σ 2  (b) τ (στ )    (c) (στ )(στ )      (d) (στ )(σ 2 τ ).
Is S3 a commutative group?

2.12. Let G be a group, let d ≥ 1 be an integer, and define a subset of G by

                              G[d] = {g ∈ G : g d = e}.

(a) Prove that if g is in G[d], then g −1 is in G[d].
(b) Suppose that G is commutative. Prove that if g1 and g2 are in G[d], then their
    product g1 ? g2 is in G[d].
(c) Deduce that if G is commutative, then G[d] is a group.

(d) Show by an example that if G is not a commutative group, then G[d] need not
    be a group. (Hint. Use Exercise 2.11.)

2.13. Let G and H be groups. A function φ : G → H is called a (group) homomor-
phism if it satisfies

                  φ(g1 ? g2 ) = φ(g1 ) ? φ(g2 )   for all g1 , g2 ∈ G.

(Note that the product g1 ? g2 uses the group law in the group G, while the prod-
uct φ(g1 ) ? φ(g2 ) uses the group law in the group H.)
 (a) Let eG be the identity element of G, let eH be the identity element of H, and
     let g ∈ G. Prove that

                       φ(eG ) = eH        and     φ(g −1 ) = φ(g)−1 .

(b) Let G be a commutative group. Prove that the map φ : G → G defined
    by φ(g) = g 2 is a homomorphism. Give an example of a noncommutative group
    for which this map is not a homomorphism.
(c) Same question as (b) for the map φ(g) = g −1 .

2.14. Prove that each of the following maps is a group homomorphism.
 (a) The map φ : Z → Z/N Z that sends a ∈ Z to a mod N in Z/N Z.
                                                     0
(b) The map φ : R∗ → GL2 (R) defined by φ(a) = a0 a−1      .
 (c) The discrete logarithm map logg : F∗p → Z/(p − 1)Z, where g is a primitive root
     modulo p.

2.15. (a) Prove that GL2 (Fp ) is a group.
(b) Show that GL2 (Fp ) is a noncommutative group for every prime p.
 (c) Describe GL2 (F2 ) completely. That is, list its elements and describe the multi-
     plication table.
(d) How many elements are there in the group GL2 (Fp )?
 (e) How many elements are there in the group GLn (Fp )?

Section 2.6. How Hard Is the Discrete Logarithm Problem?
2.16. Verify the following assertions from Example 2.16.
          √        ?                                         ?
(a) x2 + x = O x2 .                       (d) (ln k)375 = O k0.001 .
                                                          
(b) 5 + 6x2 − 37x5 = O x5 .               (e) k2 2k = O e2k .
                                                            
(c) k300 = O 2k .                         (f) N 10 2N = O eN .

Section 2.7. A Collision Algorithm for the DLP
2.17. Use Shanks’s babystep–giantstep method to solve the following discrete log-
arithm problems. (For (b) and (c), you may want to write a computer program
implementing Shanks’s algorithm.)
 (a) 11x = 21 in F71 .
 (b) 156x = 116 in F593 .
 (c) 650x = 2213 in F3571 .

Section 2.8. The Chinese Remainder Theorem

2.18. Solve each of the following simultaneous systems of congruences (or explain
why no solution exists).
 (a) x ≡ 3 (mod 7) and x ≡ 4 (mod 9).
(b) x ≡ 137 (mod 423) and x ≡ 87 (mod 191).
 (c) x ≡ 133 (mod 451) and x ≡ 237 (mod 697).
(d) x ≡ 5 (mod 9), x ≡ 6 (mod 10), and x ≡ 7 (mod 11).
 (e) x ≡ 37 (mod 43), x ≡ 22 (mod 49), and x ≡ 18 (mod 71).

2.19. Solve the 1700-year-old Chinese remainder problem from the Sun Tzu Suan
Ching stated on page 84.

2.20. Let a, b, m, n be integers with gcd(m, n) = 1. Let

                           c ≡ (b − a) · m−1        (mod n).

Prove that x = a + cm is a solution to

                  x≡a     (mod m)            and     x≡b       (mod n),       (2.24)

and that every solution to (2.24) has the form x = a + cm + ymn for some y ∈ Z.

2.21. (a) Let a, b, c be positive integers and suppose that

                           a | c,   b | c,    and    gcd(a, b) = 1.

    Prove that ab | c.
(b) Let x = c and x = c? be two solutions to the system of simultaneous congru-
    ences (2.7) in the Chinese remainder theorem (Theorem 2.24). Prove that

                               c ≡ c? (mod m1 m2 · · · mk ).

2.22. For those who have studied ring theory, this exercise sketches a short
proof of the Chinese remainder theorem. Let m1 , . . . , mk be integers and let
m = m1 m2 · · · mk be their product.
 (a) Prove that the map
                Z               Z        Z                 Z
                     −
                     −−−−
                        →            ×       × ··· ×
               mZ              m1 Z     m2 Z             mk Z                 (2.25)
             a mod m −
                     −−−−
                        → (a mod m1 , a mod m2 , . . . , a mod mk )

    is a well-defined homomorphism of rings. (Hint. First define a homomorphism
    from Z to the right-hand side of (2.25), and then show that mZ is in the kernel.)
(b) Assume that m1 , . . . , mk are pairwise relatively prime. Prove that the map
    given by (2.25) is one-to-one. (Hint. What is the kernel?)
(c) Continuing with the assumption that the numbers m1 , . . . , mk are pairwise
    relatively prime, prove that the map (2.25) is onto. (Hint. Use (b) and count
    the size of both sides.)
(d) Explain why the Chinese remainder theorem (Theorem 2.24) is equivalent to
    the assertion that (b) and (c) are true.

2.23. Use the method described in Sect. 2.8.1 to find square roots modulo the
following composite moduli.

(a) Find a square root of 340 modulo 437. (Note that 437 = 19 · 23.)
(b) Find a square root of 253 modulo 3143.
(c) Find four square roots of 2833 modulo 4189. (The modulus factors as 4189 =
    59 · 71. Note that your four square roots should be distinct modulo 4189.)
(d) Find eight square roots of 813 modulo 868.

2.24. Let p be an odd prime, let a be an integer that is not divisible by p, and
let b be a square root of a modulo p. This exercise investigates the square root of a
modulo powers of p.
 (a) Prove that for some choice of k, the number b + kp is a square root of a mod-
      ulo p2 , i.e., (b + kp)2 ≡ a (mod p2 ).
 (b) The number b = 537 is a square root of a = 476 modulo the prime p = 1291.
      Use the idea in (a) to compute a square root of 476 modulo p2 .
 (c) Suppose that b is a square root of a modulo pn . Prove that for some choice of j,
      the number b + jpn is a square root of a modulo pn+1 .
 (d) Explain why (c) implies the following statement: If p is an odd prime and if a
      has a square root modulo p, then a has a square root modulo pn for every power
      of p. Is this true if p = 2?
 (e) Use the method in (c) to compute the square root of 3 modulo 133 , given
      that 92 ≡ 3 (mod 13).

2.25. Suppose n = pq with p and q distinct odd primes.
 (a) Suppose that gcd(a, pq) = 1. Prove that if the equation x2 ≡ a (mod n) has
     any solutions, then it has four solutions.
(b) Suppose that you had a machine that could find all four solutions for some
     given a. How could you use this machine to factor n?

Section 2.9. The Pohlig–Hellman Algorithm

2.26. Let Fp be a finite field and let N | p − 1. Prove that F∗p has an element of
order N . This is true in particular for any prime power that divides p − 1. (Hint.
Use the fact that F∗p has a primitive root.)

2.27. Write out your own proof that the Pohlig–Hellman algorithm works in the
particular case that p − 1 = q1 · q2 is a product of two distinct primes. This provides
a good opportunity for you to understand how the proof works and to get a feel for
how it was discovered.

2.28. Use the Pohlig–Hellman algorithm (Theorem 2.31) to solve the discrete log-
arithm problem
                                g x = a in Fp
in each of the following cases.
 (a) p = 433, g = 7, a = 166.
 (b) p = 746497, g = 10, a = 243278.
 (c) p = 41022299, g = 2, a = 39183497. (Hint. p = 2 · 295 + 1.)
 (d) p = 1291799, g = 17, a = 192988. (Hint. p − 1 has a factor of 709.)

Section 2.10. Rings, Quotient Rings, Polynomial Rings, and Finite Fields

2.29. Let R be a ring with the property that the only way that a product a · b can
be 0 is if a = 0 or b = 0. (In the terminology of Example 2.55, the ring R has no zero
divisors.) Suppose further that R has only finitely many elements. Prove that R is a
field. (Hint. Let a ∈ R with a ?= 0. What can you say about the map R → R defined
by b → a · b?)
2.30. Let R be a ring. Prove the following properties of R directly from the ring
axioms described in Sect. 2.10.1.
 (a) Prove that the additive identity element 0 ∈ R is unique, i.e., prove that there
     is only one element in R satisfying 0 + a = a + 0 = 0 for every a ∈ R.
(b) Prove that the multiplicative identity element 1 ∈ R is unique.
 (c) Prove that every element of R has a unique additive inverse.
(d) Prove that 0 ? a = a ? 0 = 0 for all a ∈ R.
 (e) We denote the additive inverse of a by −a. Prove that −(−a) = a.
 (f) Let −1 be the additive inverse of the multiplicative identity element 1 ∈ R.
     Prove that (−1) ? (−1) = 1.
 (g) Prove that b | 0 for every nonzero b ∈ R.
(h) Prove that an element of R has at most one multiplicative inverse.
2.31. Let R and S be rings. A function φ : R → S is called a (ring) homomorphism
if it satisfies

     φ(a + b) = φ(a) + φ(b)     and   φ(a ? a) = φ(a) ? φ(a)      for all a, b, ∈ R.

(a) Let 0R , 0S , 1R and 1S denote the additive and multiplicative identities of R
    and S, respectively. Prove that

            φ(0R ) = 0S ,   φ(1R ) = 1S ,   φ(−a) = −φ(a),     φ(a−1 ) = φ(a)−1 ,

    where the last equality holds for those a ∈ R that have a multiplicative inverse.
(b) Let p be a prime, and let R be a ring with the property that pa = 0 for
    every a ∈ R. (Here pa means to add a to itself p times.) Prove that the map

                                φ : R −→ R,       φ(a) = ap

     is a ring homomorphism. It is called the Frobenius homomorphism.
2.32. Prove Proposition 2.41.
2.33. Prove Proposition 2.43. (Hint. First use Exercise 2.32 to prove that the con-
gruence classes a + b and a ? b depend only on the congruence classes of a and b.)
2.34. Let F be a field and let a and b be nonzero polynomials in F[x].
 (a) Prove that deg(a · b) = deg(a) + deg(b).
(b) Prove that a has a multiplicative inverse in F[x] if and only if a is in F, i.e., if
     and only if a is a constant polynomial.
 (c) Prove that every nonzero element of F[x] can be factored into a product of
     irreducible polynomials. (Hint. Use (a), (b), and induction on the degree of the
     polynomial.)
(d) Let R be the ring Z/6Z. Give an example to show that (a) is false for some
     polynomials a and b in R[x].

2.35. Let a and b be the polynomials

                             a = x5 + 3x4 − 5x3 − 3x2 + 2x + 2,
                             b = x5 + x4 − 2x3 + 4x2 + x + 5.

Use the Euclidean algorithm to compute gcd(a, b) in each of the following rings.
 (a) F2 [x]   (b) F3 [x]   (c) F5 [x]  (d) F7 [x].

2.36. Continuing with the same polynomials a and b as in Exercise 2.35, for each
of the polynomial rings (a)–(d) in Exercise 2.35, find polynomials u and v satisfying

                                   a · u + b · v = gcd(a, b).

2.37. Prove that the polynomial x3 + x + 1 is irreducible in F2 [x]. (Hint. Think
about what a factorization would have to look like.)

2.38. The multiplication table for the field F2 [x]/(x3 + x + 1) is given in Table 2.5,
but we have omitted fourteen entries. Fill in the missing entries. (This is the field
described in Example 2.57. You can download and print a copy of Table 2.5 at www.
math.brown.edu/~jhs/MathCrypto/Table2.5.pdf.)

               0       1          x         x2              1+x      1 + x2      x + x2    1 + x + x2

      0        0       0          0          0               0          0          0           0
      1        0       1         x                                   1 + x2      x + x2    1 + x + x2
      x        0       x         x2                     x + x2          1                    1 + x2
      x2       0                          x + x2       1 + x + x2       x        1 + x2        1
    1+x        0                x + x2   1 + x + x2      1 + x2                    1           x
   1 + x2      0    1 + x2        1          x                      1 + x + x2   1+x
   x + x2      0    x + x2                1 + x2             1        1+x          x
  1 + x + x2   0   1 + x + x2   1 + x2       1               x                               1+x

Table 2.5: Multiplication table for the field F2 [x]/(x3 + x + 1)

2.39. The field F7 [x]/(x2 + 1) is a field with 49 elements, which for the moment we
denote by F49 . (See Example 2.58 for a convenient way to work with F49 .)
 (a) Is 2 + 5x a primitive root in F49 ?
 (b) Is 2 + x a primitive root in F49 ?
 (c) Is 1 + x a primitive root in F49 ?
(Hint. Lagrange’s theorem says that the order of u ∈ F49 must divide 48. So if uk ?= 1
for all proper divisors k of 48, then u is a primitive root.)

2.40. Let p be a prime number and let e ≥ 2. The quotient ring Z/pe Z and the
finite field Fpe are both rings and both have the same number of elements. Describe
some ways in which they are intrinsically different.

2.41. Let F be a finite field.
 (a) Prove that there is an integer m ≥ 1 such that if we add 1 to itself m times,

                                           1 + 1 + · · · + 1,
                                                   m ones

    then we get 0. Note that here 1 and 0 are the multiplicative and additive identity
    elements of the field F. If the notation is confusing, you can let u and z be the
    multiplicative and additive identity elements of F, and then you need to prove
    that u + u + · · · + u = z. (Hint. Since F is finite, the numbers 1, 1 + 1, 1 + 1 +
    1,. . . cannot all be different.)
(b) Let m be the smallest positive integer with the property described in (a). Prove
    that m is prime. (Hint. If m factors, show that there are nonzero elements
    in F whose product is zero, so F cannot be a field.) This prime is called the
    characteristic of the field F.
(c) Let p be the characteristic of F. Prove that F is a finite-dimensional vector
    space over the field Fp of p elements.
(d) Use (c) to deduce that F has pd elements for some d ≥ 1.
