Chapter 8

Additional Topics
in Cryptography

The emphasis of this book has been on the mathematical underpinnings of
public key cryptography. We have developed most of the mathematics from
scratch and in sufficient depth to enable the reader to understand both the
underlying mathematical principles and how they are applied in cryptographic
constructions. Unfortunately, in achieving this laudable goal, we have now
reached the end of a hefty textbook with many important cryptographic topics
left untouched.
    This final chapter contains a few brief words about some of these additional
topics. The reader should keep in mind that each of these areas is important
and that the brevity of our coverage reflects only a lack of space, not a lack of
interest. We hope that you will view this chapter as a challenge to go out and
learn more about mathematical cryptography. In particular, each section in
this chapter provides a good starting point for a term paper or class project.
    We also note that we have made no attempt to provide a full history of
the topics covered, nor have we tried to give credit to all of the researchers
working in these areas. For the convenience of the reader and the instructor,
here is a list of the topics introduced in this chapter:
  Section 8.1 Hash Functions
  Section 8.2 Random Numbers and Pseudorandom Number Generators
  Section 8.3 Zero-Knowledge Proofs
  Section 8.4 Secret Sharing Schemes
  Section 8.5 Identification Schemes
  Section 8.6 Padding Schemes, the Random Oracle Model, and Provable
                 Security

© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014                             471
J. Hoffstein et al., An Introduction to Mathematical Cryptography,
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-1711-2 8

  Section 8.7    Building Protocols from Cryptographic Primitives
  Section 8.8    Blind Digital Signatures, Digital Cash, and Bitcoin
  Section 8.9    Homomorphic Encryption
 Section 8.10    Hyperelliptic Curve Cryptography
 Section 8.11    Quantum Computing
 Section 8.12    Modern Symmetric Cryptosystems: DES and AES

8.1      Hash Functions
There are many cryptographic constructions for which one needs a function
that is easy to compute, but hard to invert. We have seen a number of exam-
ples, including digital signatures (Remark 4.2), randomization of plaintexts
in probabilistic cryptosystems (Exercise 7.21), and ID based cryptography
(Sect. 6.10.2).

Definition. A hash function takes as input an arbitrarily long document D
and returns a short bit string H. The primary properties that a hash func-
tion Hash should possess are as follows:

   • Computation of Hash(D) should be fast and easy, roughly linear time.
   • Inversion of Hash should be difficult, meaning exponential time. More
     precisely, given a hash value H, it should be difficult to find any docu-
     ment D such that Hash(D) = H.
   • For many applications it is also important that Hash be collision
     resistant. This means that it should be hard to find two different doc-
     uments D1 and D2 whose hash values Hash(D1 ) and Hash(D2 ) are the
     same.

Remark 8.1. Why do we want our hash function to be collision resistant?
Suppose that Eve can find two documents D1 and D2 that have the same
hash value Hash(D1 ) = Hash(D2 ), and suppose that D1 says “Pay the bearer
$5” and that D2 says “Pay the bearer $500.” Eve can give Alice $5 and
ask her to sign D1 . Since Alice has actually signed Hash(D1 ), she has also
signed Hash(D2 ), so Eve can go to the bank, present the signature as being
on D2 , and get paid $500.
   In practice, most hash functions use a mixing algorithm M that transforms
a bit string of length n into another bit string of length n. Then Hash works
by breaking a long document into blocks and successively using M to combine
each block with the previously processed material.
   Thus to compute H(D), we first append extra 0 bits to D so that the
length of D is an even multiple of n bits. This allows us to write D as a
concatenation
                       D = D1 ? D2 ? D3 ? D4 ? · · · ? Dk
of bit strings of length n. (See Exercise 3.43 for a discussion of concatenation.)
8.1. Hash Functions                                                                473

   Having broken D into pieces, we start the computation of Hash(D)
with an initial bit string H0 , which is the always the same. We then com-
pute M(D1 ) and set H1 = H0 xor M(D1 ). We repeat this process k times to
obtain H2 , H3 , . . . , Hk , where1

                     Hi = Hi−1 xor M(Di )          for 1 ≤ i ≤ k.

Then Hash(D) is equal to the final output value Hk .
    For practical applications, it is very important that a hash function be
extremely fast. For example, when digitally signing a document such as a
computer program or a video file, the entire document needs to be run through
the hash function, so one needs to be able to compute Hash(D) on megabyte,
or even gigabyte, length files.
    Since speed is of fundamental importance for hash functions, in the real
world one tends to use hash functions constructed using ad hoc mixing opera-
tions, rather than basing them on classical hard mathematical problems such
as factoring or discrete logarithms. The hash functions in most widespread
use today go by the name of SHA (Secure Hash Algorithm). There are sev-
eral versions of SHA, released at various times, that achieve various levels of
security.
    How do SHA and other similar hash algorithms work? We briefly illustrate
by describing the structure of SHA-1, omitting the specifics of the mixing
operations. (See [99] for the official government description of SHA.)

     Break document D (with extra bits appended) into 512-bit chunks.
     Start with five specific initial values h0 , . . . , h4 .
     LOOP over the 512-bit chunks.
         Break a 512 bit chunk into sixteen 32-bit words.
         Create a total of eighty 32-bit words w0 , . . . , w79 by
              rotating the initial words.
         LOOP i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 79
              Set a = h0 , b = h1 , c = h2 , d = h3 , e = h4 .
              Compute f using XOR and AND operations on a, b, c, d, e.
              Mix a, b, c, d, e, by rotating some of their bits, permuting
                   them, and add f and wi to a.
         END i LOOP
         Set h0 = h0 + a, h1 = h1 + b, . . . , h4 = h4 + e.
     END LOOP over chunks
     Output h0 ? h1 ? h2 ? h3 ? h4 .

                         The SHA-1 Hash Algorithm

                         i−1 and M(Di ) values would be combined in a slightly more com-
    1 In practice, the H

plicated fashion to form Hi .

Remark 8.2. Notice that SHA-1 has an inner loop that is repeated 80 times.
We say that SHA-1 has 80 rounds. Each round involves various mixing op-
erations that use the results from the previous round together with a small
amount of new data. For SHA-1, the new data used in the ith round is the
32-bit word wi . This idea of repeating a simple mixing operation is typical
of modern hash functions, pseudorandom number generators (Sect. 8.2), and
symmetric ciphers such as DES and AES (Sect. 8.12). In principle, one could
make SHA-1 faster by doing fewer rounds, but if one uses too few rounds,
then there are known methods to break the system. It is an area of ongoing
research to understand how many rounds are necessary to make SHA-1 and
similar round-based systems secure.
    The original SHA, which was later amended as SHA-1 to fix a minor
security flaw, is a hash function whose output has length 160 bits. Starting
around 2005 and continuing to the present day, various attacks have been
developed for SHA-1, originally for fewer than 80 rounds, but eventually for
the full 80-round SHA-1 implementation. To give a rough idea of progress, as
of 2012 researchers have theoretical methods that they claim will find a SHA-1
collision in around 261 operations, much less than the ostensible 280 security
level.
    This prompted the development and publication in 2001 of a suite of hash
functions known collectively as SHA-2. The individual hash functions in SHA-
2 are called SHA-n, where n ∈ {224, 256, 384, 512} indicates the block size.2
As with SHA-1, these hash functions were developed internally by the NSA.
They are similar in some ways to SHA-1, but have so far resisted any serious
attacks when the full number of rounds are used. However, given the attacks
on SHA-1, it was felt desirable to create an alternative hash function based
on different principles, so in 2007 the United States government opened a
5-year competition to design a new general purpose hash function to be called
SHA-3. The winner of the competition, announced in 2012, was created by
G. Bertoni, J. Daemen, G. Van Assche, and M. Peeters. As of 2014, a draft
standard for SHA-3 is available, but a final standardization document is not
yet ready.

8.2      Random Numbers and Pseudorandom
         Number Generators
We have seen that many cryptographic constructions require the use of
random numbers. For example:

   2 This means that a direct search takes approximately 2n steps to invert SHA-n, and

a naive collision algorithm takes approximately 2n/2 steps to find a collision for SHA-n.
Of course, none of this proves that SHA is secure, and indeed the difficulty of inverting or
finding collisions for SHA is not related, as far as is known, to any standard mathematical
problem.
8.2. Random Numbers and Pseudorandom Number                                            475

    • The key creation phase of virtually all cryptosystems requires the user
      to choose one or more random (prime) numbers. The same is true for
      creating keys in digital signature schemes.
    • The Elgamal public key cryptosystem (Sect. 2.4) uses a random element
      (random number) during the encryption process, and ElGamal-type dig-
      ital signature schemes such as DSA and ECDSA (Sect. 4.3) use a random
      element for signing.
    • The NTRU public key cryptosystem (Sect. 7.10) also uses a random
      element during the encryption process.
    • The entire premise of probabilistic encryption schemes (Sect. 3.10) is to
      incorporate randomness into the encryption process.
    • Even completely deterministic cryptosystems such as RSA gain impor-
      tant security features when some randomness is incorporated into the
      plaintext; see Sect. 8.6.

    Ideally, we would like a device that generates a completely random list
of 0s and 1s. Such devices exist, at least if one believes that quantum the-
ory is correct. They are based on measuring the radioactive decay of atoms.
According to quantum theory, given an atom of some radioactive substance,
there is a number T such that the atom has a 50 % chance of decaying in
the next T seconds, but there is no way of predicting in advance whether the
atom will decay. So the device can wait T seconds and then output a 1 if the
atom decays and a 0 if it does not decay. The device then chooses another (un-
decayed) atom and repeats the process. In principle, this gives a completely
random unpredictable bit string.3 Unfortunately, as a practical matter, it is
expensive to build a Geiger counter into every computer!
    Modern cryptosystems avoid this problem by starting with a random seed
and feeding it and other data into a function to produce a long random-looking
bit string. A function of this sort is called a pseudorandom number genera-
tor (PRNG). Notice the contradiction in the terminology. A pseudorandom
number generator is a function, so the output that it produces is not random
at all, the output is completely determined by the input. However, one hopes
that it should be difficult to distinguish output of a PRNG from the output
of a true random number generator.
    One model of a PRNG is as a function of two variables F (X, Y ). In order
to get started, Alice chooses a truly random seed value S. (Or if not truly
random, then as random as she can make it.) She then computes the numbers

           R0 = F (0, S),        R1 = F (1, S),         R2 = F (2, S),     ... .

The list of bits R0 ? R1 ? R2 ? · · · is Alice’s (pseudo)random bit string.

    3 In practice, more sophisticated measurements of radioactivity are used, but the under-

lying principle is that quantum theory gives precise probabilities that certain measurable
events will occur over a given time period.

   In order to be useful for cryptography, a PRNG should have the following
two properties:
  1. If Eve knows the first k bits of Alice’s random bit string, she should have
     no better than a 50 % chance of predicting whether the next bit will be
     a 0 or a 1. More precisely, there should not be a fast (e.g., polynomial-
     time) algorithm that can predict the next bit with better than 50 %
     chance of success.
  2. Suppose that Eve somehow learns part of Alice’s random bit string, for
     example, suppose that she finds out the values of Rt , Rt+1 , Rt+2 , . . . .
     This should not help Eve to determine the earlier part R0 , R1 , . . . , Rt−1
     of Alice’s string.
A PRNG with these properties is said to be cryptographically secure.
Example 8.3. One can build a PRNG out of a hash function Hash by choosing
an initial random value S and setting

                               Ri = Hash(i ? S).

(See Sect. 8.1 for a discussion of hash functions.) Of course, not every hash
function yields a cryptographically secure PRNG.
Example 8.4. One can also build a PRNG from a symmetric (i.e., private
key) cryptosystem, for example DES or AES (see Sect. 8.12). Here is one way
to build a PRNG that has been accepted as a public standard. Start with a
random seed S and a key K for the cryptosystem, and let EK be the associated
encryption function. Each time a random number is required, use some system
parameters, e.g., the date and time as returned by the computer’s CPU, to
form a number D and encrypt D using the key K, say

                                  C = EK (D).

Then output the “random” number

                               R = EK (C xor S)

and replace S with EK (R xor C).
Remark 8.5. Alternatively, a PRNG can be used as a symmetric cipher. The
seed value S is Alice and Bob’s private key. In order to send a message M ,
Alice breaks M into pieces M = M0 ? M1 ? M2 ? · · · . She then encrypts the ith
piece of the message as
                              Ci = Mi xor Ri .
Since Bob knows the seed value S, he can compute the same pseudorandom
string R0 ?R1 ?R2 ?· · · that Alice used to encrypt, so he can recover the message
as Mi = Ci xor Ri . (Notice that if the Ri were truly random, then Alice and
Bob would be using a one-time pad. However, in that case, they would need
to have exchanged all of the Ri ’s before sending encrypted messages.)
8.3. Zero-Knowledge Proofs                                                             477

Remark 8.6. PRNGs that are based on hash functions such as SHA or
symmetric ciphers such as DES or AES are fast and, as far as is known, crypto-
graphically secure, but the security is not based on reduction to a well-known
mathematical problem. There are PRNGs whose security can be reduced to
the difficulty of solving a hard mathematical problem such as factoring, but
such PRNGs are much slower and thus not used in practice.

8.3       Zero-Knowledge Proofs
In this section we introduce you to two new characters: Peggy, the prover,
and Victor, the verifier. Informally, a zero-knowledge proof is a procedure
that allows Peggy to convince Victor that a certain fact is true without giving
Victor any information that would let Victor convince other people that the
fact is true. As with many cryptographic constructions, this seems at first
glance to be impossible. For example, how could Peggy (in New York) convince
Victor (in California) that her house is red without sending Victor a picture
of the house? And if she sends Victor a picture, then Victor can show the
picture to other people as proof of Peggy’s house color.4
    In practice, an (interactive) zero-knowledge proof generally involves a num-
ber of challenge–response communication rounds between Peggy and Victor.
In a typical round, Victor sends Peggy a challenge, Peggy sends back a re-
sponse, and then Victor evaluates the response and decides whether to accept
or reject it. After a certain number of rounds, a good zero-knowledge proof
showing that a quantity y has some property P should satisfy the following
two conditions:
Completeness If y does have property P, then Victor should always accept
   Peggy’s responses as being valid.
Soundness If y does not have property P, then there should be only a very
    small probability that Victor accepts all of Peggy’s responses as being
    valid.
    In addition to being both sound and complete, a zero-knowledge proof
should not convey useful information to Victor, whence the name. Before
attempting to describe the somewhat subtle idea contained in the phrase
“zero-knowledge,” we pause to present a concrete example of a zero-know-
ledge proof.
Example 8.7. Peggy chooses two large primes p and q and publishes their
product N . Peggy’s task is to prove to Victor that a certain number y is a
square modulo N without revealing to Victor any information that would help
him to prove to other people that y is a square modulo N . We note that since
Peggy knows how to factor N , if y is a square modulo N , then she can find a
square root for y, say x, satisfying
    4 This house color scenario is just an informal analogy. Since Victor and Peggy undoubt-

edly both own Photoshop, a picture of Peggy’s house doesn’t actually prove anything!

                               x2 ≡ y    (mod N ).

In each round, Peggy and Victor perform the following steps:

  1. Peggy chooses a random number r modulo N . She computes and sends
     to Victor the number
                             s ≡ r2 (mod N ).

  2. Victor randomly chooses a value β ∈ {0, 1} and sends β to Peggy.
  3. Peggy computes and sends to Victor the number

                                   r (mod N )      if β = 0,
                            z≡
                                   xr (mod N )     if β = 1.

  4. Victor computes z 2 (mod N ) and checks that

                                    s (mod N )       if β = 0,
                           z2 ≡
                                    ys (mod N )      if β = 1.

      If this is true, Victor accepts Peggy’s response; otherwise, he rejects it.

Peggy and Victor repeat this procedure n times, where n is reasonably large,
say n = 80. If all of Peggy’s responses are acceptable, then Victor accepts
Peggy’s proof that y is a square modulo N ; otherwise, he rejects her proof.
   It is easy to check completeness and soundness. For completeness, note
that if y is a square modulo N , then the z that Peggy sends to Victor satisfies
z ≡ xβ r (mod N ), so

                         z 2 ≡ x2β r2 ≡ y β s   (mod N ).

Thus Victor always accepts Peggy’s response.
   Conversely, suppose that y is not a square modulo N . Then regardless of
how Peggy chooses s, only one of the two values s and ys is a square modulo N .
Hence there is a 50 % chance that Peggy will not be able to answer Victor’s
challenge, since half the time Victor will require Peggy to prove that s is a
square and half the time he will require her to prove that ys is a square.
Thus if y is not a square, then the probability that Peggy can provide valid
responses to n different challenges is 2−n . So if Peggy is able to send 80 valid
responses, Victor should be convinced that y is indeed a square modulo N .
    We now consider in what sense Peggy’s zero-knowlege proof that y has
property P should not help Victor to subsequently prove to anyone else that y
has property P. Informally, the idea is that Victor should be able to gener-
ate lists of bogus responses that are indistinguishable from lists of genuine
responses created by Peggy. The conclusion is that Peggy’s responses do not
give Victor any information, because if they did, he could get the same sort
8.3. Zero-Knowledge Proofs                                                               479

of information using his self-generated bogus lists of responses. Rather than
giving the precise mathematical formulation of this idea, which involves the
statement that two probability distributions are identical, we are content to
present an example.
Example 8.8. Continuing with the zero-knowledge proof described in Example
8.7, suppose that Victor has finished talking to Peggy, and now he wants to
convince some other verifier, say Valerie, that y is a square modulo N . At the
end of his communications with Peggy, Victor has amassed a list of triples

                       (s1 , β1 , z1 ), (s2 , β2 , z2 ), (s3 , β3 , z3 ), . . . ,

where each triple satisfies

                                   zi2 ≡ y βi si      (mod N ).

Thus if βi = 0, then Victor knows a square root of si modulo N , and if βi = 1,
then Victor knows a square root of ysi modulo N , but unless the list is ex-
tremely long, it is unlikely that there will be any values of s for which Victor
knows a square root modulo N of both s and ys. And if Victor knows only one
of these two square roots, then there is a 50 % chance that he will be unable
to answer each of Valerie’s challenges. Hence Peggy’s responses are of minimal
help to Victor if he wants to prove to Valerie that y is a square modulo N .
    Even more is true. Without talking to Peggy at all, Victor can create
lists of triples (s1 , β1 , z1 ), (s2 , β2 , z2 ), . . . that are indistinguishable from valid
lists generated by Peggy and Victor together. For example, if, when actually
talking to Peggy, Victor chooses β = 0 and β = 1 randomly in Step 2, then
he can generate a similar list of triples (s, β, z) without talking to Peggy by
randomly choosing z mod N and β ∈ {0, 1} and setting

                                 s ≡ z 2 (y β )−1       (mod N ).

This informal argument shows why the data that Peggy sends to Victor during
their interaction does not help Victor prove to anyone else that y is a square
modulo N . If it did, then Victor could use his self-generated list of triples for
the same purpose.
Remark 8.9. There are various levels of zero knowledge. For example, there is
perfect zero-knowledge, in which Victor’s bogus list of responses is statistically
identical to Peggy’s actual list; there is statistical zero-knowledge, in which
the bogus list is statistically extremely close to the actual list; and there is
computational zero-knowledge, which means that there is no efficient algorithm
that can distinguish a bogus list from an actual list. The proof that “y is a
square modulo N ” described in Example 8.7 is an example of a perfect zero-
knowledge proof.

8.4       Secret Sharing Schemes
A secret sharing scheme does what its name suggests: it provides a way of
sharing a secret among several people. For example, the combination to a
vault in a bank might be shared among the president and two vice-presidents
by giving each of them one third of the combination. It then requires all three
of them to open the vault. Alternatively, we might give half to the president
and the other half to each vice-president. Then the vault can be opened by
the president and either of his vice-presidents.
    However, this example does not meet the requirements of a true secret
sharing scheme, since knowledge of any part of the vault’s combination makes
it easier to guess the full combination. In a true secret sharing scheme among
a group of n people, no subgroup of n − 1 people should be able to gain an
advantage in discovering the secret.
    It is not hard to construct such a scheme. For example, to share a secret
number S mod m among n people, select n − 1 random numbers

                         D1 , D2 , . . . , Dn−1   modulo m,
and set
                 Dn ≡ S − D1 − D2 − · · · − Dn−1         (mod m).

The ith participant receives the value of Di , and it requires all n values to
recover the secret

                     S ≡ D1 + D 2 + · · · + D n      (mod m).

   More generally, suppose that we want to share a secret among n people in
such a way that any t of them can recover the secret, but no t − 1 of them
can do so. These are called (t, n) threshold sharing schemes, where n is the
number of participants and t is the threshold of the scheme. Threshold secret
sharing schemes with t < n are more difficult to construct; the first ones were
invented independently by Adi Shamir [123] and George Blakley [15] in 1979.
   We briefly describe Shamir’s secret sharing scheme for n participants and
threshold t. The underlying idea is that it takes k + 1 values to determine
a polynomial of degree k. Thus a linear polynomial ax + b is determined
by two values (a line is determined by two points), a quadratic polyno-
mial ax2 + bx + c by three values, etc.
   Suppose that we want to share a secret number S among n people so that
any t of them can recover S, but fewer than t cannot. We set a0 = S, choose
random numbers a1 , a2 , . . . , at−1 , and form the polynomial

                   f (x) = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + · · · + at−1 xt−1 .

Next we choose n random values for x, say x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , and compute

                           yi = f (xi )    for 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
8.5. Identification Schemes                                                     481

(In practice, one might simply take xi = i.) The ith participant is given the
value yi .
    Suppose now that t of the participants want to recover the secret, where
to ease notation, we will assume that they are participants 1 through t. After
sharing their yi values, these t participants can form the following system of
equations:
               y1 = f (x1 ) = a0 + a1 x1 + a2 x21 + · · · + at−1 xt−1
                                                                  1 ,
               y2 = f (x2 ) = a0 + a1 x2 + a2 x22 + · · · + at−1 xt−1
                                                                  2 ,
                ..                 ..
                 .                  .
               yt = f (xt ) = a0 + a1 xt + a2 x2t + · · · + at−1 xt−1
                                                                  t   .
The participants know all of the xi and yi values, so they know this system
of t linear equations for the t unknown values a0 , a1 , . . . , at−1 . They can now
solve the system, e.g., using Gaussian elimination, to find the aj values and
thus recover the secret value a0 = S. (In practice, a more efficient way to
reconstruct f (x) is to use what are known as Lagrange interpolation polyno-
mials.)

8.5      Identification Schemes
An identification scheme is an algorithm that permits Alice to prove to Bob
that she is really Alice. If Alice is meeting Bob face to face, then Alice might
use her driver’s license or passport for this purpose. But the problem becomes
more difficult when Bob and Alice are communicating over an insecure net-
work. An important feature of a secure identification scheme is that if Eve
listens to Bob and Alice’s exchange of information, she should not be able to
impersonate Alice. Indeed, even Bob should not be able to impersonate Alice.
    Identification schemes typically operate by performing a challenge and
response. This means that Bob starts by sending some sort of challenge to
Alice. Alice’s response to the challenge demonstrates her identity by showing
that she has knowledge that only Alice possesses. Sometimes there is more
than one round of challenges and responses.
    In practice, the first step is for some trusted authority (TA) to issue private
and public identification keys to Alice. Before doing this, the TA actually
verifies Alice’s identity, say by meeting her and looking at her passport. Then,
when Bob issues Alice the challenge, she uses her private key to create the
response, and Bob verifies the response using Alice’s public key. However, this
is too simplistic. How can Bob be sure that Alice’s purported public key was
created for the real Alice? The answer is that when the TA issues Alice’s
identification keys, he also gives Alice a digital signature on a hash of her
identity and her public key. Part of Bob’s verification routine then includes
using the TA’s public verification key to check the signature on Alice’s public
information.

    There are many identification schemes based on the usual underlying hard
problems. For example, there are identification schemes due to Schnorr and
to Okamoto that use the discrete logarithm problem, there is an RSA-style
scheme due to Guillou and Quisquater that relies on exponentiation modulo a
composite modulus, and there is an identification scheme due to Feige, Fiat,
and Shamir whose security is based on the difficulty of taking square roots
modulo a composite modulus.
    Identification schemes are closely related to digital signatures (Chap. 4)
and to zero-knowledge proofs (Sect. 8.3). The latter connection is clear, since
Alice identifies herself by demonstrating that she has a piece of information.
Ideally, Alice should prove that she has this knowledge without giving Bob or
Eve any useful information about the proof.
    For the relation with digital signatures, it is a standard observation that
any challenge–response identification scheme can be turned into a digital sig-
nature scheme. The trick is to use a hash of the document being signed as
the challenge. Alice’s response serves as the signature. Since a secure hash
function prevents Alice from having any a priori knowledge of Hash(D), the
hash value truly acts as a random challenge. Bob can then easily verify Alice’s
signature on D by computing Hash(D) and checking that Alice’s signature is
the correct response for the challenge Hash(D). Conversely, all of the digital
signature schemes described in Chap. 4 can be used as identification schemes,
with the hash of the document being replaced by Bob’s challenge and Alice’s
signature serving as the response.

8.6     Padding Schemes, the Random Oracle
        Model, and Provable Security
Alice asks Bob to send her a bit string x consisting of 1024 bits. Bob is
supposed to use Alice’s 1024-bit RSA public key (N, e) and apply the following
algorithm: Bob first computes y ≡ xe (mod N ), then computes z = N xor x,
and finally transmits the concatenation y ? z to Alice.
    Of course, this is completely silly. Eve can simply ignore y and recover x
immediately after peeling off z. The question is, why is this cryptosystem
particularly silly? What if another system that we actually use is equally silly
for some reason that would be obvious if only we were a bit smarter. For
example, Exercise 3.11 describes a somewhat complicated cryptosystem that
appears to require knowledge of the factorization of an integer into two primes
to break, but in fact, the public key already gives away the factorization.
    Our problem boils down to the following. We have convinced ourselves
that a certain process, for example RSA encryption, is hard to reverse unless
an adversary possesses a key piece of information. We have a cryptosystem
that uses this process to encrypt a message. But how do we know for sure
that the only way to decrypt the message is to invert the process? It’s a little
like protecting a treasure in your house by building an incredibly strong lock
8.6. Padding Schemes and the Random Oracle Model                           483

on the front door, but then walking off and leaving a side door open. What’s
missing is a guarantee that the only way to steal the treasure is by opening
the front door, and by that we mean opening it by picking the lock, not by
cutting a hole in the door or knocking it off its hinges.
    In order to solve this problem, cryptographers try to do a precise analysis
and to give a proof of security for a given cryptosystem. The ultimate goal
is to nail down exactly the underlying hard problem, and then to construct a
proof showing that anyone who can break the cryptosystem can also solve the
hard problem. Even more challenging, the argument has to be correct! Such
analyses and arguments make up a significant part of modern-day academic
cryptography.
    Consider the RSA cryptosystem, for example. RSA is based on the hard-
ness of the problem of factorization, but it is not clear at all that breaking
RSA is equivalent to factorization. That is, the ability to quickly factor large
numbers would enable one to break RSA, but there might be another way to
solve the RSA problem without directly solving the problem of factorization.
It is tempting to circumvent this difficulty by defining the hard problem that
RSA is based on to be precisely the hard problem on which RSA is based.
This gains you theoretical security, since your proof of security is now a tau-
tology, and it might even gain you a little bit of practical security, since the
passing of years lends credence to the belief that the RSA problem itself is
fundamentally hard.
    The other cryptosystems that we have studied have similar difficulties.
For example, Diffie–Hellman key exchange and the Elgamal cryptosystem are
not known to be equivalent to the discrete logarithm problem, and discrete
logarithm digital signature schemes such as DSA (Sect. 4.3) rely on the dif-
ficulty of solving a strange equation in which the unknown quantity appears
as both a base and an exponent. Similarly, the security of NTRUEncrypt is
(probabilistically) equivalent to the problem of solving the shortest or closest
vector problems in a certain class of lattices. Thus if SVP or CVP were solved
for general lattices, then NTRUEncrypt would certainly be broken, but it is
also possible that there is an easier way to solve SVP or CVP in the NTRU
lattices due to their special form.
    In 1979 Rabin [108] introduced a method of public key encryption based
on taking square roots modulo a composite modulus N = pq. The novelty of
Rabin’s cryptosystem was that he could prove that an adversary capable of
decrypting arbitrary ciphertexts could also, with high probability, factor the
modulus. This is, on the face of it, quite encouraging. On the other hand,
it also means that Rabin’s cryptosystem is susceptible to a chosen ciphertext
attack, since Rabin’s proof essentially says that a decryption oracle allows one
to factor the modulus.
    At first glance, the whole notion of chosen ciphertext attacks seems coun-
terintuitive and artificial. After all, why would Alice blindly return the de-
cryption of any ciphertext given to her. The answer is that these days Alice
is a computer program, and computer programs will do anything that they

are programmed to do. In particular, they might be programmed to inter-
change various types of information, including possibly decrypted messages
as a means of identification.
    As cryptography developed into a modern science, cryptographers realized
that a potential way around this type of problem is to pad encrypted messages
using a padding that mixes random data with the message. The object is to
somehow create a situation in which Bob can verify that the ciphertext that
he is decrypting was actually created by a person (Alice) who had knowledge
of the original plaintext. Further, Bob should be confident that when Alice
created the ciphertext, she had no significant control over the padding. (An
early padding scheme for RSA that lacked this randomness feature was broken
by Bleichenbacher [16] by simply sending a large number of messages and
seeing which ones were accepted as valid plaintexts, without even being told
their decryptions!) The standard way to introduce random-like qualities is
to create the padding by applying a hash function to the plaintext. This
makes the padding essentially “random” and hence removes it from Alice’s
direct control, while still leaving it predetermined because it is obtained by
evaluating a (hash) function. This crucial assumption, i.e., that hash functions
are somehow simultaneously random and deterministic, was introduced by
Bellare and Rogaway [12] in 1993. They called security proofs based on this
assumption the random oracle model.
    It was hoped that it would be possible, with precise definitions and careful
assumptions, to prove that certain padding schemes really were secure against
chosen ciphertext attacks. An early proposal called the Optimal Asymmetric
Encryption Padding (OAEP) scheme was proposed by Bellare and Rogaway
in 1994 [13]. In this article they proved that OAEP provides security against
chosen ciphertext attacks, an assertion that was accepted by the cryptographic
community for 7 years, during which time OAEP was written into industry
standards.
    We illustrate padding schemes by describing OAEP. Bob uses an encryp-
tion function E and two hash functions G and H. He chooses a plaintext m
and a random bit string r and computes

                           b = G(r) xor (m ? 00 · · · 0),
                                                   
                           c = E b ? H(b) xor r .

Bob sends the ciphertext c to Alice. She decrypts c and breaks it apart to
recover b and H(b) xor r. She uses this to compute first H(b) and then
                                                  
                          r = H(b) xor H(b) xor r .

Finally, she computes G(r) xor b to recover m ? 00 · · · 0. If this string ends with
an appropriate number of 0’s, Alice accepts m as a valid plaintext; otherwise,
she rejects it. Notice how OAEP uses the hash functions to make every bit
of c depend on every bit of m and r, in the sense that changing any one bit
of either m or r causes every bit of c to have a 50 % chance of changing.
8.7. Building Protocols from Cryptographic Primitives                        485

    Unfortunately, it was shown by Shoup in 2001 [131] that one of the
assumptions in the security proof of OAEP was unreasonable, in the sense
that it assumed that no amount of probing of a certain piece of information
could produce useful information. This embarrassing incident underlined one
of the fundamental limitations of security proofs. Just as it is possible for a
complicated cryptographic system to be insecure because the cryptographer
has protected it only against the lines of attack that he knows, a “proof of
security” is only as secure as the validity of its assumptions (not to mention
the correctness of its logic). Shoup proposed a variant called OAEP+ and
gave a correct proof of its security in the random oracle model.
    One might think that for the purposes of analyzing the security of a cryp-
tosystem, it is very reasonable to assume that hash functions behave exactly
as they are supposed to behave, with no hidden flaws, biases, or weaknesses.
However, there have been fierce arguments regarding the use of the random
oracle model as the basis for the security of cryptosystems, with the result
that an alternative (stronger) assumption called the standard model has been
developed to provide what has become known as provable security. For some
hint of the controversy that this has engendered, see for example [69].
    For an overview of this subject we recommend the highly readable survey
articles of Koblitz and Menezes [70] and Bellare [11]. Koblitz and Menezes
remark that “The first books on cryptography that the two of us wrote in our
naive youth suffer from this defect: the sections on security deal only with
the problem of inverting the one-way function.” (Also included is a footnote
clarifying the meaning of the word “youth.”) This quotation highlights the
tendency of those trained in pure mathematics, when introduced to the field of
public key cryptography, to concentrate primarily on the concept of (trapdoor)
one-way functions, to the exclusion of the many practical issues that arise
in real-world implementations. Indeed, the authors of the present book must
admit that even with full knowledge of this pitfall, it is the quest to construct,
understand, and apply new one-way functions to cryptographic systems that
draws them to the subject.5

8.7      Building Protocols from Cryptographic
         Primitives
The use of public key cryptography and digital signature schemes in the real
world involves far more than simply implementing one or two basic algorithms.
Applications almost always involve a number of different cryptographic primi-
tives. For example, a public key might itself be digitally signed, and the public
key cryptosystem, whose plaintexts are padded using a hash function, might be
used to send the key for a symmetric cipher. So this single application involves

   5 And unfortunately, the authors of this book cannot even offer up youth, by any

definition, as an excuse for their behavior.

choosing a public key cryptosystem and digital signature scheme (e.g., RSA),
a hash function (e.g., SHA-1), a padding scheme (e.g., OAEP+), and a sym-
metric cipher (e.g., AES).
    However, even this simple description is far from sufficient. For example,
are Bob and Alice using RSA with 1024-bit keys or with 2048-bit keys? How
long are their AES keys? Exactly how do they use their hash function or sym-
metric cipher to generate pseudorandom numbers? And even if they specify
all of the obvious parameters and decide how to use all of the cryptographic
primitives, they’re still not ready to communicate. They need to agree on for-
matting. This may seem pedantic, but it is very important. Before Bob and
Alice exchange messages, they need to specify the exact meaning of each byte
of the data, e.g., which bytes are the ciphertext, which bytes are the signature,
etc. Even something as seemingly trivial as the order in which data is stored
in memory and transmitted between computers can cause total system failure
if not specifically addressed.6
    A cryptographic protocol is a complete description of everything that is
needed in order to implement a cryptographic procedure. The term is not en-
tirely precise, but it generally refers to the way in which one or more crypto-
graphic algorithms are to be implemented and coordinated with one another.
    The theory of cryptographic protocols, especially their creation and proofs
of security, is a subject in its own right, with numerous articles and books de-
voted to the topic. We note that even if one assumes that the underlying
cryptographic primitives such as RSA or ECC are secure, it is extremely easy
to use such primitives to create a seemingly secure protocol that is, in fact,
vulnerable to attack. This is especially true if one designs the protocol pri-
marily with a view toward efficiency and flexibility; it is vital that security
considerations be given top priority. Further, given the complexity of any pro-
tocol that is formed by fitting together several cryptographic primitives, it
can be difficult to give even a convincing heuristic argument that the pro-
tocol has no security weaknesses. In brief, the construction and analysis of
cryptographic protocols is not for the faint of heart, but it is of fundamental
importance if modern cryptography is to be of any use in the real world.
    In order for computers in far-flung parts of the world to communicate se-
curely (or at all), someone needs to sit down and specify precise cryptographic
protocols. This is normally done by standard-setting bodies that are formed
either by the government or by representatives from the relevant industries.
Even restricting to the field of secure communications, there are many such
bodies in existence, each of which consumes countless man-hours of effort
and innumerable reams of paper7 as it spends years issuing draft versions

    6 Data stored on a computer as least-significant-byte first is said to be in little-endian for-

mat, while the reverse order is called big-endian. These amusing names come from Gulliver’s
Travels, in which the inhabitants of one kingdom are required to crack their soft-boiled eggs
at the “little end,” while those in a rival kingdom crack their eggs at the “big end.”
    7 We ask the reader to excuse our hyperbole. In particular, the aforementioned reams of

paper are figurative, having largely been replaced by megabytes of disk space.
8.8. Blind Digital Signatures, Digital Cash, and Bitcoin                    487

of the eventual final standard. Among the many organizations involved in
this process are the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and the American National Stan-
dards Institute (ANSI). The IETF supervises Request for Comment (RFC)
documents, which are sometimes later released as official standards. The IEEE
sponsors the important P1363 standardization project on public key cryptog-
raphy. There are many reasons why the setting of standards for cryptographic
protocols is such an arduous process, including legitimate differences of opin-
ion as to the security of different protocols and the financially serious issue of
the extent to which patented algorithms should be incorporated into publicly
approved standards. A successful member of a standards-setting board needs
not only a solid technical background, but also must have excellent political
skills.

8.8     Blind Digital Signatures, Digital Cash,
        and Bitcoin
Digital cash, and the blind digital signatures on which it is based, were both
introduced by David Chaum in 1982 [26]. The idea of a blind digital signature
is that the document to be signed is first blinded (concealed) and then signed,
yet the signature can still be verified against the original unblinded document.
One situation where blind signatures are used is in voting protocols, where
a voter might want an election official to validate (sign) her ballot without
revealing to the official how she voted.
Example 8.10. Here is a simple example of a blind signature scheme using
RSA. Alice has a document hash D, and she wants Samantha to create a blind
RSA signature on D using Samantha’s signing triple (N, e, d) as described in
Table 4.1.
  • Alice picks a random number R mod N and uses Samantha’s public ver-
    ification key e to compute D? ≡ Re D (mod N ).
  • Samantha uses her private signing key d to compute the signature

                S ≡ (D? )d ≡ (Rv D)d ≡ Red Dd ≡ RDd        (mod N ).

    (In this computation, we have used the fact that Red ≡ R (mod N ).)
  • Since Alice knows R, she can compute R−1 S ≡ Dd (mod N ), which is
    the signature on her document D.
Notice that Alice does not know Samantha’s private signing key d, while
Samantha does not know the document D that was signed.
    A second application of blind digital signatures is to digital cash. The idea
is that when Alice withdraws digital cash from her bank account and spends
it, her bank is unable to determine who received the money. Thus digital cash
should preserve the anonymity of physical cash transactions, since when Alice
withdraws actual currency from her account, her bank does not know who

she gives it to. (Of course, her bank can record the serial numbers of the
bills that she receives and then track those bills as they move through the
banking system.) Cryptographic methods adding various enhancements, such
as off-line transactions and safeguards against double spending of digital cash
units, were described in later work of Chaum, his co-authors, and others; see
for example [27].
    A potential weakness of these digital cash systems is the necessity of hav-
ing a trusted central authority, be it a bank, an e-cash company, or a govern-
ment, that is responsible for issuing cash and safe-guarding the security of the
system. In principle, the fiat currencies issued by any government have this
weakness, since at any time the issuing body might decide to (say) halve the
value of everyone’s wealth by doubling the amount of available currency. In
the short term, this would make the government very rich, since they would
suddenly have a lot of extra cash to spend. In practice, it would lead to run-
away inflation.8
    The article “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System” [91] pro-
posed a practical way to create a digital cash system without requiring a
trusted central authority. The idea is to digitally sign and cryptographically
join every transaction into a massive linked chain. To prevent a small group of
users from modifying the chain and, say, repudiating or canceling a payment,
the system is designed so that it takes a significant amount of computing
power to add a transaction to the chain. People who do these time-consuming
mining computations that keep the system running are rewarded with a small
fraction of a bitcoin. The complete transaction chain is stored on myriad com-
puters and is always available for public scrutiny.
    There is much hype and much controversy surrounding Bitcoin, including
for example the question of whether a currency that is not backed by anything
tangible can have value.9 This being a mathematical text, we will also not
pursue the fascinating economic and sociological issues raised by Bitcoin, nor
will we discuss how Bitcoin has been used as a (highly) speculative investment
tool and as a way of concealing illegal activities. Instead, we turn to the
cryptographic protocols that underlie Bitcoin.
    Bitcoin uses the elliptic curve digital signature algorithm (ECDSA,
Sect. 6.4.3) to sign transactions. It uses the specific elliptic curve, prime,
and point (E, p, P ) denoted by secp256k1 in the Standards for Efficient
Cryptography document [142, page 21]. Based on our current knowledge of
the difficulty of solving the ECDHP, this provides approximately 128 bit
security. Since it’s fun to see the actual public parameters used to secure the

    8 Many economists feel that a small amount of inflation is a good thing, since it encour-

ages investment while allowing governments to slowly outgrow their accumulated debts.
    9 In fairness, it is not entirely clear in what sense the “full faith and credit of the United

States government” that backs US currency is tangible, although one can argue that this
faith and credit represents the taxing authority of the government on the US economy,
whose productivity and output are eminently tangible.
8.8. Blind Digital Signatures, Digital Cash, and Bitcoin                          489

Bitcoin chain, we list them here. The Bitcoin curve is

                                  E : y 2 = x3 + 7,

and the prime

                   p = 2256 − 232 − 29 − 28 − 27 − 26 − 24 − 1

was chosen to have low Hamming weight, which speeds up computations in
the field Fp . The prime p and curve E have the further property that

    N = #E(Fp ) = p + 1 − 432420386565659656852420866390673177327

is prime, which means that every non-zero point in E(Fp ) has order N . The
public point P = (x, y) ∈ E(Fp ) specified by the secp256k1 standard is

    x = 5506626302227734366957871889516853432625060345377
                                    7594175500187360389116729240,
    y = 3267051002075881697808308513050704318447127338065
                                             9243275938904335757337482424.

    As mentioned earlier, Bitcoin miners perform time-consuming calculations
in order to add bitcoin transactions to the chain. They do this by finding
an input to the hash function SHA-25610 (see Sect. 8.1) that is tied to the
transaction(s) and has output containing a specified number of leading (or
trailing) zeros. Over time, as more CPU power is devoted to mining, the
SHA-256 requirements are constantly being strengthened so that it always
takes 5–10 min on average for a transaction to be added to the chain. Again,
the purpose of this requirement is to prevent any small group from going back
and altering the existing chain.
    We close this section with a few interesting Bitcoin tidbits:
  • Unlike ordinary currency, it is possible to create Bitcoins that can only
     be spent using two signatures, or two out of three signatures, etc.
  • The total number of bitcoins is designed to stabilize at 21,000,000. This
     will, in principle, eliminate bitcoin inflation (which many would argue is
     a bug, not a feature, of a currency).
  • As with all protocols that rely on factorization or discrete logarithm based
     cryptography, the construction of quantum computers (Sect. 8.11) will
     require switching to a quantum secure cryptosystem. The logistics of such
     a switch are likely to be problematic without considerable preparation and
     forethought.

   10 It is interesting that the hash function SHA-256 used by Bitcoin provides 256 bit

security, while the ECDSA signature scheme secp256k1 provides only 128 bit security.

8.9       Homomorphic Encryption
The basic RSA PKC has an interesting multiplicativity property. Suppose
that Bob sends Alice two ciphertexts c1 and c2 associated to the plaintexts m1
and m2 . Then the ciphertext associated to the product m1 m2 is the product
of the ciphtertexts c1 c2 . This is true because

                        c1 c2 ≡ me1 me2 ≡ (m1 m2 )e      (mod N ).

On the other hand, the ciphertext associated to m1 + m2 is almost certainly
not the sum of the ciphtertexts c1 + c2 , since in general

                         (m1 + m2 )e ?≡ me1 + me2        (mod N ).

A fully homomorphic cryptosystem is one that respects both addition and
multiplication. Since homomorphic encryption involves two operations, this
suggests that the correct setting for homomorphic encryption is ring theory;
see Sect. 2.10. In particular, we recall from Exercise 2.31 that if R and S are
rings, then a ring homomorphism φ : R → S is a function satisfying

   φ(a + b) = φ(a) + φ(b)        and    φ(a ? b) = φ(a) ? φ(b)          for all a, b, ∈ R.

Definition. A fully homomorphic encryption scheme (FHE scheme) is an en-
cryption scheme (K, M, C, e, d) with the property that the plaintext space M
and the ciphertext space C are rings and such that for every key k ∈ K, the
encryption function
                                ek : M −→ C
is a ring homomorphism.11
Example 8.11. Here is an example of an FHE scheme. Let M = C = Fpd be
a finite field with pd elements (see Sect. 2.10.4), and let K = {1, 2, . . . , d − 1}.
Then for each k ∈ K, the encryption function
                                                     k
                                       ek (m) = mp
                                                                       d−k
is fully homomorphic, with decryption function dk (c) = cp . (We are using
                 d
the fact that ap = a and (a + b)p = ap + bp for all elements a, b ∈ Fpd .) Of
course, this cryptosystem is either very insecure, if d is small, or completely
impractical, if d is large.

   11 We like this definition of FHE because it stresses the homomorphism in the name, but

we note that the standard definition allows more general constructions. Thus a cryptosystem
is said to be fully homomorphic if it is possible to compute any function or circuit on
encrypted data without knowing the decryption key. Thus one only needs to do addition
and multiplication on encryptions of F2 , and it is not strictly necessary for the ciphteretxt
space to be a ring.
8.9. Homomorphic Encryption                                                               491

    The search for a secure and practical FHE scheme started shortly after
the invention of RSA in the 1970s, but it remained an elusive goal until Craig
Gentry devised the first such system in 2009 [47, 48]. Although neither Gen-
try’s original system, nor subsequent improvements, are fast enough to be
used in practical applications, research continues on this important topic.
    Why, one might ask, is homomorphic encryption interesting or useful? The
answer is that using the basic operations of addition and multiplication (even
just moduo 2), one can perform any computation that can be done by any
computer. Consider the following scenario. Bob has a large amount of data to
analyze, but the analysis requires a tremendous amount of computing power,
far more than Bob possesses. Alice, on the other hand, owns a lot of computers
and is happy to rent computing time to Bob.12 Unfortunately, the data that
Bob needs to analyze is confidential; for example, it might include medical or
financial records. So what Bob would like to do is the following:
    • Encrypt the data, and also encrypt the computer program that will
      analyze the data.
    • Send the encrypted data and the encrypted program to Alice.
    • Have Alice run the encrypted program using the encrypted data without
      decrypting either.
    • Receive the encrypted output from Alice, which he then decrypts.
The miracle of an FHE scheme is that it allows Alice to run an encrypted
computer program on encrypted data and produce encrypted output, without
ever seeing any of Bob’s unencrypted material.
    Gentry’s original FHE scheme has two components. First he constructs a
system that is “somewhat homomorphic,” and then he uses an ingenious boot-
strapping procedure to make it fully homomorphic. The following definition
will be used to quantify the notion of “somewhat homomorphic.”
Definition. A monic monomial in n variables is a polynomial of the form

            M (X1 , . . . , Xn ) = X1e1 X2e2 · · · Xnen    with e1 , . . . , en ≥ 0.

The degree of M is deg(M ) = e1 + · · · + en . More generally, let

           P (X1 , . . . , Xn ) = M1 (X1 , . . . , Xn ) + · · · + Mr (X1 , . . . , Xn )

be a sum of monic monomials, and let d = max deg Mi . Then we say that P has
additive level r and multiplicative level d. We write Levela (P ) and Levelm (P ),
respectively, for the additive and multiplicative levels of P
   Every computation in a ring R may be viewed as evaluating some polyno-
mial P (X1 , . . . , Xn ) at some point (a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ Rn , although this may first
require simplification using the distributive law. For example,
  12 This situation is quite realistic. There are many companies, large and small, from which

one can rent computing power.

       (((a1 + a2 + a3 ) ? a4 ) + a5 ) ? a6 = a1 a4 a6 + a2 a4 a6 + a3 a4 a6 + a5 a6
                                           = P (a1 , . . . , a6 )

with
            P (X1 , . . . , X6 ) = X1 X4 X6 + X2 X4 X6 + X3 X4 X6 + X5 X6 .
  We note that in order to compute P (a1 , . . . , an ), we need to do at
most Levela (P ) additions of quantities, each of which is a product of at
most Levelm (P ) elements of R.

Definition. Let (K, M, C, e, d) be a cryptosystem such that M and C are
rings. We say that it is a leveled homomorphic cryptosystem of level (La , Lm )
if for every key k ∈ K, every polynomial P (X1 , . . . , Xn ) satisfying

                     Levela (P ) ≤ La     and     Levelm (P ) ≤ Lm ,

and every m1 , . . . , mn ∈ M, we have
                                                 
                dk P ek (m1 ), . . . , ek (mn ) = P (m1 , . . . , mn ),
                                   
i.e., P ek (m1 ), . . . , ek (mn ) is a valid encryption of P (m1 , . . . , mn ) for the
key k.

    Informally, a cryptosystem is leveled homomorphic if encryption ek is a
ring homomorphism when it is applied to expressions that involve a limited
number of additions and multiplications in the ring M. Leveled homomorphic
cryptosystems are interesting for two reasons. First, Gentry’s bootstrapping
method sometimes allows one to turn a leveled system into a fully homomor-
phic system, albeit at a significant loss of efficiency. Second, if the levels La
and Lm are sufficiently large, then even a leveled system may be useful in
practice.
    A number of leveled homomorphic cryptosystems have been proposed, and
the construction of secure and efficient systems is an active area of research.
We illustrate by briefly explaining how the NTRU cryptosystem described in
Sect. 7.10 can be used as a leveled homomorphic system.
Example 8.12 (Leveled Homomorphic NTRUEncrypt). To simplify the expo-
sition, we use a variant of NTRUEncrypt in which we assume that the private
key polynomials f (x) and g(x) are chosen to satisfy

                    f (x) ≡ 1 (mod p)      and    g(x) ≡ 0 (mod p);                    (8.1)

see Exercise 7.35. The NTRU plaintext and ciphertext spaces are rings
M = Rp and C = Rq , and encryption of a plaintext m(x) using the (public)
key h(x) ≡ f (x)−1 ? g(x) (mod q) and random element r(x) is given by the
formula
                   e(x) ≡ h(x) ? r(x) + m(x) (mod q).
8.9. Homomorphic Encryption                                                        493

Decryption is done by first computing the center-lift of f (x) ? e(x) (mod q),
and then reducing the result modulo p. Just as in the proof of Proposition 7.48,
see also Exercise 7.35, decryption works provided that every coefficient of the
polynomial
                           g(x) ? r(x) + f (x) ? m(x)
(without any reduction) has magnitude smaller than 12 q.
    We now consider two ciphtertexts e1 and e2 . We claim that if q is large
enough, then the decryption of e1 + e2 using the private key f yields the
plaintext m1 + m2 , and similarly, the decryption of e1 ? e2 using the private
key f 2 yields the plaintext m1 ? m2 . To see why, we compute

      f ? (e1 + e2 ) ≡ (g ? r 1 + f ? m1 ) + (pg ? r 2 + f ? m2 )    (mod q)
                    ≡ g ? (r 1 + r 2 ) + f ? (m1 + m2 )      (mod q),

so if q is large enough, then the center-lift is exactly the polynomial

                        g ? (r 1 + r 2 ) + f ? (m1 + m2 ).

Using (8.1), we see that when we reduce modulo p, we get m1 + m2 (mod p).
   Similarly,

   f 2 ? (e1 ? e2 ) ≡ (g ? r 1 + f ? m1 ) ? (g ? r 2 + f ? m2 ) (mod q)
                    ≡ g ? (g ? r 1 ? r 2 + f ? r 1 ? m2 + f ? r 2 ? m1 )
                                                + f 2 ? (m1 ? m2 )      (mod q).

So again, if q is large enough, then the center-lift gives us exactly the polyno-
mial

       g ? (g ? r 1 ? r 2 + f ? r 1 ? m2 + f ? r 2 ? m1 ) + f 2 ? (m1 ? m2 ),

and reducing modulo p gives m1 ? m2 (mod p).
    We have just shown that if q is large enough, then e1 + e2 is an NTRU
encryption of m1 +m2 and e1 ?e2 is an NTRU encryption of m1 ?m2 , although
for the latter the decryption key is f 2 . In leveled homomorphic terminology,
if q is large enough, then the addition property says that NTRUEncrypt is
leveled homomorphic with level (2, 1), and the multiplication property says
that it is leveled homomorphic with level (1, 2). Further, it is clear that by
increasing q, we can create leveled homomorphic versions of NTRUEncrypt
of any level.
    In order to derive a rough relationship between the value of q and the
levels achieved, we make the simplifying assumption that f , g, m, and r have
coefficients between −p and p, and we put no restriction on the number of
nonzero coefficients.
    Let P (X1 , . . . , Xn ) be a sum of monic monomials, and to ease notation,
let

             α = α(P ) = Levela (P )        and     μ = μ(P ) = Levelm (P ).
It is also convenient to use the homogenized version of P defined by

                   P ∗ (X0 , . . . , Xn ) = X0μ P (X1 /X0 , . . . , Xn /X0 ),

so P ∗ is a sum of monic monomials, each of which has degree exactly μ.
Let m1 , . . . , mn be plaintexts, and let e1 , . . . , en be associated ciphertexts.
Then P (e1 , . . . , en ) decrypts correctly to P (m1 , . . . , mn ) using the decryption
key f μ if the largest coefficient of

                    P (f , g ? r 1 + f ? m1 , . . . , g ? r n + f ? mn )                (8.2)

has magnitude smaller than 12 q.
   We observe that if a1 , . . . , at ∈ R have coefficients between −C and C,
then the largest coefficient of the product a1 ? · · · ? at is at most C t N t−1 ,
obtained for example if every coefficient of every ai is C. Hence the largest
coefficient of
                                   g ? r i + f ? mi
is at most 2p2 N . The monomials appearing in (8.2) are products of μ ex-
pressions of the form g ? r i + f ? mi with 0 ≤ i ≤ n, where for convenience
we set r 0 = 0 and m0 = 1. So the monomials in (8.2) have coefficients that
are at most (2p2 N )μ N μ−1 , which is smaller than (2pN )2μ . Finally, we note
that (8.2) is a sum of at most α monomials, and hence the largest coeffi-
cient in (8.2) is at most α(2pN )2μ . This proves that P (e1 , . . . , en ) decrypts
correctly to P (m1 , . . . , mn ) using the decryption key f μ if q satisfies

                                      q > 2α(2pN )2μ .

Thus the size of q increases linearly with the number of additions, but expo-
nentially with the number of multiplications

8.10        Hyperelliptic Curve Cryptography
A hyperelliptic curve of genus g is the set of solutions to an equation of the
form13
              C : Y 2 = X 2g+1 + A1 X 2g + · · · + A2g X + A2g+1 ,
with the added requirement that the polynomial F (X) = X 2g+1 + · · · + A2g+1
have distinct roots.14 And just as for elliptic curves, we throw in one extra
point O that lives “at infinity.” Thus an elliptic curve is a curve of genus 1.

  13 When working over a field F , one uses the more general form Y 2 + Y = F (X).
                                2k
  14 When one is working over C, the distinct roots condition means complex roots. Over a

finite field Fp , the condition may be? formulated by? requiring that the discriminant of F (X)
not vanish, or equivalently that gcd F (X), F ? (X) = 1, where F ? (X) is obtained by formally
differentiating F (X).
8.10. Hyperelliptic Curve Cryptography                                                   495

    In general there is no addition law for the individual points on a hyper-
elliptic curve, but it is possible to define an addition law for collections of
points. Roughly speaking, we can take two collections of g points, say

                  {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pg }   and       {Q1 , Q2 , . . . , Qg },

and “add” them to obtain a new collection of g points {R1 , R2 , . . . , Rg }. This
generalizes the addition law on an elliptic curve, but a precise formulation is
somewhat more complicated.
   To describe the addition law exactly, we define a divisor on C to be a
formal sum of points

 n1 [P1 ] + n2 [P2 ] + · · · + nr [Pr ]     with P1 , . . . , Pr ∈ C and n1 , . . . , nr ∈ Z.

Note that a divisor is simply a convenient shorthand for a finite set of points,
each of which has an attached multiplicity. In particular, if f (X, Y ) is a ra-
tional function on C, then we can attach a divisor to f (X, Y ) by listing the
points where f vanishes and the points where f has poles, with their appro-
priate multiplicities. The degree of a divisor is the sum of its multiplicities,
                                                         
     deg(D) = deg n1 [P1 ] + n2 [P2 ] + · · · + nr [Pr ] = n1 + n2 + · · · + nr .

(See Sect. 6.8.2 for a discussion of rational functions and divisors on elliptic
curves.)
    We next define the divisor group of C, denoted by Div(C), to be the set
of divisors on C. Note that we can add and subtract divisors by adding and
subtracting the multiplicities of each point. We also let Div0 (C) be the set of
divisors of degree 0. One can prove that the divisor of a function always has
degree 0. Two divisors D1 and D2 are said to be linearly equivalent if

                           D1 − D2 = divisor of a function.

We write Jac0 (C) for the set of divisors of degree 0, with the understand-
ing that linearly equivalent divisors are considered to be identical. The
set Jac0 (C), with the addition law obtained by adding the multiplicities of
points, is called the Jacobian variety of C. It is the higher-genus analogue of
elliptic curves and their addition laws.
    A crucial property of Jac0 (C) is that it can be described as the set of solu-
tions to a system of polynomial equations, and the addition law may also be
described using polynomials. So if we take solutions with coordinates in Fp ,
then we obtain a group (i.e., a set with an addition law) that is completely
analogous to the group E(Fp ) of points on an elliptic curve. For notational
convenience, let J = Jac0 (C) and J(Fp ) be the points on Jac0 (C) with coor-
dinates in Fp . The Hyperelliptic Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem (HCDLP)
is as follows:
       Given P and Q in J(Fp ), find an integer m such that Q = mP .

It is clear how one can use hyperelliptic curves for public key cryptography by
mimicking the constructions for the multiplicative group (Sects. 2.3 and 2.4)
and for elliptic curves (Sect. 6.4). This leads to hyperelliptic Diffie–Hellman
key exchange and the hyperelliptic Elgamal public key cryptosystem.
    The primary, and from cryptographic purposes fundamental, difference
between elliptic curves and hyperelliptic curves is that the latter have larger
groups of points. More precisely, there is an analogue of Hasse’s theorem
(Theorem 6.11), due to André Weil, which says that
                                               1
                                                  
                          #J(Fp ) = pg + O pg− 2 .

For example, a hyperelliptic curve of genus 2 has approximately p2 points.
    As with elliptic curves, one hopes that the best algorithms to solve the
HCDLP are collision algorithms such as Pollard’s ρ algorithm. (But see Re-
mark 8.13.) Since the group J(Fp ) has approximately pg elements, this means
that it takes O(pg/2 ) steps to solve HCDLP. Thus using curves with g > 1
allows us to achieve security levels equivalent to those on elliptic curves while
using a smaller prime p.
    However, as g gets large, the computational complexity of the addition law
becomes formidable (and there are also security issues), so for concreteness,
we consider the case g = 2. Then J(Fp ) has approximately p2 elements and
it takes O(p) steps to solve the HCDLP. This may be compared with an
                                                             √
elliptic curve, for which #E(Fp ) ≈ p and ECDLP takes O( p ) steps to solve.
Thus J(Fp ) allows us to use primes with approximately half as many digits.
This does not lead to a significant speed advantage, because the addition law
on J is significantly more complicated than the addition law on E. However,
it does mean that ciphertexts, and even more importantly, digital signatures,
are half as large using J as they are using E. This becomes a large advantage
on highly constrained devices such as radio frequency identification (RFID)
tags.
Remark 8.13. It is not actually true that the best known methods to solve
the HCDLP are collision algorithms. If the genus g of the curve is moderately
large compared to the prime p, then Adleman, DeMarrais, and Huang found
an index calculus algorithm that solves the HCDLP in subexponential time.
They show that if 2g + 1 ≥ (ln p)1+? for some ? > 0, then the HCDLP can be
solved in L(p2g+1 )c steps for some small constant c. In the opposite direction,
if p is large, say p > g!, then Gaudry found an algorithm to solve the HCDLP
in O(g 3 p2+? ) steps. This is not helpful if g = 1 or 2, but it is significant
if g ≥ 3 and p is large. This is one of the reasons that only hyperelliptic curves
of genus 2 and 3 are being seriously considered for use in cryptography.
     Finally, just as for elliptic curves, there are various attacks on the HCDLP
using versions of the Weil and Tate pairing (see Sect. 6.9.1), but it is easy to
avoid such attacks by appropriate choices of parameters.
8.11. Quantum Computing                                                                  497

8.11        Quantum Computing
The value of each bit in a classical computer is either 0 or 1. In a quantum
computer, each so-called quantum bit (qubit) may simultaneously takes on
every value between 0 and 1 with varying probabilities. This added flexibil-
ity allows many computations, including integer factorization and discrete
logarithm problems, to be done very quickly. Thus a working quantum com-
puter with sufficiently many qubits would break RSA and both the classical
and the elliptic curve versions of Elgamal. (However, there is at present no
polynomial-time quantum algorithm that solve the shortest or closest lattice
vector problems.)
    Tempting though it is, we will not use this opportunity to give a serious
introduction to quantum mechanics. The aim of this section is fairly modest.
We sketch the basic ideas behind one remarkable application of quantum me-
chanics to cryptography: Shor’s polynomial-time quantum algorithm [128] for
factoring integers and for finding discrete logarithms. The following presen-
tation owes a great deal to Shor’s accessible and beautifully written exposi-
tion [129], which would serve as a nice start for the interested reader familiar
with the concept of a Hilbert space. For those with a less robust background
in mathematics and quantum theory, see for example [64].
    The fundamental unit of information in classical computers is the binary
digit (bit), represented as a 0 or 1. Bits are manipulated according to the
principles of Boolean logic, in which connectives such as AND and OR oper-
ate on pairs of bits in the usual way, and NOT reverses 0 and 1. Sequences of
bits are manipulated by Boolean logic gates, using these Boolean rules, and a
succession of gates yields an end state, or computation. A quantum computer
manipulates quantum bits (qubits) via quantum logic gates, which are sup-
posed to simulate the laws of quantum mechanics, especially properties such
as superposition and entanglement, which give the field of quantum mechanics
its distinctive nonclassical characteristics.
    A qubit with two states is typically represented using ket notation,15 in
which |0" denotes the 0-state and |1" the 1-state. Then the (pure) states of
the system have the form
                                  α |0" + β |1" ,
where α and β are complex numbers satisfying |α|2 + |β|2 = 1.
    In an n-component system, the 2n basis elements are represented by se-
quences such as |si " = |0110 . . . 0" consisting of a list of n zeros and ones, and
a state of the system is
                          n
                         2? −1                        ?
                                 αi |si " ,   where       |αi |2 = 1.                   (8.3)
                         i=0

   15 The rather strange word ket is the latter half of the word bracket. In quantum mechanics

there is also bra notation x| and a “bracket pairing” x|y .

A sum (8.3) is called a superposition of states. There are other quantum states
known as “mixed” states that we do not discuss here, so we omit the word
pure in the rest of this discussion. Thus a quantum state is represented by a
vector of complex numbers of length 2n such that sum of the squares of their
moduli is equal to one. These are called complex unit vectors.
    Just as for classical computers, manipulating qubits via quantum logic
gates requires the notion of a change of state. A quantum change of state is
the result of applying a unitary linear transformation16 to one of the complex
unit vectors representing a state. Actually, there are additional restrictions on
which unitary transformations are permitted for changes of state. One of these
restrictions is the requirement of locality: the unitary matrices should operate
on only a fixed finite number of bits. It turns out that 2-bit transformations
form the building blocks of the allowable transformations.
    The quantum-mechanical interpretation of the αi ’s is that |αi |2 represents
the probability that a measurement of the system yields state |si ". It is the
probabilistic interpretation of the complex coefficients of these vectors that
encodes the physical realities observed in experiment and predicted by physical
theory.
    In [129], Shor describes a quantum polynomial-time algorithm to find (with
high probability) the order r of a number x mod n. (Recall that the order
of x is the smallest integer r ≥ 1 such that xr ≡ 1 mod n.) Factorization
can be reduced to the problem of finding the order of an integer, because if x
is chosen randomly and has even order r, then gcd (xr/2 − 1, n) is likely to
be a nontrivial odd factor of n. (See [87].) Shor also gives a polynomial-time
quantum algorithm to solve the discrete logarithm problem in F∗p , and such
algorithms also exist for the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem [107].
Interestingly, there are still no polynomial-time (or even subexponential-time)
quantum algorithms to solve the shortest or closest vector problems, so lattice-
based cryptosystems are currently secure even against the construction of a
quantum computer.17
    The basic building block of Shor’s algorithm is a quantum version of the
Fast Fourier Transform. In order to find the order r of a number a modulo n,
we choose q to be a power of 2 in the interval between n2 and 2n2 . Then for
any 0 < a < q, the state |a" is obtained from the binary representation of the
number a. The Fourier transform of |a" is the state

                               1 ?
                                 q−1
                                          |c" exp(2πiac/q).
                              q 1/2 c=0

   16 A unitary linear transformation is given by a matrix with determinant one whose

conjugate transpose is equal to its inverse.
   17 This is not strictly true because there is a general quantum search algorithm that

essentially cuts searches by a square root. So if a quantum computer were built, the key
size of lattice-based cryptosystems might need to double. But this would be a small price
compared to the devastation that a working quantum computer would cause to factorization
and discrete logarithm-based systems.
8.12. Modern Symmetric Cryptosystems: DES and AES                            499

It turns out that this transformation can be achieved in polynomial time.
Shor then applies the quantum Fourier transform to a certain superposition
of states and measures the resulting system. The key computation shows that
the probability of seeing state |c" is relatively large if there exists a rational
number dr ∈ Q satisfying
                                          
                                 c d?
                                  − ?< 1.
                                 q     r ? 2q
(Recall that r is the order of a.) Using the continued fraction expansion of the
known rational number qc , it is not hard to determine the fraction dr in lowest
terms, since q > n2 .
    There remains only the “minor” challenge of building a functioning quan-
tum computer. Research in this field has focused on the issue of decoherence,
which involves controlling the errors in quantum computation introduced by
the interaction of the computer with its environment. There is already a vast
literature on quantum computing and quantum computers, reflecting to some
extent the large amount of government funding that has been allocated to the
subject. One place to start gathering resources about quantum computers is
the website for NIST’s Quantum Information Program at qubit.nist.gov.
    Finally, we would be remiss if we did not mention the theory of quantum
cryptography. The idea is to use quantum-mechanical principles such as the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle or the entanglement of quantum states to
perform a completely secure key exchange. In particular, if Eve attempts to
read either Bob’s or Alice’s transmission, then quantum theory says that she
must alter the data, so Bob and Alice will know that their communication
has been compromised.

8.12      Modern Symmetric Cryptosystems:
          DES and AES
In Sect. 1.7.1 we gave an abstract formulation of symmetric ciphers, and in
Sect. 1.7.4 we described several elementary examples. Not surprisingly, none
of the examples in Sect. 1.7.4 is secure. Modern symmetric ciphers such as
the Data Encryption Standard (DES) and the Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES) are based on ad hoc mixing operations, rather than on intractable
mathematical problems used by asymmetric ciphers. The reason that DES
and AES and other symmetric ciphers are used in practice is that they are
much faster than asymmetric ciphers. Thus if Alice wants to send Bob a long
message, she first uses an asymmetric cipher such as RSA to send Bob a key
for a symmetric cipher, and then she uses a symmetric cipher such as DES or
AES to send the actual data.
    DES was created by a team of cryptographers at IBM in the early 1970s,
and with some modifications suggested by the United States National Security
Agency (NSA), it was officially adopted in 1977 as a government standard

suitable for use in commercial applications. (See [97].) DES uses a 56-bit
private key and encrypts blocks of 64 bits at a time. Most of DES’s mixing
operations are linear, with the only nonlinear component being the use of
eight S-boxes (substitution boxes). Each S-box is a look-up table in which six
input bits are replaced by four output bits. Figure 8.1 illustrates one of the
S-boxes used by DES.

                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
              0 14 4 13 1 2 15 11 8 3 10 6 12 5 9 0 7
              1 0 15 7 4 14 2 13 1 10 6 12 11 9 5 3 8
              2 4 1 14 8 13 6 2 11 15 12 9 7 3 10 5 0
              3 15 12 8 2 4 9 1 7 5 11 3 14 10 0 6 13

Figure 8.1: The first of eight S-boxes used by DES

   Here is how an S-box is used. The input is a list of six bits, say

                           Input = β1 β2 β3 β4 β5 β6 .

First use the 2-bit binary number β1 β6 , which is a number between 0 and 3, to
choose the row of the S-box, and then use the 4-bit binary number β2 β3 β4 β5 ,
which is a number between 0 and 15, to choose the column of the S-box. The
output is the entry of the S-box for the chosen row and column. This entry,
which is between 0 and 15, is converted into a 4-bit number.
    For example, suppose that the input string is ‘110010’. Binary ‘10’ is 2, so
we use row 2, and binary ‘1001’ is 9, so we use column 9. The entry of the S-box
in Fig. 8.1 for row 2 and column 9 is 12, which we convert to binary ‘1100’.
    The S-boxes were designed to prevent various sorts of attacks, including
especially an attack called differential cryptanalysis, which was known to IBM
and the NSA in the 1970s, but published only after its rediscovery by Biham
and Shamir in the 1980s. Differential cryptanalysis and other non-brute-force
attacks are somewhat impractical because they require knowledge of a large
number (>240 ) of plaintext/ciphertext pairs.
    A more serious flaw of DES is its comparatively short 56-bit key. As
computer hardware became increasingly fast and inexpensive and comput-
ing power more distributed in the 1990s, it became feasible to break DES by
a brute-force search of all possible keys, either using many machines over the
Internet or building a dedicated DES cracking machine. To demonstrate this
vulnerability, in 1999 a group broke a 56-bit DES key in less than 24 h.
    One solution to this problem, which has been widely adopted, is to use
DES multiple times. There are a number of different versions of Triple DES,
the simplest of which is to simply encrypt the plaintext three times using
three different keys. Thus if we write DES(k, m) for the DES encryption of
the message m using the key k, then one version of triple DES is

           TDES(k1 , k2 , k3 , m) = DES(k3 , DES(k2 , DES(k1 , m))).
8.12. Modern Symmetric Cryptosystems: DES and AES                                      501

A variation replaces the middle DES encryption by a DES decryption; this has
the effect that setting k1 = k2 = k3 = k yields ordinary DES encryption. An-
other variation, used by the electronics payment industry, takes k1 = k3 , which
reduces key size at the cost of some security reduction. Finally, since three
DES encryptions triple the encryption time, another version called DES-X
uses a single DES encryption combined with initial and final XOR operations
with two 64-bit keys. Thus DES-X looks like

                 DESX(k1 , k2 , k3 , m) = k3 xor DES(k2 , m xor k1 ).

    Although DES and its variants were widely deployed, it suffers from short
and inflexible key and block sizes. Further, although DES is fast when im-
plemented in specialized hardware, it is comparatively slow in software. So in
1997 the United States National Institute of Standards (NIST) organized an
open competition to choose a replacement for DES. There were many submis-
sions, and after several years of analysis and several international conferences
devoted to the selection process, NIST announced in 2000 that the Rijndael
cipher, invented by the Belgian cryptographers J. Daemen and V. Rijmen, had
been chosen as AES. Since that time AES has been widely adopted, although
variants of DES are still in use.18
    AES is a block cipher in which the plaintext–ciphertext blocks are 128 bits
in length and the key size may be 128, 192, or 256 bits. AES is similar to
DES in that it encrypts and decrypts by repeating a basic operation several
times. In the case of AES, there are 10, 12, or 14 rounds depending on the size
of the key. AES is also similar to DES in that it uses an S-box to provide the
all-important nonlinearity to the encryption process. However, AES’s S-box
is constructed using the operation of taking multiplicative inverses in the
field F28 with 28 elements. (See Sect. 2.10.4 for a discussion of finite fields
with a prime power number of elements.) Many of AES’s basic operations use
128 bit blocks, which are broken up into 16 bytes. Each byte consists of 8 bits
and is treated as an element of the field F28 . Then various operations, including
inversion, are performed in F28 . The details of AES are too complicated to
give here, but they are designed to be very fast when implemented in either
software or hardware. The interested reader will find a full description in the
official NIST publication FIPS PUB 197 [96] and in many other sources.

   18 All of the AES finalists (MARS, RC6, Rijndael, Serpent, Twofish) were believed to be

secure, and none was clearly superior in all aspects. So the choice of Rijndael was based on
its balance of flexibility, ease of implementation, and speed in both hardware and software.
List of Notation

Z               the integers {. . . , −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .}, 10
b|a             b divides a (integers), 10
b?a             b does not divide a (integers), 10
gcd             greatest common divisor, 11
a ≡ b (mod m)   a and b are congruent modulo m, 19
Z/mZ            the ring of integers modulo m, 21
(Z/mZ)∗         the group of units in Z/mZ, 22
ordp (a)        order (or exponent) of p in a, 28
a−1 mod p       the multiplicative inverse of a modulo p, 28
R               the field of real numbers, 29
Q               the field of rational numbers, 29
C               the field of complex numbers, 29
Fp              the finite field Z/pZ, 29
K               space of keys, 37
M               space of messages (plaintexts), 37
C               space of ciphertexts, 37
e or ek         encryption function, 37
d or dk         decryption function, 37
⊕               exclusive or (XOR), 43
 x?             the greatest integer in x, 53
logg (h)        the discrete logarithm of h to the base g, 65
                composition operation in a group, 74
|G|             the order of the group G, 74
#G              the order of the group G, 74
GLn             the general linear group, 75
g x?            exponentiation of g in a group G, 75
O g(x)          big-O notation, 78
                multiplication in a ring, 95
Z[x]            ring of polynomials with integer coefficients, 96
b|a             b divides a (in a ring), 96
b?a             b does not divide a (in a ring), 96
a ≡ b (mod m)   a and b are congruent modulo m (in a ring), 97
R/mR            quotient ring of R by m, 98
R/(m)           quotient ring of R by m, 98
R[x]            ring of polynomials with coefficients in R, 98

© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014                                   503
J. Hoffstein et al., An Introduction to Mathematical Cryptography,
Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-1711-2
504                                                          List of Notation

deg              degree of a polynomial, 98
Fp d             a finite field with pd elements, 106
GF(pd )          a field with pd elements, 106
π(X)             number of primes between 2 and X, 133
ζ(s)             Riemann zeta function, 135
ψ(X,
   B)            Number of B-smooth integers between 2 an X, 150
o g(x)           little-o notation,
                                 √ 151
L(X)
                 the function e (ln X)(ln ln X) , 151
Ω ?g(x)          big-Ω notation, 152
Θ g(x)           big-Θ notation, 152          ?
f (X) + g(X)     alternative for f (X) = O? g(X) , 152
f (X) , g(X)     alternative for f (X) = Ω ?g(X) , 152
 f (X) ,+ g(X)   alternative for f (X) = Θ g(X) , 152
 Z[β]            the ring generated by the complex number β, 162
                                                1−?

 L? (X)          the function e(ln X) (ln ln X) , 165
 a
 p
                 the Legendre symbol of a modulo p, 171
Li(X)            the logarithmic integral function, 186
K Pri            private signing key, 194
K Pub            public verification key, 194
Sign             signing algorithm, 194
Verify
                 verification algorithm, 194
 n
 r
                 combinatorial symbol n choose r, 212
IndCo(s, t)      index of coincidence of s, 219
MutIndCo(s, t)   mutual index of coincidence of s and t, 221
Pr               a probability function, 229
Pr(F | E)        conditional probability of F on E, 234
fX (x)           probability density function of X, 239
FX (x)           probability distribution function of X, 239
fX,Y (x, y)      joint density function of X and Y , 241
fX,Y (x | y)     conditional density function of X and Y , 241
Of+ (x)          orbit of x under iteration of f , 254
H(X)             the entropy of the random variable X, 270
⊕                addition on an elliptic curve, 302
O                point at infinity on elliptic curve, 305
ΔE               discriminant of the elliptic curve E, 306
E(Fp )           points of elliptic curve with coordinates in Fp , 308
logP (Q)         the elliptic discrete logarithm of Q with respect to P , 313
τ                the p-power Frobenius map Fpk → Fpk , 334
τ                the p-power Frobenius map on an elliptic curve E(Fpk ), 334
E[m]             points of order m on an elliptic curve E, 339
deg(D)           degree of the divisor D, 341
Sum(D)           sum of points in the divisor D, 341
em               the Weil pairing on an elliptic curve, 342
τ (P, Q)         Tate pairing on an elliptic curve, 348
τ̂ (P, Q)        modified Tate pairing on an elliptic curve, 348
ê?              modified Weil pairing on an elliptic curve, 354
a·b              dot product of a and b, 385
"a"              Euclidean norm of a, 385
List of Notation                                                            505

GLn (Z)        the special linear group (over Z), 390
det(L)         the determinant (covolume) of the lattice L, 392
γn             Hermite constant, 397
H(B)           the Hadamard ratio of the basis B, 397
BR (a)         closed ball of radius R centered at a, 397
Γ(s)           the gamma function, 400
σ(L)           Gaussian expected shortest length of a vector in L, 402
R              the convolution polynomial ring Z[x]/(xN − 1), 412
Rq             the convolution polynomial ring (Z/qZ)[x]/(xN − 1), 412
a?b            multiplication in convolution polynomial ring, 413
               convolution product of vectors, 414
T (d1 , d2 )   ternary polynomial, 417
LNTRU
  h            the NTRU lattice associated to h(x), 425
MhNTRU         matrix for the NTRU lattice associated to h(x), 425
"a"∞           sup norm of a, 434
B∗             Gram–Schmidt orthogonal basis associated to B, 439
W⊥             the orthogonal complement of W , 440
Hash           a hash function, 472
Div(C)         group of divisors on a curve, 495
Div0 (C)       group of divisors of degree 0 on a curve, 495
Jac0 (C)       the Jacobian variety of the curve C, 495
J(Fp )         the group of points modulo p on the Jacobian Jac0 (C), 495
|0-            ket notation in quantum mechanics, 497
