                           Foreword

Computer forensics is a relatively new field, and over the years it has been called many
things: “computer forensics,” “digital forensics,” and “media analysis” to name a few. It
has only been in the past few years that we have begun to recognize that all of our digital
devices leave digital breadcrumbs and that these breadcrumbs are valuable evidence in a
wide range of inquiries. While criminal justice professionals were some of the first to
take an interest in this digital evidence, the intelligence, information security, and civil
law fields have enthusiastically adopted this new source of information.
   Digital forensics has joined the mainstream. In 2003, the American Society of Crime
Laboratory Directors–Laboratory Accreditation Board (ASCLD–LAB) recognized digital
evidence as a full-fledged forensic discipline. Along with this acceptance came increased
interest in training and education in this field. The Computer Forensic Educator’s
Working Group (now known as the Digital Forensic Working Group) was formed to
assist educators in developing programs in this field. There are now over three-dozen
colleges and universities that have, or are, developing programs in this field. More join
their ranks each month.
    I have had the pleasure of working with many law enforcement agencies, training
organizations, colleges, and universities to develop digital forensic programs. One of the
first questions that I am asked is if I can recommend a good textbook for their course or
courses. There have been many books written about this field. Most take a targeted
approach to a particular investigative approach, such as incident response or criminal
investigation. Some tend to be how-to manuals for specific tools. It has been hard to
find a book that provides a solid technical and process foundation for the field…That is,
until now.

FOREWORD

   This book is the foundational book for file system analysis. It is thorough, complete,
and well organized. Brian Carrier has done what needed to be done for this field. This book
provides a solid understanding of both the structures that make up different file systems
and how these structures work. Carrier has written this book in such a way that the read-
ers can use what they know about one file system to learn another. This book will be
invaluable as a textbook and as a reference and needs to be on the shelf of every digital
forensic practitioner and educator. It will also provide accessible reading for those who
want to understand subjects such as data recovery.
   When I was first approached about writing this Foreword, I was excited! I have known
Brian Carrier for a number of years and I have always been impressed with his wonder-
ful balance of incredible technical expertise and his ability to clearly explain not just
what he knows but, more importantly, what you need to know. Brian’s work on Autopsy
and The Sleuth Kit (TSK) has demonstrated his command of this field—his name is a
household name in the digital forensic community. I have been privileged to work with
Brian in his current role at Purdue University, and he is helping to do for the academic
community what he did for the commercial sector: He set a high standard.
   So, it is without reservation that I recommend this book to you. It will provide you
with a solid foundation in digital media.

Mark M. Pollitt
President, Digital Evidence Professional Services, Inc.
Retired Director of the FBI’s Regional Computer Forensic Laboratory Program

