                              Preface

One of the biggest challenges that I have faced over the years while developing The Sleuth
Kit (TSK) has been finding good file and volume system (such as partition tables, RAID,
and so on) documentation. It also has been challenging to explain to users why certain
files cannot be recovered or what to do when a corrupt file system is encountered
because there are no good references to recommend. It is easy to find resources that
describe file systems at a high level, but source code is typically needed to learn the
details. My goal for this book is to fill the void and describe how data are stored on disk
and describe where and how digital evidence can be found.
    There are two target audiences for this book. One is the experienced investigator that
has learned about digital investigations from real cases and using analysis tools. The
other is someone who is new to the field and is interested in learning about the general
theory of an investigation and where digital evidence may exist but is not yet looking for
a book that has a tutorial on how to use a specific tool.
    The value of the material in this book is that it helps to provide an education rather
than training on a specific tool. Consider some of the more formal sciences or engineer-
ing disciplines. All undergraduates are required to take a couple of semesters of physics,
chemistry, or biology. These courses are not required because the students will be using
all the material for the rest of their careers. In fact, software and equipment exist to
perform many of the calculations students are forced to memorize. The point of the
classes is to provide students with insight about how things work so that they are not
constrained by their tools.

PREFACE

   The goal of this book is to provide an investigator with an education similar to what
Chemistry 101 is to a chemist in a forensics lab. The majority of digital evidence is found
on a disk, and knowing how and why the evidence exists can help an investigator to bet-
ter testify about it. It also will help an investigator find errors and bugs in his analysis
tools because he can conduct sanity checks on the tool output.
   The recent trends in digital investigations have shown that more education is needed.
Forensic labs are being accredited for digital evidence, and there are debates about the
required education and certification levels. Numerous universities offer courses and even
Master’s degrees in computer forensics. Government and university labs are conducting
theoretical research in the area and focusing on future, as well as current, problems.
There are also peer-reviewed journals for publishing research and investigation tech-
niques. All these new directions require in-depth knowledge outside of a specific tool
or technique.
   The approach of this book is to describe the basic concepts and theory of a volume
and file system and then apply it to an investigation. For each file system, this book cov-
ers analysis techniques and special considerations that the investigator should make.
Scenarios are given to reinforce how the information can be used in an actual case. In
addition, the data structures associated with volume and file systems are given, and disk
images are analyzed by hand so that you can see where the various data are located. If
you are not interested in parsing data structures, you can skip the data structure chap-
ters. Only non-commercial tools are used so that you can download them for free and
duplicate the results on your systems.

ROADMAP
This book is organized into three parts. Part 1 provides the basic foundations, and Parts
2 and 3 provide the technical meat of the book. The book is organized so that we move
up the layers of abstraction in a computer. We start by discussing hard disks and then
discuss how disks are organized into partitions. After we discuss partitions, we discuss
the contents of partitions, which are typically a file system.
   Part 1, “Foundations,” starts with Chapter 1, “Digital Investigation Foundations,” and
discusses the approach I take to a digital investigation. The different phases and guide-
lines are presented so that you know where I use the techniques described in this book.
This book does not require that you use the same approach that I do. Chapter 2,
“Computer Foundations,” provides the computer foundations and describes data struc-
tures, data encoding, the boot process, and hard disk technology. Chapter 3, “Hard Disk
Data Acquisition,” provides the theory and a case study of hard disk acquisition so that
we have data to analyze in Parts 2 and 3.

    Part 2, “Volume Analysis,” of the book is about the analysis of data structures that par-
tition and assemble storage volumes. Chapter 4, “Volume Analysis,” provides a general
overview of the volume analysis techniques, and Chapter 5, “PC-based Partitions,” exam-
ines the common DOS and Apple partitions. Chapter 6, “Server-based Partitions,” covers
the partitions found in BSD, Sun Solaris, and Itanium-based systems. Chapter 7,
“Multiple Disk Volumes,” covers RAID and volume spanning.
    Part 3, “File System Analysis,” of the book is about the analysis of data structures in a
volume that are used to store and retrieve files. Chapter 8, “File System Analysis,” covers
the general theory of file system analysis and defines terminology for the rest of Part 3.
Each file system has at least two chapters dedicated to it where the first chapter discusses
the basic concepts and investigation techniques and the second chapter includes the data
structures and manual analysis of example disk images. You have a choice of reading the
two chapters in parallel, reading one after the other, or skipping the data structures
chapter altogether.
    The designs of the file systems are very different, so they are described using a general
file system model. The general model organizes the data in a file system into one of five
categories: file system, content, metadata, file name, and application. This general model
is used to describe each of the file systems so that it is easier to compare them.
    Chapters 9, “FAT Concepts and Analysis,” and 10, “FAT Data Structures,” detail the
FAT file system, and Chapters 11, “NTFS Concepts,” 12, “NTFS Analysis,” and 13, “NTFS
Data Structures,” cover NTFS. Next, we skip to the Unix file systems with Chapters 14,
“Ext2 and Ext3 Concepts and Analysis,” and 15, “Ext2 and Ext3 Data Structures,” on the
Linux Ext2 and Ext3 file systems. Lastly, Chapters 16, “UFS1 and UFS2 Concepts and
Analysis,” and 17, “UFS1 and UFS2 Data Structures,” examine UFS1 and UFS2, which are
found in FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, and Sun Solaris.
    After Part 3 of this book, you will know where a file existed on disk and the various
data structures that need to be in sync for you to view it. This book does not discuss how
to analyze the file’s contents.

    Now that you know what is included in this book, I will tell you what is not in this
book. This book stops at the file system level and does not look at the application level.
Therefore, we do not look at how to analyze various file formats. We also do not look at
what files a specific OS or application creates. If you are interested in a step-by-step
guide to investigating a Windows ‘98 computer that has been used to download suspect
files, then you will be disappointed with this book. If you want a guide to investigating a
compromised Linux server, then you may learn a few tricks in this book, but it is not

PREFACE

what you are looking for. Those topics fall into the application analysis realm and require
another book to do them justice. If you are interested in having more than just a step-by-
step guide, then this book is probably for you.

RESOURCES
As I mentioned in the beginning, the target audience for this book is not someone who
is new to the field and looking for a book that will show the basic investigation concepts
or how to use a specific tool. There are several quality books that are breadth-based,
including:

  Casey, Eoghan. Digital Evidence and Computer Crime. 2nd ed. London: Academic
  Press, 2004.
  Kruse, Warren and Jay Heiser. Computer Forensics. Boston: Addison Wesley, 2002.
  Mandia, Kevin, Chris Prosise, and Matt Pepe. Incident Response and Computer
  Forensics. Emeryville: McGraw Hill/Osborne, 2003.

   Throughout this book, I will be using The Sleuth Kit (TSK) on example disk images so
that both the raw data and formatted data can be shown. That is not to say that this is a
tutorial on using TSK. To learn only about using TSK, the previous books or the
computer forensic chapters in Know Your Enemy, 2nd Edition should be referred to. The
appendix in this book describes TSK and Autopsy (a graphical interface for TSK). TSK
and additional documentation can be downloaded from http://www.sleuthkit.org.
   The URLs of other tools that are used throughout the book will be given as
needed. Additional resources, links, and corrections will be available from http://
www.digital-evidence.org/fsfa/.
  Any corrections can be e-mailed to me at fsfa@digital-evidence.org.

                       Acknowledgments

              I would like to thank many people for helping me with digital forensics. First, thanks go
              out to those who have helped me in general over the years. My appreciation goes to
              Eoghan Casey, Dave Dittrich, Dan Farmer, Dan Geer, Dan Kalil, Warren Kruse, Gary
              Palmer, Eugene Spafford, Lance Spitzner, and Wietse Venema for various forms of
              guidance, knowledge, and opportunities.
                 I would also like to thank Cory Altheide, Eoghan Casey, Knut Eckstein, and Jim Lyle
              for reviewing the entire book. Special thanks go to Knut, who went through every
              hexdump dissection of the example disk images and verified each hexadecimal to deci-
              mal conversion (and found several typos), and to Eoghan for reminding me when the
              content needed more practical applications. Christopher Brown, Simson Garfinkel,
              Christophe Grenier, Barry Grundy, Gord Hama, Jesse Kornblum, Troy Larson, Mark
              Menz, Richard Russon, and Chris Sanft all reviewed and improved one or more chapters
              in their areas of expertise.
                 Many folks at Addison Wesley and Pearson helped to make this book possible. Jessica
              Goldstein guided and encouraged me through the process, Christy Hackerd made sure
              the editing and production process went smoothly, and Chanda Leary-Coutu provided
              her marketing expertise. Thanks to Elise Walter for her copyediting, Christal Andry for
              her proofreading, Eric Schroeder for his indexing, Jake McFarland for his composition
              work, and Chuti Prasertsith for his cover design work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   Finally, many thanks to my family and especially to my best friend (and Mrs.-to-be)
Jenny, who helped me find balance in life despite the nights and weekends that I spent
hunched over a keyboard (and went as far as buying me an X-Box as a distraction from
data structures and abstraction layers). Also, thanks to our cat, Achoo, for reminding me
each day that playing with hair elastics and laser pointers is almost as fun as playing with
ones and zeros.

