      Digital Investigation
          Foundations
                                      1
I am going to assume that anyone interested in this book does not need motivation with
respect to why someone would want to investigate a computer or other digital device, so
I will skip the customary numbers and statistics. This book is about how you can
conduct a smarter investigation, and it is about data and how they are stored. Digital
investigation tools have become relatively easy to use, which is good because they reduce
the time needed to conduct an investigation. However, it also means that the investigator
may not fully understand the results. This could be dangerous when the investigator
needs to testify about the evidence and from where it came. This book starts with the
basic foundations of investigations and computers and then examines volume and file
systems. There are many ways of conducting an investigation, and this chapter describes
one of them. You do not need to take the same approach, but this chapter shows where I
think the contents of this book fit into the bigger picture.

DIGITAL INVESTIGATIONS AND EVIDENCE
There is an abundant number of digital forensic and investigation definitions, and this
section gives the definitions that I use and a justification for them. The focus of a digital
investigation is going to be some type of digital device that has been involved in an
incident or crime. The digital device was either used to commit a physical crime or it
executed a digital event that violated a policy or law. An example of the first case is if
a suspect used the Internet to conduct research about a physical crime. Examples of
the latter case are when an attacker gains unauthorized access to a computer, a user

downloads contraband material, or a user sends a threatening e-mail. When the viola-
tion is detected, an investigation is started to answer questions such as why the violation
occurred and who or what caused it to occur.
   A digital investigation is a process where we develop and test hypotheses that answer
questions about digital events. This is done using the scientific method where we
develop a hypothesis using evidence that we find and then test the hypothesis by looking
for additional evidence that shows the hypothesis is impossible. Digital evidence is a digi-
tal object that contains reliable information that supports or refutes a hypothesis.
   Consider a server that has been compromised. We start an investigation to determine
how it occurred and who did it. During the investigation, we find data that were created
by events related to the incident. We recover deleted log entries from the server, find
attack tools, and find numerous vulnerabilities that existed on the server. Using this data,
and more, we develop hypotheses about which vulnerability the attacker used to gain
access and what she did afterwards. Later, we examine the firewall configuration and logs
and determine that some of the scenarios in our hypotheses are impossible because that
type of network traffic could not have existed, and we do not find the necessary log
entries. Therefore, we have found evidence that refutes one or more hypotheses.
   In this book, I use the term evidence in the investigative context. Evidence has both
legal and investigative uses. The definition that I previously gave was for the investigative
uses of evidence, and there could be situations where not all of it can be entered into a
court of law. Because the legal admissibility requirements vary by country and state and
because I do not have a legal background, I am going to focus on the general concept of
evidence, and you can make the adjustments needed in your jurisdiction.1 In fact, there
are no legal requirements that are specific to file systems, so the general digital investiga-
tion books listed in the Preface can provide the needed information.
   So far, you may have noticed that I have not used the term “forensic” during the dis-
cussion about a digital investigation. The American Heritage Dictionary defines forensic
as an adjective and “relating to the use of science or technology in the investigation and
establishment of facts or evidence in a court of law” [Houghton Mifflin Company 2000].
The nature of digital evidence requires us to use technology during an investigation, so
the main difference between a digital investigation and a digital forensic investigation is
the introduction of legal requirements. A digital forensic investigation is a process that
uses science and technology to analyze digital objects and that develops and tests theo-
ries, which can be entered into a court of law, to answer questions about events that

1. A good overview of U.S. law is Cybercrime [Clifford 2001].

                                                  DIGITAL CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATION PROCESS

occurred. In other words, a digital forensic investigation is a more restricted form of dig-
ital investigation. I will be using the term digital investigation in this book because the
focus is on the technology and not specific legal requirements.

DIGITAL CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATION PROCESS
There is no single way to conduct an investigation. If you ask five people to find the per-
son who drank the last cup of coffee without starting a new pot, you will probably see
five different approaches. One person may dust the pot for fingerprints, another may ask
for security camera tapes of the break room, and another may look for the person with
the hottest cup of coffee. As long as we find the right person and do not break any laws
in the process, it does not matter which process is used, although some are more efficient
than others.
    The approach that I use for a digital investigation is based on the physical crime scene
investigation process [Carrier and Spafford 2003]. In this case, we have a digital crime
scene that includes the digital environment created by software and hardware. The
process has three major phases, which are system preservation, evidence searching, and
event reconstruction. These phases do not need to occur one after another, and the flow
is shown in Figure 1.1.

             System Preservation             Evidence Searching                Event Reconstruction
                   Phase                           Phase                              Phase

Figure 1.1    The three major phases of a digital crime scene investigation.

   This process can be used when investigating both live and dead systems. A live analysis
occurs when you use the operating system or other resources of the system being investi-
gated to find evidence. A dead analysis occurs when you are running trusted applications
in a trusted operating system to find evidence. With a live analysis, you risk getting false
information because the software could maliciously hide or falsify data. A dead analysis
is more ideal, but is not possible in all circumstances.

SYSTEM PRESERVATION PHASE
The first phase in the investigation process is the System Preservation Phase where we try
to preserve the state of the digital crime scene. The actions that are taken in this phase

vary depending on the legal, business, or operational requirements of the investigation.
For example, legal requirements may cause you to unplug the system and make a full
copy of all data. On the other extreme could be a case involving a spyware infection or
a honeypot2 and no preservation is performed. Most investigations in a corporate or
military setting that will not go to court use techniques in between these two extremes.
   The purpose of this phase is to reduce the amount of evidence that may be overwrit-
ten. This process continues after data has been acquired from the system because we
need to preserve the data for future analysis. In Chapter 3, “Hard Disk Data Acquisition,”
we will look at how to make a full copy of a hard disk, and the remainder of the book
will cover how to analyze the data and search for evidence.

Preservation Techniques
The goal of this phase is to reduce the amount of evidence that is overwritten, so we
want to limit the number processes that can write to our storage devices. For a dead
analysis, we will terminate all processes by turning the system off, and we will make
duplicate copies of all data. As will be discussed in Chapter 3, write blockers can be used
to prevent evidence from being overwritten.
    For a live analysis, suspect processes can be killed or suspended. The network connec-
tion can be unplugged (plug the system into an empty hub or switch to prevent log mes-
sages about a dead link), or network filters can be applied so that the perpetrator cannot
connect from a remote system and delete data. Important data should be copied from
the system in case it is overwritten while searching for evidence. For example, if you are
going to be reading files, then you can save the temporal data for each file so that you
have a copy of the last access times before you cause them to be updated.
    When important data are saved during a dead or live analysis, a cryptographic hash
should be calculated to later show that the data have not changed. A cryptographic hash,
such as MD5, SHA-1, and SHA-256, is a mathematical formula that generates a very big
number based on input data. If any bit of the input data changes, the output number
changes dramatically. (A more detailed description can be found in Applied
Cryptography, 2nd Edition [Schneier 1995].) The algorithms are designed such that it
is extremely difficult to find two inputs that generate the same output. Therefore, if the
hash value of your important data changes, then you know that the data has been
modified.

2. A honeypot is “an information resource whose value lies in unauthorized or illicit use of that resource”
   [Honeynet Project 2004].

                                           DIGITAL CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATION PROCESS

EVIDENCE SEARCHING PHASE
After we have taken steps to preserve the data we need to search them for evidence.
Recall that we are looking for data that support or refute hypotheses about the incident.
This process typically starts with a survey of common locations based on the type of
incident, if one is known. For example, if we are investigating Web-browsing habits, we
will look at the Web browser cache, history file, and bookmarks. If we are investigating a
Linux intrusion, we may look for signs of a rootkit or new user accounts. As the investi-
gation proceeds and we develop hypotheses, we will search for evidence that will refute
or support them. It is important to look for evidence that refutes your hypothesis instead
of only looking for evidence that supports your hypothesis.
    The theory behind the searching process is fairly simple. We define the general charac-
teristics of the object for which we are searching and then look for that object in a collec-
tion of data. For example, if we want all files with the JPG extension, we will look at each
file name and identify the ones that end with the characters “.JPG.” The two key steps are
determining for what we are looking and where we expect to find it.
    Part 2, “Volume Analysis,” and Part 3, “File System Analysis,” of this book are about
searching for evidence in a volume and file system. In fact, the file system analysis chap-
ters are organized so that you can focus on a specific category of data that may contain
your evidence. The end of this chapter contains a summary of the popular investigation
toolkits, and they all allow you to view, search, and sort the data from a suspect system so
that you can find evidence.

Search Techniques
Most searching for evidence is done in a file system and inside files. A common search
technique is to search for files based on their names or patterns in their names. Another
common search technique is to search for files based on a keyword in their content. We
can also search for files based on their temporal data, such as the last accessed or written
time.
   We can search for known files by comparing the MD5 or SHA-1 hash of a file’s
content with a hash database such as the National Software Reference Library (NSRL)
(http://www.nsrl.nist.gov). Hash databases can be used to find files that are known to
be bad or good. Another common method of searching is to search for files based on sig-
natures in their content. This allows us to find all files of a given type even if someone
has changed their name.
   When analyzing network data, we may search for all packets from a specific source
address or all packets going to a specific port. We also may want to find packets that have
a certain keyword in them.

Carrier_01.qxd   5/24/05   10:04 AM   Page 8

        CHAPTER 1     DIGITAL INVESTIGATION FOUNDATIONS

        EVENT RECONSTRUCTION PHASE
        The last phase of the investigation is to use the evidence that we found and determine
        what events occurred in the system. Our definition of an investigation was that we are
        trying to answer questions about digital events in the system. During the Evidence
        Searching Phase, we might have found several files that violate a corporate policy or law,
        but that does not answer questions about events. One of the files may have been the
        effect of an event that downloaded it, but we should also try to determine which applica-
        tion downloaded it. Is there evidence that a Web browser downloaded them, or could it
        be from malware? (Several cases have used malware as a defense when contraband or
        other digital evidence has been found [George 2004; Brenner, Carrier, and Henninger
        2004].) After the digital event reconstruction phase, we may be able to correlate the
        digital events with physical events.
           Event reconstruction requires knowledge about the applications and the OS that are
        installed on the system so that you can create hypotheses based on their capabilities. For
        example, different events can occur in Windows 95 than Windows XP, and different ver-
        sions of the Mozilla web browser can cause different events. This type of analysis is out
        of the scope of this book, but general guidelines can be found in Casey [2004].

        GENERAL GUIDELINES
        Not every investigation will use the same procedures, and there could be situations
        where you need to develop a new procedure. This book might be considered a little
        academic because it does not cover only what exists in current tools. There are some
        techniques that have not been implemented, so you may have to improvise to find the
        evidence. Here are my PICL guidelines, which will hopefully keep you out of one when
        you are developing new procedures. PICL stands for preservation, isolation, correlation,
        and logging.
           The first guideline is preservation of the system being investigated. The motivation
        behind this guideline is that you do not want to modify any data that could have been
        evidence, and you do not want to be in a courtroom where the other side tries to con-
        vince the jury that you may have overwritten exculpatory evidence. This is what we saw
        in the Preservation Phase of the investigation process. Some examples of how the preser-
        vation guideline is implemented are

        • Copy important data, put the original in a safe place, and analyze the copy so that you
          can restore the original if the data is modified.
        • Calculate MD5 or SHA hashes of important data so that you can later prove that the
          data has not changed.

                                            DIGITAL CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATION PROCESS

• Use a write-blocking device during procedures that could write to the suspect data.
• Minimize the number of files created during a live analysis because they could over-
  write evidence in unallocated space.
• Be careful when opening files on the suspect system during a live analysis because you
  could be modifying data, such as the last access time.

    The second guideline is to isolate the analysis environment from both the suspect data
and the outside world. You want to isolate yourself from the suspect data because you do
not know what it might do. Running an executable from the suspect system could delete
all files on your computer, or it could communicate with a remote system. Opening an
HTML file from the suspect system could cause your Web browser to execute scripts
and download files from a remote server. Both of these are potentially dangerous, and
caution should be taken. Isolation from the suspect data is implemented by viewing
data in applications that have limited functionality or in a virtual environment, such as
VMWare (http://www.vmware.com), that can be easily rebuilt if it is destroyed.
    You should isolate yourself from the outside world so that no tampering can occur
and so that you do not transmit anything that you did not want to. For example, the pre-
vious paragraph described how something as simple as an HTML page could cause you
to connect to a remote server. Isolation from the outside world is typically implemented
using an analysis network that is not connected to the outside world or that is connected
using a firewall that allows only limited connectivity.
    Note that isolation is difficult with live analysis. By definition, you are not isolated
from the suspect data because you are analyzing a system using its OS, which is suspect
code. Every action you take involves suspect data. Further, it is difficult to isolate the sys-
tem from the outside world because that requires removing network connectivity, and
live analysis typically occurs because the system must remain active.
    The third guideline is to correlate data with other independent sources. This helps
reduce the risk of forged data. For example, we will later see that timestamps can be eas-
ily changed in most systems. Therefore, if time is very important in your investigation,
you should try to find log entries, network traffic, or other events that can confirm the
file activity times.
    The final guideline is to log and document your actions. This helps identify what
searches you have not yet conducted and what your results were. When doing a live
analysis or performing techniques that will modify data, it is important to document
what you do so that you can later document what changes in the system were because of
your actions.

DATA ANALYSIS
In the previous section, I said we were going to search for digital evidence, which is a
rather general statement because evidence can be found almost anywhere. In this sec-
tion, I am going to narrow down the different places where we can search for digital
evidence and identify which will be discussed later in this book. We will also discuss
which data we can trust more than others.

ANALYSIS TYPES
When analyzing digital data, we are looking at an object that has been designed by peo-
ple. Further, the storage systems of most digital devices have been designed to be scalable
and flexible, and they have a layered design. I will use this layered design to define the
different analysis types [Carrier 2003a].
   If we start at the bottom of the design layers, there are two independent analysis areas.
One is based on storage devices and the other is based on communication devices. This
book is going to focus on the analysis of storage devices, specifically non-volatile devices,
such as hard disks. The analysis of communication systems, such as IP networks, is not
covered in this book, but is elsewhere [Bejtlich 2005; Casey 2004; Mandia et al. 2003].
   Figure 1.2 shows the different analysis areas. The bottom layer is Physical Storage
Media Analysis and involves the analysis of the physical storage medium. Examples of
physical store mediums include hard disks, memory chips, and CD-ROMs. Analysis of
this area might involve reading magnetic data from in between tracks or other tech-
niques that require a clean room. For this book, we are going to assume that we have a
reliable method of reading data from the physical storage medium and so we have a
stream 1s and 0s that were previously written to the storage device.
   We now analyze the 1s and 0s from the physical medium. Memory is typically organ-
ized by processes and is out of the scope of this book. We will focus on non-volatile stor-
age, such as hard disks and flash cards.
   Storage devices that are used for non-volatile storage are typically organized into vol-
umes. A volume is a collection of storage locations that a user or application can write to
and read from. We will discuss volume analysis in Part 2 of the book, but there are two
major concepts in this layer. One is partitioning, where we divide a single volume into
multiple smaller volumes, and the other is assembly, where we combine multiple vol-
umes into one larger volume, which may later be partitioned. Examples of this category
include DOS partition tables, Apple partitions, and RAID arrays. Some media, such as
floppy disks, do not have any data in this layer, and the entire disk is a volume. We will
need to analyze data at the volume level to determine where the file system or other data
are located and to determine where we may find hidden data.

Carrier_01.qxd    5/24/05      10:05 AM        Page 11

                                                                                                          DATA ANALYSIS

                              Application/OS
                                 Analysis
                                                     Swap Space
                                                      Analysis

                                File System                       Database
                                  Analysis                        Analysis

                                        Volume Analysis              Memory Analysis

                                          Physical Storage Media Analysis                   Network Analysis

Figure 1.2   Layers of analysis based on the design of digital data.The bold boxes are covered in this book.

                     Inside each volume can be any type of data, but the most common contents are file
                 systems. Other volumes may contain a database or be used as a temporary swap space
                 (similar to the Windows pagefile). Part 3 of the book focuses on file systems, which is a
                 collection of data structures that allow an application to create, read, and write files. We
                 analyze a file system to find files, to recover deleted files, and to find hidden data. The
                 result of file system analysis could be file content, data fragments, and metadata associ-
                 ated with files.
                     To understand what is inside of a file, we need to jump to the application layer. The
                 structure of each file is based on the application or OS that created the file. For example,
                 from the file system perspective, a Windows registry file is no different from an HTML
                 page because they are both files. Internally, they have very different structures and differ-
                 ent tools are needed to analyze each. Application analysis is very important, and it is here
                 where we would analyze configuration files to determine what programs were running
                 or to determine what a JPEG picture is of. I do not discuss application analysis in this
                 book because it requires multiple books of its own to cover in the same detail that file
                 systems and volumes are covered here. Refer to the general digital investigation books
                 listed in the Preface for more information.
                     We can see the analysis process in Figure 1.3. This shows a disk that is analyzed to pro-
                 duce a stream of bytes, which are analyzed at the volume layer to produce volumes. The
                 volumes are analyzed at the file system layer to produce a file. The file is then analyzed at
                 the application layer.

                                          Physical
                    Hard                   Media                        Sectors of Data
                    Disk                  Analysis

                                          Volume
                                                                          Volume
                                          Analysis

                                            File                            File
                                          System
                                          Analysis

                                         Application
                                          Analysis

Figure 1.3   Process of analyzing data at the physical level to the application level.

ESSENTIAL AND NONESSENTIAL DATA
All data in the layers previously discussed have some structure, but not all structure is
necessary for the layer to serve its core purpose. For example, the purpose of the file sys-
tem layer is to organize an empty volume so that we can store data and later retrieve
them. The file system is required to correlate a file name with file content. Therefore, the
name is essential and the on-disk location of the file content is essential. We can see this
in Figure 1.4 where we have a file named miracle.txt and its content is located at
address 345. If either the name or the address were incorrect or missing, then the file
content could not be read. For example, if the address were set to 344, then the file would
have different content.
   Figure 1.4 also shows that the file has a last accessed time. This value is not essential to
the purpose of the file system, and if it were changed, missing, or incorrectly set, it would
not affect the process of reading or writing file content.
   In this book, I introduce the concept of essential and nonessential data because we
can trust essential data but we may not be able to trust nonessential data. We can trust
that the file content address in a file is accurate because otherwise the person who used
the system would not have been able to read the data. The last access time may or may
not be accurate. The OS may not have updated it after the last access, the user may have
changed the time, or the OS clock could have been off by three hours, and the wrong
time was stored.

                                                                                     OVERVIEW OF TOOLKITS

                        Name:           Cluster:     Size:           Last Accessed:
                       miracle.txt        345         40            October 27, 2004

                                     Cluster 344                   Cluster 345

                             Today, the Yankees              Today, the Red Sox
                             won the World Series.           won the World Series.

Figure 1.4   To find and read this file, it is essential for the name, size, and content location to be accurate,
             but it is not essential for the last accessed time to be accurate.

   Note that just because we trust the number for the content address does not mean
that we trust the actual content at that address. For example, the address value in a
deleted file may be accurate, but the data unit could have been reallocated and the con-
tent at that address is for a new file. Nonessential data may be correct most of the time,
but you should try to find additional data sources to support them when they are used in
an incident hypothesis (i.e., the correlation in the PICL guidelines). In Parts 2 and 3 of
the book, I will identify which data are essential and which are not.

OVERVIEW OF TOOLKITS
There are many tools that can help an investigator analyze a digital system. Most tools
focus on the preservation and searching phases of the investigation. For the rest of this
book, I will be showing examples using The Sleuth Kit (TSK), which I develop and which
is described later in this section. TSK is free, which means that any reader can try the
examples in this book without having to spend more money.
   This book is not intended to be a TSK tutorial, and not everyone wants to use Unix-
based, non-commercial tools. Therefore, I am including a list of the most common
analysis tools. Most of the techniques described in this book can be performed using
these tools. Tools that are restricted to law enforcement are not listed here. The descrip-
tions are not an exhaustive list of features and are based on the content of their Web site.
I have not confirmed or used every feature, but each of the vendors has reviewed
these descriptions.

   If you are interested in a more extensive list of tools, refer to Christine Siedsma’s
Electronic Evidence Information site (http://www.e-evidence.info) or Jacco
Tunnissen’s Computer Forensics, Cybercrime and Steganography site
(http://www.forensics.nl). I also maintain a list of open source forensics tools that are
both commercial and non-commercial (http://www.opensourceforensics.org). This
book helps show the theory of how a tool is analyzing a file system, but I think open
source tools are useful for investigations because they allow an investigator or a trusted
party to read the source code and verify how a tool has implemented the theory. This
allows an investigator to better testify about the digital evidence [Carrier 2003b].

ENCASE BY GUIDANCE SOFTWARE
There are no official numbers on the topic, but it is generally accepted that EnCase
(http://www.encase.com) is the most widely used computer investigation software.
EnCase is Windows-based and can acquire and analyze data using the local or network-
based versions of the tool. EnCase can analyze many file system formats, including FAT,
NTFS, HFS+, UFS, Ext2/3, Reiser, JFS, CD-ROMs, and DVDs. EnCase also supports
Microsoft Windows dynamic disks and AIX LVM.
   EnCase allows you to list the files and directories, recover deleted files, conduct key-
word searches, view all graphic images, make timelines of file activity, and use hash
databases to identify known files. It also has its own scripting language, called EnScript,
which allows you to automate many tasks. Add-on modules support the decryption of
NTFS encrypted files and allow you to mount the suspect data as though it were a
local disk.

FORENSIC TOOLKIT BY ACCESSDATA
The Forensic Toolkit (FTK) is Windows-based and can acquire and analyze disk, file sys-
tem, and application data (http://www.accessdata.com). FTK supports FAT, NTFS, and
Ext2/3 file systems, but is best known for its searching abilities and application-level
analysis support. FTK creates a sorted index of the words in a file system so that individ-
ual searches are much faster. FTK also has many viewers for different file formats and
supports many e-mail formats.
    FTK allows you to view the files and directories in the file system, recover deleted files,
conduct keyword searches, view all graphic images, search on various file characteristics,
and use hash databases to identify known files. AccessData also has tools for decrypting
files and recovering passwords.

                                                                                  SUMMARY

PRODISCOVER BY TECHNOLOGY PATHWAYS
ProDiscover (http://www.techpathways.com) is a Windows-based acquisition and
analysis tool that comes in both local and network-based versions. ProDiscover can
analyze FAT, NTFS, Ext2/3, and UFS file systems and Windows dynamic disks. When
searching, it provides the basic options to list the files and directories, recover deleted
files, search for keywords, and use hash databases to identify known files. ProDiscover is
available with a license that includes the source code so that an investigator or lab can
verify the tool’s actions.

SMART BY ASR DATA
SMART (http://www.asrdata.com) is a Linux-based acquisition and analysis tool. Andy
Rosen, who was the original developer for Expert Witness (which is now called EnCase),
developed SMART. SMART takes advantage of the large number of file systems that
Linux supports and can analyze FAT, NTFS, Ext2/3, UFS, HFS+, JFS, Reiser, CD-ROMs,
and more. To search for evidence, it allows you to list and filter the files and directories
in the image, recover deleted files, conduct keyword searches, view all graphic images,
and use hash databases to identify known files.

THE SLEUTH KIT / AUTOPSY
The Sleuth Kit (TSK) is a collection of Unix-based command line analysis tools, and
Autopsy is a graphical interface for TSK (http://www.sleuthkit.org). The file system
tools in TSK are based on The Coroner’s Toolkit (TCT) (http://www.porcupine.org),
which was written by Dan Farmer and Wietse Venema. TSK and Autopsy can analyze
FAT, NTFS, Ext2/3, and UFS file systems and can list files and directories, recover deleted
files, make timelines of file activity, perform keyword searches, and use hash databases.
We will be using TSK throughout this book, and Appendix A, “The Sleuth Kit and
Autopsy,” provides a description of how it can be used.

SUMMARY
There is no single way to conduct an investigation, and I have given a brief overview of
one approach that I take. It has only three major phases and is based on a physical crime
scene investigation procedure. We have also looked at the major investigation types and a
summary of the available toolkits. In the next two chapters, we will look at the computer
fundamentals and how to acquire data during the Preservation Phase of an investigation.

Carrier_01.qxd   5/24/05   10:06 AM   Page 16

        CHAPTER 1     DIGITAL INVESTIGATION FOUNDATIONS

        BIBLIOGRAPHY
        Bejtlich, Richard. The Tao of Network Security Monitoring: Beyond Intrusion Detection.
        Boston: Addison Wesley, 2005.
        Brenner, Susan, Brian Carrier, and Jef Henninger. “The Trojan Defense in Cybercrime
        Cases.” Santa Clara Computer and High Technology Law Journal, 21(1), 2004.
        Carrier, Brian. “Defining Digital Forensic Examination and Analysis Tools Using
        Abstraction Layers.” International Journal of Digital Evidence, Winter 2003a.
        http://www.ijde.org.

        Carrier, Brian. “Open Source Digital Forensic Tools: The Legal Argument.” Fall 2003b.
        http://www.digital-evidence.org.

        Carrier, Brian, and Eugene H. Spafford. “Getting Physical with the Digital Investigation
        Process.” International Journal of Digital Evidence, Fall 2003. http://www.ijde.org.
        Casey, Eoghan. Digital Evidence and Computer Crime. 2nd ed. London: Academic
        Press, 2004.
        Clifford, Ralph, ed. Cybercrime: The Investigation, Prosecution, and Defense of a
        Computer-Related Crime. Durham: Carolina Academic Press, 2001.
        George, Esther. “UK Computer Misuse Act—The Trojan Virus Defense.” Journal of
        Digital Investigation, 1(2), 2004.
        The Honeynet Project. Know Your Enemy. 2nd ed. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
        Houghton Mifflin Company. The American Heritage Dictionary. 4th ed. Boston:
        Houghton Mifflin, 2000.
        Mandia, Kevin, Chris Prosise, and Matt Pepe. Incident Response and Computer Forensics.
        2nd ed. Emeryville: McGraw Hill/Osborne, 2003.
        Schneier, Bruce. Applied Cryptography. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley Publishing, 1995.

