                      Computer
                     Foundations
                                     2
The goal of this chapter is to cover the low-level basics of how computers operate. In the
following chapters of this book, we examine, in detail, how data are stored, and this
chapter provides background information for those who do not have programming or
operating system design experience. This chapter starts with a discussion about data and
how they are organized on disk. We discuss binary versus hexadecimal values and little-
and big-endian ordering. Next, we examine the boot process and code required to start a
computer. Lastly, we examine hard disks and discuss their geometry, ATA commands,
host protected areas, and SCSI.

The purpose of the devices we investigate is to process digital data, so we will cover some
of the basics of data in this section. We will look at binary and hexadecimal numbers,
data sizes, endian ordering, and data structures. These concepts are essential to how data
are stored. If you have done programming before, this should be a review.

BINARY, DECIMAL, AND HEXADECIMAL
First, let’s look at number formats. Humans are used to working with decimal numbers,
but computers use binary, which means that there are only 0s and 1s. Each 0 or 1 is
called a bit, and bits are organized into groups of 8 called bytes. Binary numbers are sim-
ilar to decimal numbers except that decimal numbers have 10 different symbols (0 to 9)
instead of only 2.

   Before we dive into binary, we need to consider what a decimal number is. A decimal
number is a series of symbols, and each symbol has a value. The symbol in the right-
most column has a value of 1, and the next column to the left has a value of 10. Each col-
umn has a value that is 10 times as much as the previous column. For example, the
second column from the right has a value of 10, the third has 100, the fourth has 1,000,
and so on. Consider the decimal number 35,812. We can calculate the decimal value of
this number by multiplying the symbol in each column with the column’s value and
adding the products. We can see this in Figure 2.1. The result is not surprising because
we are converting a decimal number to its decimal value. We will use this general
process, though, to determine the decimal value of non-decimal numbers.

                                      Decimal Number: 35,812

                                10,000    1,000    100     10       1
                                   3        5       8       1       2

                   (3 x 10,000) + (5 x 1,000) + (8 x 100) + (1 x 10) + (2 x 1) = 35,812

Figure 2.1   The values of each symbol in a decimal number.

    The right-most column is called the least significant symbol, and the left-most column
is called the most significant symbol. With the number 35,812, the 3 is the most signifi-
cant symbol, and the 2 is the least significant symbol.
    Now let’s look at binary numbers. A binary number has only two symbols (0 and 1),
and each column has a decimal value that is two times as much as the previous column.
Therefore, the right-most column has a decimal value of 1, the second column from the
right has a decimal value of 2, the third column’s decimal value is 4, the fourth column’s
decimal value is 8, and so on. To calculate the decimal value of a binary number, we sim-
ply add the value of each column multiplied by the value in it. We can see this in Figure
2.2 for the binary number 1001 0011. We see that its decimal value is 147.
    For reference, Table 2.1 shows the decimal value of the first 16 binary numbers. It also
shows the hexadecimal values, which we will examine next.

                                        Binary Number: 1001 0011

                            128    64      32    16     8      4      2     1
                             1      0      0     1      0      0      1     1

             (1 x 128) + (0 x 64) + (0 x 32) + (1 x 16) + (0 x 8) + (0 x 4) + (1 x 2) + (1 x 1) = 147

Figure 2.2     Converting a binary number to its decimal value.

Table 2.1    Binary, decimal, and hexadecimal conversion table.

Binary               Decimal               Hexadecimal

0000                 00                    0

0001                 01                    1

0010                 02                    2

0011                 03                    3

0100                 04                    4

0101                 05                    5

0110                 06                    6

0111                 07                    7

1000                 08                    8

1001                 09                    9

1010                 10                    A

1011                 11                    B

1100                 12                    C

1101                 13                    D

1110                 14                    E

1111                 15                    F

   Now let’s look at a hexadecimal number, which has 16 symbols (the numbers 0 to 9
followed by the letters A to F). Refer back to Table 2.1 to see the conversion between the
base hexadecimal symbols and decimal symbols. We care about hexadecimal numbers

because it’s easy to convert between binary and hexadecimal, and they are frequently
used when looking at raw data. I will precede a hexadecimal number with ‘0x’ to differ-
entiate it from a decimal number.
   We rarely need to convert a hexadecimal number to its decimal value by hand, but I
will go through the process once. The decimal value of each column in a hexadecimal
number increases by a factor of 16. Therefore, the decimal value of the first column is 1,
the second column has a decimal value of 16, and the third column has a decimal value
of 256. To convert, we simply add the result from multiplying the column’s value with
the symbol in it. Figure 2.3 shows the conversion of the hexadecimal number 0x8BE4 to
a decimal number.

                                                 Hexadecimal Number: 0x8BE4
                              Reference
                                                  4,096   256         16          1
                              0xB = 11
                              0xE = 14              8      11         14          4

                         (8 x 4,096) + (11 x 256) + (14 x 16) + (4 x 1) = 35,812

Figure 2.3   Converting a hexadecimal value to its decimal value.

   Lastly, let’s convert between hexadecimal and binary. This is much easier because it
requires only lookups. If we have a hexadecimal number and want the binary value, we
look up each hexadecimal symbol in Table 2.1 and replace it with the equivalent 4 bits.
Similarly, to convert a binary value to a hexadecimal value, we organize the bits into
groups of 4 and then look up the equivalent hexadecimal symbol. That is all it takes. We
can see this in Figure 2.4 where we convert a binary number to hexadecimal and the
other way around.

                 1001 0011 to Hexadecimal                 0x93 to Binary

                      Binary    1001      0011                  0x9        0x3        Hexadecimal

                Hexadecimal     0x9       0x3               1001           0011       Binary

Figure 2.4   Converting between binary and hexadecimal requires only lookups from Table 2.1.

   Sometimes, we want to know the maximum value that can be represented with a cer-
tain number of columns. We do this by raising the number of symbols in each column
by the number of columns and subtract 1. We subtract 1 because we need to take the 0
value into account. For example, with a binary number we raise 2 to the number of bits
in the value and subtract 1. Therefore, a 32-bit value has a maximum decimal value of

232 – 1 = 4,294,967,295

   Fortunately, most computers and low-level editing tools have a calculator that con-
verts between binary, decimal, and hexadecimal, so you do not need to memorize these
techniques. In this book, the on-disk data are given in hexadecimal, and I will convert
the important values to decimal and provide both.

To store digital data, we need to allocate a location on a storage device. You can think
of this like the paper forms where you need to enter each character in your name and
address in little boxes. The name and address fields have allocated space on the page
for the characters in your name. With digital data, bytes on a disk or in memory are
allocated for the bytes in a specific value.
   A byte is the smallest amount of space that is typically allocated to data. A byte can
hold only 256 values, so bytes are grouped together to store larger numbers. Typical sizes
include 2, 4, or 8 bytes. Computers differ in how they organize multiple-byte values.
Some of them use big-endian ordering and put the most significant byte of the number
in the first storage byte, and others use little-endian ordering and put the least significant
byte of the number in the first storage byte. Recall that the most significant byte is the
byte with the most value (the left-most byte), and the least significant byte is the byte
with the least value (the right-most byte).
   Figure 2.5 shows a 4-byte value that is stored in both little and big endian ordering.
The value has been allocated a 4-byte slot that starts in byte 80 and ends in byte 83.
When we examine the disk and file system data in this book, we need to keep the endian
ordering of the original system in mind. Otherwise, we will calculate the incorrect value.
   IA32-based systems (i.e., Intel Pentium) and their 64-bit counterparts use the little-
endian ordering, so we need to “rearrange” the bytes if we want the most significant byte
to be the left-most number. Sun SPARC and Motorola PowerPC (i.e., Apple computers)
systems use big-endian ordering.

                                           Actual Value: 0x12345678

                                                 79 80 81 82 83 84
                                   Big-endian    00   12   34     56     78   00

                                                 79 80 81 82 83 84
                                 Little-endian   00   78   56     34     12   00

Figure 2.5    A 4-byte value stored in both big- and little-endian ordering.

The previous section examined how a computer stores numbers, but we must now con-
sider how it stores letters and sentences. The most common technique is to encode the
characters using ASCII or Unicode. ASCII is simpler, so we will start there. ASCII assigns
a numerical value to the characters in American English. For example, the letter ‘A’ is
equal to 0x41, and ‘&’ is equal to 0x26. The largest defined value is 0x7E, which means
that 1 byte can be used to store each character. There are many values that are defined as
control characters and are not printable, such the 0x07 bell sound. Table 2.2 shows the
hexadecimal number to ASCII character conversion table. A more detailed ASCII table
can be found at http://www.asciitable.com/.

Table 2.2    Hexadecimal to ASCII conversion table.

00 – NULL        10 – DLE         20 – SPC       30 – 0         40 – @         50 – P   60 – `   70 – p

01 – SOH         11 – DC1         21 – !         31 – 1         41 – A         51 – Q   61 – a   71 – q

02 – STX         12 – DC2         22 – ”         32 – 2         42 – B         52 – R   62 – b   72 – r

03 – ETX         13 – DC3         23 – #         33 – 3         43 – C         53 – S   63 – c   73 – s

04 – EOT         14 – DC4         24 – $         34 – 4         44 – D         54 – T   64 – d   74 – t

05 – ENQ         15 – NAK         25 – %         35 – 5         45 – E         55 – U   65 – e   75 – u

06 – ACK         16 – SYN         26 – &         36 – 6         46 – F         56 – V   66 – f   76 – v

07 – BEL         17 – ETB         27 – ’         37 – 7         47 – G         57 – W   67 – g   77 – w

08 – BS          18 – CAN         28 – (         38 – 8         48 – H         58 – X   68 – h   78 – x

09 – TAB         19 – EM          29 – )         39 – 9         49 – I         59 – Y   69 – i   79 – y

Table 2.2    Hexadecimal to ASCII conversion table (continued).

0A – LF          1A – SUB        2A – *         3A – ;         4A – J            5A – Z     6A – j   7A – z

0B – BT          1B – ESC        2B – +         3B – ;         4B – K            5B – [     6B – k   7B – {

0C – FF          1C – FS         2C – ,         3C – <         4C – L            5C – \     6C – l   7C – |

0D – CR          1D – GS         2D – -         3D – =         4D – M            5D – ]     6D – m   7D – }

0E – SO          1E – RS         2E – .         3E – >         4E – N            5E – ^     6E – n   7E – ~

0F – SI          1F – US         2F – /         3F – ?         4F – O            5F – _     6F – o   7F –

   To store a sentence or a word using ASCII, we need to allocate as many bytes as there
are characters in the sentence or word. Each byte stores the value of a character. The
endian ordering of a system does not play a role in how the characters are stored because
these are separate 1-byte values. Therefore, the first character in the word or sentence is
always in the first allocated byte. The series of bytes in a word or sentence is called a
string. Many times, the string ends with the NULL symbol, which is 0x00. Figure 2.6
shows an example string stored in ASCII. The string has 10 symbols in it and is NULL
terminated so it has allocated 11 bytes starting at byte 64.

                                               String: 1 Main St.

                            64   65   66   67     68     69   70   71   72   73     74

                            31   20   4D   61     69     6e   20   53   74   2e     00
                            1         M    a      i      n         S    t    .

Figure 2.6    An address that is represented in ASCII starting at memory address 64.

   ASCII is nice and simple if you use American English, but it is quite limited for the
rest of the world because their native symbols cannot be represented. Unicode helps
solve this problem by using more than 1 byte to store the numerical version of a symbol.
(More information can be found at www.unicode.org.) The version 4.0 Unicode standard
supports over 96,000 characters, which requires 4-bytes per character instead of the 1
byte that ASCII requires.
   There are three ways of storing a Unicode character. The first method, UTF-32, uses a
4-byte value for each character, which might waste a lot of space. The second method,
UTF-16, stores the most heavily used characters in a 2-byte value and the lesser-used
characters in a 4-byte value. Therefore, on average this uses less space than UTF-32.

The third method is called UTF-8, and it uses 1, 2, or 4 bytes to store a character. Each
character requires a different number of bytes, and the most frequently used bytes use
only 1 byte.
   UTF-8 and UTF-16 use a variable number of bytes to store each character and, there-
fore, make processing the data more difficult. UTF-8 is frequently used because it has the
least amount of wasted space and because ASCII is a subset of it. A UTF-8 string that has
only the characters in ASCII uses only 1 byte per character and has the same values as
the equivalent ASCII string.

Before we can look at how data are stored in specific file systems, we need to look at the
general concept of data organization. Let’s return back to the previous example where we
compared digital data sizes to boxes on a paper form. With a paper form, a label precedes
the boxes and tells you that the boxes are for the name or address. Computers do not,
generally, precede file system data with a label. Instead, they simply know that the first 32
bytes are for a person’s name and the next 32 bytes are for the street name, for example.
   Computers know the layout of the data because of data structures. A data structure
describes how data are laid out. It works like a template or map. The data structure is
broken up into fields, and each field has a size and name, although this information is
not saved with the data. For example, our data structure could define the first field to be
called ‘number’ and have a length of 2 bytes. It is used to store the house number in our
address. Immediately after the ‘number’ field is the ‘street’ field and with a length of 30
bytes. We can see this layout in Table 2.3.

Table 2.3   A basic data structure for the house number and street name.

Byte Range         Description

0–1                2-byte house number

2–31               30-byte ASCII street name

   If we want to write data to a storage device, we refer to the appropriate data structure
to determine where each value should be written. For example, if we want to store the
address 1 Main St., we would first break the address up into the number and name. We
would write the number 1 to bytes 0 to 1 of our storage space and then write “Main St.”
in bytes 2 to 9 by determining what the ASCII values are for each character. The remain-
ing bytes can be set to 0 since we do not need them. In this case, we allocated 32 bytes of

storage space, and it can be any where in the device. The byte offsets are relative to the
start of the space we were allocated. Keep in mind that the order of the bytes in the
house number depends on the endian ordering of the computer.
   When we want to read data from the storage device, we determine where the data
starts and then refer to its data structure to find out where the needed values are. For
example, let’s read the data we just wrote. We learn where it starts in the storage device
and then apply our data structure template. Here is the output of a tool that reads the
raw data.

0000000: 0100 4d61 696e 2053 742e 0000 0000 0000     ..Main St.......
0000016: 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000     ................
0000032: 1900 536f 7574 6820 5374 2e00 0000 0000     ..South St......
0000048: 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000     ................

   The previous output is from the xxd Unix tool and is similar to a graphical hex-
editor tool. The left column is the byte offset of the row in decimal, the 8 middle
columns are 16 bytes of the data in hexadecimal, and the last column is the ASCII
equivalent of the data. A ‘.’ exists where there is no printable ASCII character for the
value. Remember that each hexadecimal symbol represents 4 bits, so a byte needs 2
hexadecimal symbols.
   We look up the layout of our data structure and see that each address is 32 bytes, so
the first address is in bytes 0 to 31. Bytes 0 to 1 should be the 2 byte number field, and
bytes 2 to 31 should be the street name. Bytes 0 to 1 show us the value 0x0100. The data
are from an Intel system, which is little-endian, and we will therefore have to switch the
order of the 0x01 and the 0x00 to produce 0x0001. When we convert this to decimal we
get the number 1.
   The second field in the data structure is in bytes 2 to 31 and is an ASCII string, which
is not effected by the endian ordering of the system, so we do not have to reorder the
bytes. We can either convert each byte to its ASCII equivalent or, in this case, cheat and
look on the right column to see “Main St..” This is the value we previously wrote. We see
that another address data structure starts in byte 32 and extends until byte 63. You can
process it as an exercise (it is for 25 South St).
   Obviously, the data structures used by a file system will not be storing street addresses,
but they rely on the same basic concepts. For example, the first sector of the file system
typically contains a large data structure that has dozens of fields in it and we need to
read it and know that the size of the file system is given in bytes 32 to 35. Many file
systems have several large data structures that are used in multiple places.

There is one last data type that I want to discuss before we look at actual data structures,
and it is a flag. Some data are used to identify if something exists, which can be repre-
sented with either a 1 or a 0. An example could be whether a partition is bootable or not.
One method of storing this information is to allocate a full byte for it and save the 0 or 1
value. This wastes a lot of space, though, because only 1 bit is needed, yet 8 bits are allo-
cated. A more efficient method is to pack several of these binary conditions into one
value. Each bit in the value corresponds to a feature or option. These are frequently
called flags because each bit flags whether a condition is true. To read a flag value, we
need to convert the number to binary and then examine each bit. If the bit is 1, the flag
is set.
    Let’s look at an example by making our previous street address data structure a little
more complex. The original data structure had a field for the house number and a field
for the street name. Now, we will add an optional 16-byte city name after the street field.
Because the city name is optional, we need a flag to identify if it exists or not. The flag is
in byte 31 and bit 0 is set when the city exists (i.e., 0000 0001). When the city exists, the
data structure is 48 bytes instead of 32. The new data structure is shown in Table 2.4.

Table 2.4   A data structure with a flag value.

Byte Range         Description

0–1                2-byte house number

2–30               29-byte ASCII street name

31–31              Flags

32–47              16-byte ASCII city name (if flag is set)

   Here is sample data that was written to disk using this data structure:

0000000: 0100 4d61 696e 2053 742e 0000 0000 0000              ..Main St.......
0000016: 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0061              ...............a
0000032: 426f 7374 6f6e 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000              Boston..........
0000048: 1800 536f 7574 6820 5374 2e00 0000 0000              ..South St......
0000064: 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0060              ...............`

   On the first line, we see the same data as the previous example. The address is 1 Main
St, and the flag value in byte 31 has a value of 0x61. The flag is only 1 byte in size, so we

do not have to worry about the endian ordering. We need to look at this value in binary,
so we use the lookup table previously given in Table 2.1 and convert the values 0x6 and
0x1 to the binary value 0110 0001. We see that the least significant bit is set, which is the
flag for the city. The other bits are for other flag values, such as identifying this address as
a business address. Based on the flag, we know that bytes 32 to 47 contain the city name,
which is “Boston.” The next data structure starts at byte 48, and its flag field is in byte 79.
Its value is 0x60, and the city flag is not set. Therefore, the third data structure would
start at byte 80.
   We will see flag values through out file system data structures. They are used to show
which features are enabled, which permissions are in effect, and if the file system is in a
clean state.

In the following chapters of this book, we are going to discuss where data reside on a
disk and which data are essential for the operation of the computer. Many times, I will
refer to boot code, which are machine instructions used by the computer when it is
starting. This section describes the boot process and where boot code can be found.
Many disks reserve space for boot code, but do not use it. This section will help you to
identify which boot code is being used.

The heart of a modern computer is one or more Central Processing Units (CPU).
Example CPUs are the Intel Pentium and Itanium, AMD Athlon, Motorola PowerPC,
and Sun UltraSPARC. CPUs by themselves are not very useful because they do only what
they are told. They are similar to a calculator. A calculator can do amazing things, but a
human needs to be sitting in front of it and entering numbers.
   CPUs get their instructions from memory. CPU instructions are written in machine
code, which is difficult to read and not user-friendly. It is, in general, two levels below the
C or Perl programming languages that many people have seen. The level in between is an
assembly language, which is readable by humans but still not very user-friendly.
   I will briefly describe machine code so that you know what you are looking at when
you see machine code on a disk. Each machine code instruction is several bytes long, and
the first couple of bytes identify the type of instruction, called the opcode. For example,
the value 3 could be for an addition instruction. Following the opcode are the arguments
to the instruction. For example, the arguments for the addition instruction would be the
two numbers to add.

    We do not really need much more detail than that for this book, but I will finish with
a basic example. One of the machine instructions is to move values into registers of the
CPU. Registers are places where CPUs store data. An assembly instruction to do this is
MOV AH,00 where the value 0 is moved into the AH register. The machine code equivalent
is the hexadecimal value 0xB400 where B4 is the opcode for MOV AH and 00 is the value,
in hexadecimal, to move in. There are tools that will translate the machine code to the
assembly code for you, but as you can see, it is not always obvious that you are looking at
machine code versus some other random data.

We just discussed that the CPU is the heart of the computer and needs to be fed instruc-
tions. Therefore, to start a computer, we need to have a device that feeds the CPU
instructions, also known as boot code. In most systems, this is a two-step process where
the first step involves getting all the hardware up and running, and the second step
involves getting the OS or other software up and running. We will briefly look into boot
code because all volume and file systems have a specific location where boot code is
stored, and it is not always needed.
   When power is applied to a CPU, it knows to read instructions from a specific loca-
tion in memory, which is typically Read Only Memory (ROM). The instructions in ROM
force the system to probe for and configure hardware. After the hardware is configured,
the CPU searches for a device that may contain additional boot code. If it finds such a
device, its boot code is executed, and the code attempts to locate and load a specific
operating system. The process after the bootable disk is found is platform-specific, and I
will cover it in more detail in the following chapters.
   As an example, though, we will take a brief look at the boot process of a Microsoft
Windows system. When the system is powered on, the CPU reads instructions from the
Basic Input / Output System (BIOS), and it searches for the hard disks, CD drives, and
other hardware devices that it has been configured to support. After the hardware has
been located, the BIOS examines the floppy disks, hard disks, and CDs in some config-
ured order and looks at the first sector for boot code. The code in the first sector of a
bootable disk causes the CPU to process the partition table and locate the bootable
partition where the Windows operating system is located. In the first sector of the parti-
tion is more boot code, which locates and loads the actual operating system. We can see
how the various components refer to each other in Figure 2.7.
   In the Windows example, if the boot code on the disk were missing, the BIOS would
not find a bootable device and generate an error. If the boot code on the disk could not
find boot code in one of the partitions, it would generate an error. We will examine each
of these boot code locations in the following chapters.

                          1)
                              BIOS
                           Instructions

                                               CPU

                          2)   Disk                      3) Partition
                             Sector 0                       Sector 0
                           Instructions                   Instructions

                                                                4)   Windows
                                                                     Operating
                                            Disk 0                    System

Figure 2.7   The relationship among the various boot code locations in an IA32 system.

If a digital investigator can learn about only one piece of hardware in a computer, hard
disks are probably his best choice because they are one of the most common sources of
digital evidence. This section covers hard disks basics and discusses topics that are of
interest to an investigator, such as access methods, write blocking, and locations where
data can be hidden. The first section is an overview of how a disk works, and the next
two sections cover AT Attachment (ATA/IDE) disks and Small Computer Systems Interface
(SCSI) disks, respectively.

Let’s start with the internals of all modern hard disks. This information is useful for a
basic understanding of how data are stored and because older file systems and partition-
ing schemes use disk geometry and other internal values that are hidden with modern
disks. Therefore, knowing about disk geometry will help you to understand some of the
values in a file system. The goal of this section is not to enable you to fix hard disks.
Instead, the goal is to obtain a conceptual understanding of what is going on inside.
   Hard disks contain one or more circular platters that are stacked on top of each other
and spin at the same time. A picture of the inside of a disk can be found in Figure 2.8.
The bottom and top of each platter is coated with a magnetic media, and when the disk
is manufactured, the platters are uniform and empty.

Figure 2.8   The inside of an ATA disk where we see the platters on the right and an arm on the left that
             reads from and writes to the platters.

   Inside the disk is an arm that moves back and forth, and it has a head on the top and
bottom of each platter that can read and write data, although only one head can read or
write at a time.
   A low-level format is performed on the blank platters to create data structures for
tracks and sectors. A track is a circular ring that goes around the platter. It is similar to a
lane on a running track so that if you go around the entire circle, you will end in the
same location that you started. Each track on the hard disk is given an address from the
outside inward, starting with 0. For example, if there were 10,000 tracks on each platter,
the outside track of each platter would be 0, and the inside track (nearest the center of
the circle) would be 9,999. Because the layout of each platter is the same and the tracks
on each platter are given the same address, the term cylinder is used to describe all tracks
at a given address on all platters. For example, cylinder 0 is track 0 on the bottom and
top of all platters in the hard disk. The heads in the disk are given an address so that we
can uniquely identify which platter and on which side of the platter we want to read
from or write to.
   Each track is divided into sectors, which is the smallest addressable storage unit in the
hard disk and is typically 512 bytes. Each sector is given an address, starting at 1 for each
track. Therefore, we can address a specific sector by using the cylinder address (C) to get
the track, the head number (H) to get the platter and side, and the sector address (S) to
get the sector in the track. We can see this in Figure 2.9.

                      Track #1
                      Sector #3

                                                                        Track #0
                                           3             2

                                   4                             1

                                   5                              8

                                            6            7

Figure 2.9   Disk geometry of one platter showing the track (or cylinder) and sector addresses (not even
             close to scale).

   We will discuss in the “Types of Sector Addresses” section that the CHS address is
no longer used as the primary addressing method. The Logical Block Address (LBA) is
instead used, and it assigns sequential addresses to each sector. The LBA address may not
be related to its physical location.
   A sector can become defective and should therefore no longer be used to store user
data. With older disks, it was the responsibility of the operating system to know where
the bad sectors were and to not allocate them for files. Users could also manually tell the
disk which sectors to ignore because they were bad. In fact, many file systems still pro-
vide the option to mark sectors as bad. This is typically not needed, though, because
modern disks can identify a bad sector and remap the address to a good location some-
where else on the disk. The user never knows that this has happened.
   The previous description of the layout is overly simplified. In reality, the disk arranges
the location of the sectors to obtain the best performance. So, sectors and tracks may be
offset to take advantage of the seek times and speeds of the drive. For the needs of many
investigators, this simplistic view is good enough because most of us do not have clean
rooms, and the equipment to locate where a specific sector is located on a platter. A more
detailed discussion of drive internals can be found in Forensic Computing [Sammes and
Jenkinson 2000].

ATA / IDE INTERFACE
The AT Attachment (ATA) interface is the most popular hard disk interface. Disks that
use this interface are frequently referred to as IDE disks, but IDE simply stands for
Integrated Disk Electronics and identifies a hard disk that has the logic board built into it,
which older disks did not. The actual interface that the “IDE” disks use is ATA. This sec-
tion goes into some of the relevant details of the ATA specification so that we can discuss
technologies, such as hardware write blockers and host protected areas.
   The ATA specifications are developed by the T13 Technical Committee (http://
www.t13.org), which is a committee for the International Committee on Information
Technology Standards (INCITS). The final version of each specification is available for a
fee, but draft versions are freely available on the INCITS Web site. For the purposes of
learning about hard disks, the draft versions are sufficient.
   ATA disks require a controller, which is built into the motherboard of modern sys-
tems. The controller issues commands to one or two ATA disks using a ribbon cable. The
cable has maximum length of 18 inches and has 40 pins, but newer disks have an extra
40 wires that are not connected to any pins. The interface can be seen in Figure 2.10. The
extra wires are there to prevent interference between the wires. Laptops frequently have a
smaller disk and use a 44-pin interface, which includes pins for power. Adaptors can be
used to convert between the two interfaces, as can be seen in Figure 2.11. There is also a
44-pin high-density interface that is used in portable devices, such as Apple iPods.

Figure 2.10   An ATA disk with the 40-pin connector, jumpers, and power connector.

   The interface data path between the controller and disks is called a channel. Each
channel can have two disks, and the terms “master” and “slave” were given to them, even
though neither has control over the other. ATA disks can be configured as master or slave
using a physical jumper on the disk. Some also can be configured to use “Cable Select,”
where they will be assigned as master or slave based on which plug they have on the
ribbon cable. Most consumer computers have two channels and can support four
ATA disks.

Figure 2.11   A 44-pin ATA laptop drive connected to a 40-pin ATA ribbon cable using an adaptor
              (Photo courtesy of Eoghan Casey).

To read or write data from the disk, we need to be able to address the sectors. As we will
see later in the book, a single sector will be assigned a new address each time a partition,
file system, or file uses it. The address that we are referring to in this section is its physi-
cal address. The physical address of a sector is its address relative to the start of the
physical media.
    There are two different physical addressing methods. Older hard disks used the disk
geometry and the CHS method, which we already discussed. Refer to Figure 2.9 for a
simplistic example of how the cylinder and head addresses are organized.
    The CHS addressing scheme sounds good, but it has proven to be too limiting and is
not used much anymore. The original ATA specification used a 16-bit cylinder value, a
4-bit head value, and an 8-bit sector value, but the older BIOSs used a 10-bit cylinder
value, 8-bit head value, and a 6-bit sector value. Therefore, to communicate with the
hard disk through the BIOS, the smallest size for each value had to be used, which
allowed only a 504MB disk.
    To work around the 504MB limit, new BIOSes were developed that would translate
the address ranges that they liked to the addresses that the ATA specification liked. For
example, if the application requested data from cylinder 8, head 4, and sector 32, the
BIOS might translate that and request cylinder 26, head 2, sector 32 from the disk. For
translation to work, the BIOS will report a hard disk geometry that is different from
what actually existed on the disk. The translation process does not work for disks that
are larger than 8.1GB.
    BIOSes that perform address translation are not as common anymore, but an investi-
gator may run into difficulties if he encounters such a system. If he pulls the disk out of

the system and puts it into one of his systems, the translation might not exist or might be
different, and an acquisition or dead analysis cannot be performed because the wrong
sectors will be returned. To solve this problem, an investigator needs to use the original
system or find a similar system that performs the same translation. An investigator can
determine if a system is doing translation by looking up the BIOS version on the vendors
website or by looking for references in the BIOS.
   To overcome the 8.1GB limit associated with translation, the CHS addresses were
abandoned, and Logical Block Addresses (LBA) became standard. LBA uses a single num-
ber, starting at 0, to address each sector and has been supported since the first formal
ATA specification. With LBA, the software does not need to know anything about the
geometry; it needs to know only a single number. Support for CHS addresses was
removed from the ATA specification in ATA-6.
   Unfortunately, some of the file system and other data structures still use CHS
addresses, so we need to be able to convertfrom CHS to LBA throughout this book. LBA
address 0 is CHS address 0,0,1 and LBA 1 is CHS address 0,0,2. When all the sectors in
the track have been used, the first sector at the next head in the same cylinder is used,
which is CHS address 0,1,1. You can visualize this as filling the outer ring of the bottom
platter, then moving up platters until the top platter is reached. Then, the second ring on
the bottom platter is used. The conversion algorithm is

LBA = (((CYLINDER * heads_per_cylinder) + HEAD) * sectors_per_track) + SECTOR – 1

   where you replace CYLINDER, HEAD, and SECTOR with the respective CHS address
values. For example, consider a disk that reported 16 heads per cylinder and 63 sectors
per track. If we had a CHS address of cylinder 2, head 3, and sector 4, its conversion to
LBA would be as follows:

2208 = (((2 * 16) + 3) * 63) + 4 - 1

Interface Standards
There are a lot of interface terms in the consumer hard disk arena, which can be confus-
ing. Some of the terms mean the same thing, where a standards committee chose one,
and a hard disk company chose another. A description of the unofficial terms, such as
“Enhanced IDE” and “Ultra ATA,” can be found in the PC Guide’s “Unofficial IDE/ATA
Standards and Marketing Programs” (http://www.pcguide.com/ref/hdd/if/ide/
unstd.htm). In general, each new standard adds a faster method of reading and writing
data or fixes a size limitation of a previous standard.

   Note that ATA specifications are applicable to only hard disks. Removable media, such
as CD-ROMs and ZIP disks, need to use a special specification, called AT Attachment
Packet Interface (ATAPI). ATAPI devices typically use the same cables and controller, but
they require special drivers.
   Here are some of the highlights of the specifications that are of interest to an
investigation:

• ATA-1: Originally published in 1994. This specification had support for CHS and 28-
  bit LBA addresses [T13 1994].
• ATA-3: This specification was published in 1997 and added reliability and security
  features.Self-Monitoring Analysis and Reporting Technology (SMART) was introduced,
  which attempts to improve reliability by monitoring several parts of the disk.
  Passwords were also introduced in this specification [T13 1997].
• ATA / ATAPI-4: ATAPI, the specification for removable media, was integrated into
  the ATA specification in ATA-4, which was published in 1998. The 80-wire cable was
  introduced to help decrease interference. ATA-4 added the HPA, which will be
  discussed later [T13 1998].
• ATA / ATAPI-6: This specification was published in 2002, added 48-bit LBA addresses,
  removed support for CHS addresses, and added the DCO [T13 2002].
• ATA / ATAPI-7: This specification is still in draft form at the time of this writing.
  The drafts include serial ATA, which will be discussed later.

Disk Commands
This section provides an overview of how the controller and hard disk communicate,
which will help when we discuss hardware write protectors and the host protected area.
This section does not apply to ATAPI devices, such as CD-ROMs.
   The controller issues commands to the hard disk over the ribbon cable. The com-
mands are issued to both disks on the cable, but part of the command identifies if it is
for the master or slave. The controller communicates with the hard disk by writing to its
registers, which are small pieces of memory. The registers work like an online order form
where the controller writes data into specific registers like you would write data into spe-
cific fields of the form. When all the necessary data has been written to the registers, the
controller writes to the command register, and the hard disk processes the command.
This is like hitting the submit button of an HTML form. In theory, the disk should not
do anything until the command register is written to.

   For example, consider a case where the controller wants to read a sector of the disk. It
would need to write the sector address and number of sectors to read in the appropriate
registers. After the command details have been written to the registers, the controller
would instruct the hard disk to perform the read action by writing to the
command register.

Hard Disk Passwords
The ATA-3 specification introduced new optional security features, including passwords
that can be set through the BIOS or various software applications. If implemented, there
are two passwords in hard disks, the user and the master passwords. The master pass-
word was designed so that a company administrator could gain access to the computer
in case the user password was lost. If passwords are being used, there are two modes that
the disk can operate in: high and maximum. In the high security mode, the user and
master password can unlock the disk. In maximum-security mode, the user password
can unlock the disk but the master password can unlock the disk only after the disk con-
tents have been wiped. After a certain number of failed password attempts, the disk will
freeze, and the system will need to be rebooted.
   The hard disk will require the SECURITY_UNLOCK command to be executed with
the correct password before many of the other ATA commands can be executed. After
the correct password has been entered, the disk works normally until the disk is
powered down.
   Some ATA commands are still enabled on the hard disk when it is locked, so it may
show up as a valid disk when inserted into a computer. However, when you try to read
actual user data from a locked disk, it will either produce an error or require a password.
There are several free programs on the Internet that will tell you if the disk is locked and
will allow you to unlock it with the password. Two such programs are atapwd and
hdunlock.1 The password can be set through the BIOS or through various software
applications. Some data-recovery companies may be able to bypass the password by
opening the disk.

Host Protected Area
The Host Protected Area (HPA) is a special area of the disk that can be used to save data,
and a casual observer might not see it. The size of this area is configurable using ATA
commands, and many disks have a size of 0 by default.

1. These programs are most commonly found on Web sites that document how to modify video game con-
   soles. An example is http://www.xbox-scene.com/tools/tools.php?page=harddrive.

   The HPA was added in ATA-4, and the motivation was for a location where computer
vendors could store data that would not be erased when a user formats and erases the
hard disk contents. The HPA is at the end of the disk and, when used, can only be
accessed by reconfiguring the hard disk.
   Let’s go over the process in more detail using the ATA commands. Some of the com-
mands I will use have two versions depending on the size of the disk, but we will use only
one of them. There are two commands that return maximum addressable sectors values,
and if a HPA exists their return values will be different. The READ_NATIVE_MAX_
ADDRESS command will return the maximum physical address, but the IDENTIFY_
DEVICE command will return only the number of sectors that a user can access.
Therefore, if an HPA exists, the READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS will return the actual
end of the disk and the IDENTIFY_DEVICE command will return the end of the user
area (and the start of the HPA). Note that the next section will show that the READ_
NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS is not always the last physical address of the disk.
   To create an HPA, the SET_MAX_ADDRESS command is used to set the maximum
address to which the user should have access. To remove an HPA, the
SET_MAX_ADDRESS command must be executed again with the actual maximum size
of the disk, which can be found from READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS.
   For example, if the disk is 20GB, READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS will return a
sector count of 20GB (41,943,040 for example). To create a 1GB host protected area,
we execute SET_MAX_ADDRESS with an address of 39,845,888. Any attempt to read
from or write to the final 2,097,152 sectors (1GB) will generate an error, and the
IDENTIFY_DEVICE command will return a maximum address of 39,845,888. We can
see this in Figure 2.12. To remove the HPA, we would execute SET_MAX_ADDRESS
with the full sector count.

                  0                                                  19     20
                 GB                                                  GB     GB

                                   User Addressable Sectors               HPA

                                                        IDENTIFY_DEVICE

                                                   READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS

Figure 2.12   A 1GB Host Protected Area (HPA) in a 20GB disk.

   One of the settings for the SET_MAX_ADDRESS command is a ‘volatility bit’ that,
when set, causes the HPA to exist after the hard disk is reset or power cycled. There is
also a set of locking commands in the ATA specification that prevents modifications to
the maximum address until the next reset. This allows the BIOS to read or write some

data in the host protected area when the system is powering up, set the host protected
area so that the user cannot see the data, and then lock the area so that it cannot be
changed. A password can even be used (which is a different password than is used for
accessing the disk).
   In summary, a hard disk may have an HPA containing system files, hidden informa-
tion, or maybe both. It can be detected by comparing the output of two ATA commands.
To remove it, the maximum address of the hard disk must be reset, but the volatility set-
ting allows the change to be temporary.

Device Configuration Overlay
In addition to data being hidden in an HPA, data can be hidden using Device
Configuration Overlay (DCO). DCO was added to ATA-6 and allows the apparent capa-
bilities of a hard disk to be limited. Each ATA specification has optional features that a
disk may or may not implement. The computer uses the IDENTIFY_DEVICE command
to determine which features a hard disk supports. A DCO can cause the IDENTIFY_
DEVICE command to show that supported features are not supported and show a
smaller disk size than actually exists.
   Let’s look at some of the DCO commands. The DEVICE_CONFIGURATION_
IDENTIFY command returns the actual features and size of a disk. Therefore, we can
detect a DCO by comparing the outputs of DEVICE_CONFIGURATION_IDENTIFY
and IDENTIFY_DEVICE. Further, recall that the READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS
command returns the size of the disk after an HPA. We can detect a DCO that hides
sectors by comparing the READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS output with DEVICE_
CONFIGURATION_IDENTIFY.
   For example, consider a 20GB disk where a DCO has set the maximum address to
19GB. The READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS and IDENTIFY_DEVICE show that the
disk is only 19GB. If a 1GB HPA is also created, the IDENTIFY_DEVICE command
shows that the size of the disk is 18GB. We can see this in Figure 2.13.

                  0                                                 18     19      20
                 GB                                                 GB     GB      GB

                                User Addressable Sectors                 HPA    DCO

                                                  IDENTIFY_DEVICE

                                             READ_NATIVE_MAX_ADDRESS

                                               DEVICE_CONFIGURATION_IDENTIFY

Figure 2.13   A DCO can hide sectors at the end of the disk, in addition to sectors hidden by an HPA.

   To create or change a DCO, the DEVICE_CONFIGURATION_SET command is used.
To remove a DCO, the DEVICE_CONFIGURATION_RESET command is used. Unlike
HPA, there is no volatile option that allows the device to change the settings for that one
session. All DCO changes are permanent across resets and power cycles.

Serial ATA
Working with ATA devices has its drawbacks. The cables are big, not flexible, and have
the connectors in places that are frequently not where you want them. The hard disks
also can be difficult to configure with master and slave jumpers. The cable and speed of
the interface were some of the motivations behind the development of Serial ATA, which
is included in the ATA-7 specification.
    The interface is called serial because only one bit of information is transmitted
between the controller and the disk at a time, as compared to 16 bits at a time with
the original interface, or parallel ATA. The serial ATA connectors are about one-fourth
the size of the parallel ATA connectors and they have only seven contacts. Each serial
ATA device is connected directly to the controller, and there is no chaining of
multiple devices.
    Serial ATA has been designed so that a new controller can be placed in a computer,
and the computer does not know the difference between the original ATA (parallel ATA)
and the new serial ATA. In fact, the serial ATA controller has registers that make the com-
puter think that it is talking to a parallel ATA disk. The host computer sees each disk that
is connected to the serial ATA controller as the master disk on its own channel.

Now that we know how the ATA hard drives work and how they are controlled, we need
to discuss how software interfaces with them because this can cause problems when
acquiring the contents of a disk. There are two methods that software can use to access
the disk: directly through the hard disk controller or through the BIOS.

Direct Access to Controller
We saw in a previous section that the hard disk is connected to a hard disk controller,
which issues commands to the hard disk using the ribbon cable. One technique for
reading and writing data is for software to communicate directly with the hard disk
controller, which then communicates with the hard disk.
   To communicate this way, the software needs to know how to address the controller
and how to issue commands to it. For example, the software needs to know what the
command code for the read operation is, and it needs to know how to identify which

sectors to read. The software also will have to be able to query the hard disk for details
such as type and size.

BIOS Access to Controller
Accessing the hard disk directly is the fastest way to get data to and from the disk, but it
requires the software to know quite a bit about the hardware. One of the jobs of the
BIOS is to prevent software from having to know those details. The BIOS knows about
the hardware, and it provides services to the software so that they can more easily com-
municate with hardware.
   Recall from the “Boot Code Locations” section that the BIOS is used when the com-
puter starts. The BIOS performs many tasks during the boot process, but there are two
that we are interested in for this discussion. The first relevant task is that it determines
the details of the currently installed disks. The second relevant task is that it loads the
interrupt table, which will be used to provide services to the operating system
and software.
   To use the BIOS hard disk services, the software must load data, such as the sector
address and sizes, into the CPU registers and execute the software interrupt command
0x13 (commonly called INT13h). The software interrupt command causes the processor
to look at the interrupt table and locate the code that will process the service request.
Typically, the table entry for interrupt 0x13 contains the address of the BIOS code that
will use its knowledge of the hard disk to communicate with the controller. In essence,
the BIOS works as a middleman between the software and the hard disk.
   INT13h is actually a category of disk functions and includes functions that write to
the disk, read from the disk, format tracks on the disk, and query the disk for informa-
tion. The original INT13h functions for reading and writing used CHS addresses and
allowed the software to access a disk that was only 8.1GB or less. To overcome this limi-
tation, new functions were added to INT13h in the BIOS, called the “extended INT13h.”
   The extended INT13h functions required new BIOS code and used a 64-bit LBA
address. For backward compatibility reasons, the old CHS functions remained, and soft-
ware had to be rewritten to take advantage of the new LBA INT13h functions.

When building a portable incident response kit, some of the more difficult decisions
may include identifying what types of Small Computer Systems Interface (SCSI) cables,
drives, and connectors should be included. This section gives an overview of SCSI,
focuses on the different types, and describes how it is different from ATA. SCSI hard
disks are not as common as ATA hard disks for consumer PCs, but they are standard on
most servers.

   Like ATA, there are many specifications of SCSI, which are published by the T10
Technical Committee for INCITS (http://www.t10.org). There are three SCSI specifica-
tions, SCSI-1, SCSI-2, and SCSI-3. SCSI-3 actually includes many smaller specifications,
but covering all the details is out of the scope for this book.

SCSI versus ATA
There are both high-level and low-level differences between SCSI and ATA. The most
obvious high-level difference includes the numerous connector types. With ATA, there
was only 40- and 44-pin connectors, but SCSI has many shapes and styles. The SCSI
cables can be much longer than ATA cables and there can be more than two devices on
the same cable. Each device on the SCSI cable needs a unique numerical ID, which can
be configured with jumpers on the disk or with software. Many SCSI disks also have a
jumper to make the disk read only, which provides a similar function to an ATA write
blocker. ATA write blockers are external devices that block write commands, and they
will be discussed in Chapter 3, “Hard Disk Data Acquisition.”
   The first low-level difference between ATA and SCSI is that SCSI does not have a con-
troller. The ATA interface was designed for a single controller to tell one or two hard
disks what to do. SCSI was designed as a bus where different devices communicate with
each other and the devices are not limited to hard disks. With a SCSI configuration, the
card that plugs into the computer is not a controller because each device on the SCSI
cable is essentially an equal and can make requests of each other.
   Like ATA, standard SCSI is parallel and data transfers occur in 8-bit or 16-bit chunks.
Also like ATA, there is a serial version of the specification, which is the serial attached
SCSI specification.

Types of SCSI
The differences in SCSI versions boil down to how many bits are transferred at a time,
the frequency of the signals on the cable (the speed of the transfer), and what types of
signals are used. Older types of SCSI had a normal version and a wide version, where the
normal version transferred 8 bits at a time and the wide version transferred 16-bits at a
time. For example, an Ultra SCSI device performs an 8-bit transfer and a Wide Ultra
SCSI device performs a 16-bit transfer. All newer systems use 16-bit transfers, and there
is no need to differentiate between normal and wide.
   The second difference in SCSI versions is the speed of the signals in the cable. Table
2.5 shows the names of the SCSI types, the speed, and the transfer rates for an 8-bit
normal bus and a 16-bit wide bus.

Table 2.5     Speed differences among the different types of SCSI.

Type                     Frequency              8-bit Transfer Rate   16-bit (wide) Transfer Rate

SCSI (normal)            5 MHz                  5MB/s                 10MB/s

Fast SCSI                10 MHz                 10MB/s                20MB/s

Ultra SCSI               20 MHz                 20MB/s                40MB/s

Ultra2 SCSI              40 MHz                 40MB/s                80MB/s

Ultra3 SCSI              80 MHz                 N/A                   160MB/s

Ultra160 SCSI            80 MHz                 N/A                   160MB/s

Ultra320 SCSI            160 MHz                N/A                   320MB/s

    Within each of these types, there are different ways that the data are represented on
the wire. The obvious method is single ended (SE), where a high voltage is placed on the
wire if a 1 is being transmitted and no voltage is placed on the wire if a 0 is transmitted.
This method runs into problems at higher speeds and with longer cables because the
electric signal cannot stabilize at the high clock rate and the wires cause interference with
each other.
    The second method of transmitting the data is called differential voltage, and each bit
actually requires two wires. If a 0 is being transmitted, no voltage is applied to both
wires. If a 1 is being transmitted, a positive voltage is applied to one wire and the oppo-
site voltage is applied to the second wire. When a device reads the signals from the cable,
it takes the difference between the two wires. A high voltage differential (HVD) signal
option has existed in SCSI since the first version and a low voltage differential (LVD) sig-
nal option uses a smaller signal, has existed since Ultra2 SCSI, and is the primary signal
type for new disks. Table 2.6 shows the types of SCSI that use the different signal types.

Table 2.6     Signal types that can found in each type of SCSI.
Signal Type          SCSI Types

SE                   SCSI, Fast SCSI, Ultra SCSI

HVD                  SCSI, Fast SCSI, Ultra SCSI, Ultra2 SCSI

LVD                  Ultra2 SCSI, Ultra3 SCSI, Ultra160 SCSI, Ultra 320 SCSI

   It is very important that you do not mix different signal types. You can cause damage
to your devices when you connect SE devices to HVD and some LVD devices. Some of

the LVD disks are SE compatible, so they can be used in an SE environment without
damage, but they will only operate at the speeds that the SE devices use. There are sym-
bols on the SCSI devices that identify what signal type they use. Ensure that all devices
have the same symbol or compatible ones. The symbols are shown in Figure 2.14.

              A)                  B)                    C)                      D)
              SCSI     SE         SCSI       LVD        SCSI       LVD/SE       SCSI        DIFF

Figure 2.14   Symbols for SCSI signal types. (A) is for SE devices, (B) is for LVD devices, (C) is for devices
              that are both SE and LVD compatible, and (D) is for HVD devices.

Connector Types
There are many types of SCSI connectors, but there are only a few that are frequently
encountered. In general, drives that have an 8-bit bus have a 50-pin cable, and those that
have a 16-bit bus have a 68-pin cable. The high-density 68-pin adaptor is currently one
of the most common, and it comes in a normal size and a very high-density size, but the
normal is most common and can be seen in Figure 2.15. The 68-pin adaptor is used for
both LVD and SE signals, but the physical cable for the different signal types is different.
Check the writing on the cable to prevent problems.

Figure 2.15   A SCSI disk with a 68-pin connector.

   A variation of the high-density 68-pin connector is the Single Connector Attachment
(SCA) connector. The purpose of this connector is to provide power and the data wires
in one connector, which makes it easier to swap drives in a server. This connector has 80
pins and includes pins for power and to configure the disk. A picture of one can be
found in Figure 2.16.

Figure 2.16   A SCSI disk with an SCA connector.

   There are many adaptors for the different SCSI connectors, and the SCSI devices are
supposed to be backward compatible. However, not all adaptor and device configura-
tions may work. If the setup does work, it will run at the speed of the slowest device.
Remember to not mix any HVD devices with LVD or SE devices without the appropriate
adaptors and to only mix LVD and SE devices if the LVD devices can run in SE mode.

Size Barriers
SCSI disks do not suffer from the same size limitations as ATA disks do because the SCSI
specification has always used 32-bit and 64-bit LBA addresses. Although, the size limita-
tions of the BIOS (if you are using INT13h) or file system may be smaller that what SCSI
supports, and they will be the limiting factor.
   When used through the BIOS, the SCSI controller translates a CHS address to an LBA
address. Different controllers can use different mapping techniques, but many of them
choose one based on the geometry described by the entries in a partition table. It could
be possible for an investigator to have a controller in his acquisition system that does not
conduct the same mapping as the original controller, so the disk needs to be acquired
using direct access and not the BIOS.

SUMMARY
In this chapter, we have discussed the basics of data organization and storage. These
are important concepts for this book because we will be looking at the data structures
and storage methods that the various file systems use. Additional information about
data structures can be found in C programming books. We also looked at hard disk
technology, which is also important because it is where most of the evidence is found.
Additional information about hard disk technology can be found in the PC Guide
(http://www.pcguide.com/ref/hdd/index.htm) or in the official ATA or SCSI
specifications.

                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sammes, Tony, and Brian Jenkinson. Forensic Computing: A Practitioner’s Guide. New
York: Springer-Verlag, 2000.
T13. “Information Technology—AT Attachment Interface for Disk Drives.” X3T10, 791D
Revision 4c, 1994. http://www.t13.org/project/d0791r4c-ATA-1.pdf.
T13. “Information Technology—AT Attachment with Packet Interface—6 (ATA/
ATAPI-6).” 1410D Revision 3b, February 26, 2002. http://www.t13.org/docs2002/
d1410r3b.pdf.

T13. “Information Technology—AT Attachment with Packet Interface Extension
(ATA/ATAPI-4).” 1153D Revision 18, August 19, 1998. http://www.t13.org/project/
d1153r18-ATA-ATAPI-4.pdf.

T13. “Information Technology—AT Attachment-3 Interface (ATA-3).” X3T13, 2008D
Revision 7b, January 27, 1997. http://www.t13.org/project/d2008r7b-ATA-3.pdf.

This page intentionally left blank
