  Multiple Disk Volumes
                                      7
In many critical servers, multiple disks are used for performance, reliability, or scalabil-
ity. The disks are merged and processed so that they look normal but they are not. This
chapter covers RAID and disk spanning systems, both of which can be difficult to inves-
tigate. There can be many challenges when investigating a system that uses a multiple
disk volume, and not all the problems have been solved. This chapter explains the tech-
nology behind both of these volume systems and then provides some suggestions
for analyzing or acquiring the data. Of any chapter in this book, this will likely become
outdated the most quickly because new technology is being developed to create new
types of storage systems and because new analysis techniques will be developed to help
fill the void in this area. The first part of this chapter examines RAID systems, which
provide redundancy, and the second part of the chapter examines disk spanning, which
creates larger volumes.

RAID
RAID stands for Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks and is commonly used in high-
performance systems or in critical systems. RAID was first proposed in the late 1980s as a
method of using inexpensive disks to achieve performance and storage capacities similar
to the expensive high-performance disks [Patterson, et al. 1988]. The main theory
behind RAID is to use multiple disks instead of one in order to provide redundancy and

improve disk performance. A hardware controller or software driver merges the multiple
disks together, and the computer sees a large single volume.
    RAID used to be found only in high-end servers but is now becoming more common
on desktop systems. Microsoft Windows NT, 2000, and XP have the option to provide
the user with some level of RAID. In this section, we will first describe the technology
involved with RAID systems, and then we will discuss how to acquire or analyze a RAID
system. A RAID volume can be partitioned using any of the methods shown in Chapter
5, “PC-based Partitions,” and Chapter 6, “Server-based Partitions.”

There are multiple levels of RAID, and each level provides a different amount of reliabil-
ity and performance improvements. In this section, we will cover how six of the different
RAID levels work. A RAID volume is the volume created by the hardware or software that
combines the hard disks.
   RAID Level 0 volumes use two or more disks, and the data is striped across the disks
in block-size chunks. When data are striped, consecutive blocks of the RAID volume are
mapped to blocks on alternate disks. For example, if there are two disks, RAID block 0 is
block 0 on disk 1, RAID block 1 is block 0 on disk 2, RAID block 2 is block 1 on disk 1,
and RAID block 3 is block 1 on disk 2. This can be seen in Figure 7.1 where ‘D0,’ ‘D1,’
‘D2,’ and ‘D3’ are blocks of data. A system would use this level of RAID for performance
reasons and not redundancy because only one copy of the data exists.

                        RAID 0                                        RAID 1

                 D0                 D1                          D0                D0

                 D2                 D3                          D1                D1

                 D4                 D5                          D2                D2

               Disk 1             Disk 2                     Disk 1             Disk 2

Figure 7.1   A RAID Level 0 volume with two disks and data striped across them in block-sized chunks
             and a RAID Level 1 volume with two disks and data mirrored between them.

                                                                                         RAID

   RAID Level 1 volumes use two or more disks and mirror the data. When data are writ-
ten to one disk, they are also written to the other disk, and both disks contain the same
allocated data. The two disks may contain different data in the sectors that are not used
in the RAID volume. If there is a disk failure, the other disk can be used for recovery. For
example, if we have two disks in a RAID Level 1 volume, RAID block 0 is block 0 on both
disks 1 and 2, RAID block 1 is block 1 on both disks 1 and 2, etc. This also can be seen in
Figure 7.1.
   RAID Level 2 volumes are rare and use error-correcting codes to fix any incorrect data
when it is read from the disks. The data are striped across many disks using bit-sized
chunks, and additional disks contain the error-correcting code values.
   RAID Level 3 volumes require at least three disks and have a dedicated parity disk.
The parity disk is used to recognize errors in the other two disks or to recreate the con-
tents of a disk if it fails. An inefficient example of parity is traditional addition. If I have
two values, 3 and 4, I can add them and my parity is 7. If at any time the two values do
not add to 7, I know that there is an error. If one of the values is lost, I can recover it by
subtracting the value that still exists from 7.
   With RAID Level 3, the data are broken up into byte-sized chunks and striped, or
alternated, across the data disks. A dedicated parity disk contains the values needed to
duplicate the data to rebuild any data that is lost when one of the disks fails. This level is
similar to what we saw with Level 0, except that the striping size is much smaller (bytes
instead of blocks) and there is a dedicated parity disk. An example with two data disks
and one parity disk can be found in Figure 7.2.

                                                RAID 3

                               D0                 D1                 P0

                               D2                 D3                 P1

                               D4                 D5                 P2

                             Data               Data               Parity
                             Disk 1             Disk 2             Disk

Figure 7.2   A RAID Level 3 volume with two data disks and one parity disk.

   A common method of calculating the parity information is by using the “exclusive or”
(XOR) operation. The XOR operator takes two one-bit inputs and generates a one-bit
output using the rules found in Table 7.1. The XOR of two values larger than one bit can
be calculated by independently applying the XOR rules to each set of bits.

Table 7.1   Rules for the XOR operation.

Input 1            Input 2           Output

0                  0                 0

0                  1                 1

1                  0                 1

1                  1                 0

   The XOR operator is useful because if you know any of the two of the input or output
values, you can calculate the third value. This is similar to adding two numbers and then
subtracting one to get the original. For example, let there be three data disks and one
parity disk. The data disks have the values: 1011 0010, 1100 1111, and 1000 0001. The
parity for these values would be calculated as follows:

(1011 0010 XOR 1100 1111) XOR 1000 0001
(0111 1101) XOR 1000 0001
1111 1100

  The byte 1111 1100 would be written to the parity disk. If the second disk failed, its
byte could be created as follows:

1111 1100 XOR (1011 0010 XOR 1000 0001)
1111 1100 XOR (0011 0011)
1100 1111

   We have easily reconstructed the byte for the second disk.
   RAID Level 4 volumes are similar to Level 3, except that the data is striped in block-
sized chunks instead of byte-sized chunks. Level 4 uses two or more data disks and a
dedicated parity disk, so its architecture is the same as shown in Figure 7.2.
   RAID Level 5 volumes are similar to Level 4, but they remove the bottleneck associ-
ated with the parity disk. In Level 5, there is no dedicated parity disk, and all the disks
contain both data and parity values on an alternating basis. For example, if there are

                                                                                     RAID

three disks, RAID block 0 is block 0 of disk 1, RAID block 1 is in block 0 of disk 2, and
the corresponding parity block is block 0 of disk 3. The next parity block will be block 1
of disk 2 and will contain the XOR of block 1 of disks 1 and 3. This can be seen in
Figure 7.3.

                                                RAID 5

                                D0                 D1                 P0

                                D2                 P1                 D3

                                P2                 D4                 D5

                              Disk 1             Disk 2             Disk 3

Figure 7.3   A RAID Level 5 volume with three disks and distributed parity data.

  Level 5 is one of the more common forms of RAID and requires at least three disks.
There are many other RAID levels that are not very common. They combine multiple
RAID levels and make analysis even harder.

One method of creating a RAID volume is to use special hardware. This section will
examine how this is done and how to acquire such a system.

Background
A hardware RAID implementation can come in two major forms: as a special controller
that plugs into one of the buses or as a device that plugs into a normal disk controller,
such as ATA, SCSI, or Firewire. In either case, the hard disks plug into a special piece of
hardware and, in general, the computer sees only the RAID volume and not the individ-
ual disks. Figure 7.4 shows the connections between the disks, controller, and volume.
   If a special RAID controller is being used, the computer probes for the controller
when booting. With many IA32 systems, the BIOS for the RAID controller displays
messages on the screen, and the user can enter a setup screen to configure the controller
and disks. The OS needs hardware drivers for the RAID controller. Disks that are created

with one controller typically cannot be used with another controller. If a special device is
being used that goes in between the normal disk controller and the hard disks, no special
drivers are needed.

                                         RAID                       Operating
                                        Volume                       System

                                       Hardware
                                     RAID Controller

                          Disk            Disk            Disk

Figure 7.4   A hardware controller makes the disks look like one for the OS.

Acquisition and Analysis
There are many types of RAID hardware implementations, so we will only provide some
basic guidelines here. To analyze the RAID volume, it is easiest to acquire the final RAID
volume as though it were a normal single disk and use the typical file system and parti-
tion analysis tools. One method of performing this is to boot the suspect system with a
bootable Linux, or similar, CD that has drivers for the RAID controller. You can then use
dd, or a similar command, to acquire the final RAID volume. Note that some RAID
volumes are very large; therefore, you will need a large amount of disk space on which
to store the image (or maybe your own RAID volume).
   Different bootable Linux CDs have drivers for different RAID controllers, so check
your favorite CDs and make a list of which controllers they support. You may need to
make your own CD or bring several CDs with you so that you are prepared.
   If you do not have the needed drivers for the RAID controller for an onsite acquisi-
tion, the individual disks and controller should be taken back to the lab. Not much has
been published about the layout of data on the individual disks, so it could be difficult
to merge the disks without the controller.
   The RAID volume may not use all sectors on a disk and it is possible that the unused
sectors contain hidden data. Therefore, acquiring the contents of each disk in addition
to the RAID volume is the safest, although not always the easiest, solution. If you do not
know the layout of the data, it could be difficult to identify the unused sectors of the

                                                                                           RAID

disk. If you have specific keywords for which you are looking, the individual disks can be
searched, in addition to searching the RAID volume.

RAID volumes also can be implemented in software. This section will examine how this
is done and how to acquire a software RAID volume.

Background
With a software RAID, the operating system has special drivers that merge the individual
disks. In this scenario, the OS sees the individual disks, but may show only the RAID vol-
ume to the user. The individual disks can typically be accessed through raw devices in
UNIX system or through device objects in Microsoft Windows. Most operating systems
now offer some levels of RAID, including Microsoft Windows NT, 2000, and XP; Apple
OS X; Linux; Sun Solaris; HP-UX; and IBM AIX. Software RAID is not as efficient as
hardware RAID because the CPU must be used to calculate the parity bits and split the
data. We can see the connections in Figure 7.5.

                                                          RAID
                                                         Volume
                                   Operating
                                    System
                                                          RAID
                                                         Software

                                  Disk            Disk              Disk

Figure 7.5   With software RAID, the OS merges the disks and it has access to each disk.

   In Windows 2000 and XP, the Logical Disk Manager (LDM) controls the RAID vol-
umes. The LDM requires that disks be formatted as dynamic disks, which are different
from the DOS-based partitions that we previously saw in Chapter 5, “PC-Based
Partitions.” The LDM can create RAID level 0 (striping), RAID level 1 (mirroring), and
RAID level 5 (striping with parity) volumes, although RAID levels 1 and 5 are available
only with the server version of Windows. A dynamic disk can be used for more than one

RAID volume, but that is unlikely if the system is using RAID for performance or redun-
dancy reasons. All configuration information for the Windows RAID volume is stored
on the disks and not on the local system. We will discuss LDM in much more detail later
in the chapter when we discuss disk spanning.
   In Linux, RAID is achieved with the multiple device (MD) kernel driver. The disks in
a Linux RAID do not have to be formatted in any special way and can be normal DOS-
partitioned disks. The configuration information is stored on the local system in a con-
figuration file, /etc/raidtab by default. The resulting RAID volume gets a new device
that can be mounted as a normal disk. The MD driver supports RAID Level 0 (striping),
RAID Level 1 (mirroring), and RAID Level 5 (striping with parity). There is an optional
“persistent superblock” option that places configuration information on the disk so
that it can be used in other systems besides the original system (which makes offsite
analysis easier).

Acquisition and Analysis
Analysis and acquisition of software RAID is similar to a hardware RAID. Based on cur-
rent technology, the easiest scenario is to acquire the RAID volume so that the normal
file system tools can be used. Unlike hardware RAID, there are some analysis tools that
can merge the individual disks together.
    With software RAID, you may not need the original software to recreate the RAID
volume. For example, Linux has support for Windows Logical Disk Management (LDM)
and may be able to properly merge the Windows disks. Not all Linux kernels ship with
LDM enabled, but you can enable it by recompiling the kernel. If you are using
Microsoft Windows to create the RAID volume, apply hardware write blockers to
prevent overwriting data.
    Let’s look at a Windows LDM example with Linux. When you boot a Linux kernel
with support for LDM, a device is created for each of the partitions in the RAID. You
have to edit the /etc/raidtab file so that it describes the RAID setup and partitions. For
example, the following is a configuration file for a Windows LDM RAID Level 0 (strip-
ing) with two partitions (/dev/hdb1 and /dev/hdd1) using 64KB blocks:

# cat /etc/raidtab
raiddev /dev/md0
        raid-level            0
        nr-raid-disks         2
        nr-spare-disks        0
        persistent-superblock 0
        chunk-size            64k
        device                /dev/hdb1

                                                                                      RAID

        raid-disk               0
        device                  /dev/hdd1
        raid-disk               1

   Using this configuration file, the device /dev/md0 could be mounted read-only or
imaged using dd. Test the process before an incident happens and make backup copies of
real disks during an incident. We will cover the process of using Linux with Windows
LDM in more detail in the “Disk Spanning” section. A similar process is used for making
a Linux MD software RAID on the acquisition system. If you can copy the raidtab file
from the original system, its contents can be used as a base to make the RAID volume on
the acquisition system.
   EnCase from Guidance Software and ProDiscover from Technology Pathways can
import the disks from a Windows RAID volume and analyze them as though they were
a single volume. This is actually the better long-term method of analyzing the data
because it provides access to data that may be hidden in the individual disks and would
not be acquired by collecting only the RAID volume. There is always a risk, though, of
using software, in either Linux or third-party tools, that does not use an official specifi-
cation because it could have errors and not produce an accurate version of the original
RAID volume.

Investigating a system with a RAID volume can be difficult because they are not
frequently encountered and not every implementation is the same. Be very careful when
trying different acquisition techniques that you do not modify the original disks in the
process. Use hardware write-blockers or the read-only jumper on the individual hard
disks to prevent modifications. It may also be useful to make images of the individual
disks before you make an image of the full RAID volume. The individual disk images
may contain hidden data that are not in the final RAID volume. No cases involving
hidden RAID data have been published, but it could be possible depending on whom
you are investigating. It is also possible that the entire disk is not being used for the
RAID. Some RAID systems use only part of the hard disk so that it is easier to replace the
disk if it fails. For example, only 40GB of each individual disk in the RAID volume could
be used, regardless if each individual disk is 40GB or 80GB. The unused area may con-
tain data from a previous usage or be used to hide data.

SUMMARY
This section has given an overview of RAID. RAID is common in high-end servers and is
becoming more common in desktop systems that need performance or large amounts of
disk space. The low-level details were not given because they vary by implementation
and there is no single standard. More details will be given later in the “Disk Spanning”
section because many systems incorporate software RAID in their volume
management support.
    The key concept for investigations is to practice acquiring RAID systems. If possible, it
is easiest to acquire the full RAID volume at the scene and then perform analysis using
standard tools. The problems with this approach are that it requires a very large disk to
save the data to, and there could be data on the individual disks that are not shown in the
final RAID volume. Therefore, it is safest to always acquire the individual disks as well.

Disk spanning makes multiple disks appear to be one large disk. Disk spanning is
frequently discussed with RAID because many software RAID solutions also provide disk
spanning, but disk spanning offers no redundancy or performance benefits. It is used to
create large storage systems, and some versions allow you to add disks and dynamically
increase the size of the file system.
   Many operating systems now include disk spanning, and in this section we cover the
software solutions that come with Microsoft Windows and Linux. Other systems, such as
Sun Solaris, IBM AIX, and Apple OSX, come with their own versions of disk spanning,
but they are not covered here. The first part of this section covers the basic concepts and
provides some general definitions that are used in all implementations. Then we cover
the Windows and Linux systems. This section, like the previous RAID section, does not
provide answers to every problem that you may encounter because not all the answers
are known. This section describes how disk spanning works so that you can have a better
understanding about why tools may not exist that meet all your needs.

OVERVIEW
The main theory behind disk spanning is similar to using a three-ring binder for taking
notes instead of a spiral notebook. When you use all the pages in the spiral notebook,
you must buy a new one and carry both of them around. When you use all the pages in
the three-ring binder, you can add more pages to the end of it and even use a larger
binder if needed. With disk spanning, the storage space from new disks is appended to

the end of the existing storage space. Figure 7.6 shows an example where there are two
disks being used for spanning, and each disk holds 100 data blocks. Blocks 0 to 99 are
written to disk 1, and blocks 100 to 199 are written to disk 2.

                                          D0                D100

                                          D1                D101

                                          D2                D102

                                          D3                D103

                                          ...                 ...

                                         D99                D199

                                        Disk 1             Disk 2

Figure 7.6   Disk spanning with 100 units on the first disk and 100 units on the second disk.

   A logical volume is the output of the disk-spanning software. The logical volume is
made up of multiple physical disks or partitions that are sequentially merged together.
Many systems also have disk groups, which are groups of physical disks, and only disks in
the same group can be combined to make a logical volume. Figure 7.7 shows the rela-
tionship between the levels of abstraction. It contains three physical disks that are
grouped into one disk group. The disks are spanned to form two logical volumes.

                           Physical
                            Disk 1
                                                                     Logical
                                                                    Volume 1

                           Physical               Disk
                            Disk 2               Group 1

                                                                     Logical
                                                                    Volume 2
                           Physical
                            Disk 3

Figure 7.7   Terms and relationships for disk-spanning systems.

        There are two methods of disk spanning in Linux. The MD driver, which we previously
        saw with RAID systems, also can perform basic disk spanning, and there is also the more
        advanced system called the Logical Volume Manager (LVM). Both systems come with
        major Linux distributions, and this section examines MD devices. We are covering Linux
        before Windows because the Linux drivers can be used to analyze a Windows system.

        Background
           The MD driver uses normal DOS-based partitions and groups them together to form
        a RAID or disk-spanning volume. Each disk can have multiple partitions and each can
        be used in a different RAID or logical volume. There is no notion of disk groups in this
        model. There is a configuration file, /etc/raidtab, that lists which partitions go in which
        order, and the volume cannot be mounted unless it is configured in this file. The config-
        uration file has the same layout as was described in the previous RAID section except
        that the ‘raid-level’ setting is set to ‘linear.’ An example configuration file for a
        logical volume with two partitions (/dev/hdb1 and /dev/hdd1) is

        # cat /etc/raidtab
        raiddev /dev/md0
                raid-level      linear
                nr-raid-disks   2
                nr-spare-disks 0
                persistent-superblock   1
                chunk-size      4k
                device          /dev/hdb1
                raid-disk       0
                device          /dev/hdd1
                raid-disk       1

          This kernel reads the configuration file and creates a device, /dev/md0, that can be
        mounted and used as a single volume, but it really combines the storage space of
        /dev/hdb1 and /dev/hdd1.
          If the ‘persistent-superblock’ value is set to 0, then the only configuration data for the
        device is in the /etc/raidtab file. If the value is set to 1, each disk or partition contains
        configuration data at the end of it that allows the auto-detect feature of Linux to auto-
        matically create the MD device. For the auto-detect process to work with Linux, the DOS
        partition that it is located in must have a partition type of 0xfd. You can see if the device
        was created during the boot by looking at the /var/log/messages log file. The auto-
        detect process occurs when the ‘md’ kernel module is loaded.

   If the disks or partitions contain the persistent superblock, they have a 1024-byte
structure that is broken up into sections. The first section contains settings about the
resulting disk spanning or RAID volume, such as versions, the number of disks, creation
time, and identifiers. The second section contains general information, such as the last
update time, a counter, the state of the volume, and the number of working and failed
disks. The remaining sections contain information about each of the disks in the vol-
ume, including the major and minor numbers of the device, the role of the device in the
volume, and the disk’s state. As we will see in the analysis section, a typical Linux system
updates the values in the superblock when it boots, even if the volume is never mounted.
Using the superblock, the kernel can determine if the disks have been removed from the
system and placed in a different order.

Acquisition and Analysis
To analyze the data on a MD volume, your best bet is to acquire the volume as a single
drive or partition and use standard analysis tools. The easiest scenario is if the volume
has a persistent superblock. Otherwise, you will have to create the /etc/raidtab file on
your acquisition system. If you need to create the raidtab file, then you should try to
access the /etc/ directory on the original and use it as a base.
   After the configuration file has been created, the MD device can be created using the
raidstart command. That makes a device in the /dev/ directory based on the name
given in the configuration file, and the volume can be acquired with dd or a similar tool.
After the acquisition, the raidstop command needs to be executed to stop the
MD device. If there is a persistent superblock, be aware that some of the values in the
superblock are updated when you make a new raid device with raidstart. Ensure
that you have backup images of the disks and try ATA or SCSI write blockers if you
have them.
   If the partition type for each of the DOS partitions in the volume is set to 0xfd, the
persistent superblock exists, and the system is set to autodetect MD devices—a device
will be created during startup. As with executing raidstart, this process updates the ‘last
update’ time, the counter, and the corresponding checksum value in the superblock. This
occurs even when the MD volume is not mounted!
   If you place the disks into a system in a different order and location from where they
originally were, the superblock will be rewritten. This happens even if the volume is not
mounted, so care must be taken to reduce the changes to each disk. Furthermore, I have
experienced problems when I had only one of two disks in the analysis system when I
booted. The counter on that disk increased, but when I booted next with both disks,
Linux would not create the MD device because they had different counter values.

   I have also found that when dealing with MD disks, it is best to get into the habit of
not keeping a raidtab file. It can be very dangerous because if you shut the system down
and put new disks in there, Linux will try and process them as a volume. You might con-
sider modifying your shutdown scripts to copy the raidtab file to another name so that it
does not exist for the next power on.
   Bootable Linux CDs can be used to acquire MD volumes, and some autodetect the
volume while others do not and require that you make an /etc/raidtab file. If you can
boot from a CD and create the MD device, acquire that as normal. Otherwise, acquire
each disk and document which places they were in so that you minimize any modifica-
tions to the disk by putting them in a different order. I have not been able to recreate MD
volumes by using a raw image of the original partitions or loopback devices. Therefore,
you may need to restore the images to a disk and extract the data from the disks in
the lab.

The second method of disk spanning in Linux is with LVM. This section describes the
design of LVM and acquisition techniques.

Background
LVM has a more advanced architecture than MD and uses the notion of disk groups,
which it calls volume groups. DOS partitions that are used with LVM have a partition
type of 0x8e. The disks or partitions in the volume group are divided into physical
extents, which are equal-sized containers and typically have a size that is several MBs.
Each system can have one or more volume groups and each volume group has a subdi-
rectory in the /dev/ directory.
   A logical volume is made up of logical extents, which have the same size as the physical
extents, and there is a mapping between each logical extent and physical extent. We can
see this in Figure 7.8, where a logical volume is created from three sets of physical extents
from two physical disks.
   Logical volumes can be implemented by either concatenating the available physical
extents or by using striping (where consecutive logical extents are on different disks). A
2GB concatenated volume may have its first 1.5GB from disk 1 and the last 500MB from
disk 2. On the other hand, if the volume is striped, it may use two 1GB disks where the
first 1MB is from disk 1, the second 1MB from disk 2, the third 1MB from disk 1, and
so on. The logical volumes are given a device file in the volume group subdirectory
in /dev/.

                                                              Volume
                      Physical Extents                        Group
                                                                              Logical Extents

Figure 7.8    LVM organizes physical disks into physical extents that are mapped to logical extents in the
                            logical volume.

                 The configuration data for a logical volume are stored on both the local system and
              the disks. The local configuration files are stored in the /etc/lvmtab file and the
              /etc/lvmtab.d/ directory. The configuration files are in a binary format and are updated
              with the LVM utilities, such as vgimport, vgscan, and vgchange. The on-disk structure is
              located at the beginning of the disk and contains information about the disk, the
              volume group of which the disk is a member, and the logical volumes that the volume
              group has. None of the fields in the structure is for a time value, so the structure is not
              updated when the logical volume is created as occurs with MD devices.

              Acquisition and Analysis
              The analysis of an LVM system can be more automated than that of MD devices. The
              steps that I will describe here are from my experience with current versions of LVM, and
              I have verified them with LVM developers.1 LVM has the vgexport and vgimport utilities
              that are supposed to be used when moving disks between systems, but I have found that
              they are not needed for acquiring the disks. The vgexport utility removes the local con-
              figuration files for the volume and writes the word “-EXPORT” in the volume group
              name on the disk. This step is not needed for an investigation when removing the disks
              from the suspect system.
                 To analyze a LVM volume, you can either remove the disks from the system and place
              them in a trusted Linux system or boot the suspect system from a bootable Linux CD
              with LVM support. As we discussed with MD, it is safest to have your systems configured
              to not automatically mount and configure logical volumes. When the analysis system is
              running, execute the vgscan command to scan the devices for logical volumes. This

              1. Email communication with Heinz Mauelshagen and A. J. Lewis. November 17, 2003.

        automatically creates the /etc/lvmtab file and configuration files in the /etc/lvmtab.d/
        directory. After the configuration files have been created, the vgchange –a y command is
        needed to activate the volumes that were found in the scan. With LVM, the location and
        master or slave configuration of the disks is not important. When the volume has
        become active, you can dd it from the volume device in /dev/. In my experience, using
        the vgscan and vgchange commands does not change the MD5 value of the disks. The
        command sequence can be found here where the system was booted from The Penguin
        Sleuth Kit (note that the Penguin Sleuth Kit is not related to The Sleuth Kit analysis
        tools). The Penguin Sleuth Kit is available at http://www.linux-forensics.com.

        # vgscan
        vgscan -- reading all physical volumes (this may take a while...)
        vgscan -- found inactive volume group “vg_big2”
        vgscan -- “/etc/lvmtab” and “/etc/lvmtab.d” successfully created
        vgscan -- WARNING: This program does not do a VGDA backup of your volume group

        # vgchange -a y
        vgchange -- volume group “vg_big2” successfully activated

          Note that this behavior could change in future versions of LVM, so test your proce-
        dures before you perform these actions on a real system and make disk backups before
        merging the volumes.

        Microsoft has included support for disk spanning since Windows NT. This section will
        describe the design of Windows LDM and acquisition techniques.

        Dynamic Disks
        LDM is responsible for managing the logical volumes in Windows 2000 and XP. LDM
        supports simple volumes that are similar to basic partitions, disk spanning, RAID Level 0
        (splitting), RAID Level 1 (mirroring), and RAID Level 5. The RAID capabilities were
        briefly discussed earlier in the chapter and they will be discussed in more detail here.
           Basic disks are those that we saw in Chapters 5 and 6. These disks have a DOS or GPT
        partition table, and each partition is self-contained. Basic disks cannot be used with
        LDM. A dynamic disk has additional data structures to make partitions that can be used
        to make logical volumes. We will now discuss dynamic disks in more detail.
           A dynamic disk has two important areas. The LDM partition area consumes most of
        the disk, and it is where dynamic partitions are allocated. The last 1MB of the dynamic

              disk is allocated to the LDM database. The LDM database contains entries to describe
              how the partition area is organized and how logical volumes should be created.
                 Each dynamic disk in an IA32 system has a DOS-based partition table in the first sec-
              tor so that legacy systems will know that the disk is being used. The partition table has
              only one entry, and it spans the entire disk with a partition type of 0x42. The LDM parti-
              tion area and database are located inside this DOS partition, as shown in Figure 7.9. We
              can see the partition table here using mmls from The Sleuth Kit:

              # mmls –t dos vdisk.dd
              DOS Partition Table
              Units are in 512-byte sectors
                   Slot    Start        End                  Length           Description
              00: -----    0000000000   0000000000           0000000001       Primary Table (#0)
              01: -----    0000000001   0000000062           0000000062       Unallocated
              02: 00:00    0000000063   0120101939           0120101877       Win LVM / Secure FS (0x42)

                                                    0x42 Type DOS Partition

                                                    LDM Partition Area

                                                                                     LDM Database

Figure 7.9   The layout of a dynamic disk in an IA32 system where the LDM data structures are inside a
                           DOS partition.

                  Each dynamic disk in an IA64 (Intel Itanium, and so on) system has GPT partitions
              for the partition area and LDM database. There are specific partition types for these par-
              titions and a partition is created for each.
                  Windows supports only one disk group, so all dynamic disks are automatically
              assigned to it. The partition area of each dynamic disk can be partitioned into dynamic
              partitions. Dynamic partitions from one or more disks are grouped to make logical vol-
              umes. We can see this relationship in Figure 7.10. It is important in this section to distin-
              guish between the terms that Microsoft uses for dynamic disks versus DOS partitions.
              With DOS partitions, Microsoft considers logical volumes to be partitions that are inside
              an extended partition, whereas with dynamic disks all partitions that can contain a file
              system or other data are called logical volumes.

      Dynamic
       Disk 1
                       Dynamic                     Disk
                       Partitions                 Group
      Dynamic
       Disk 2

Figure 7.10   A LDM logical volume is made up of dynamic partitions from a disk group.

The LDM Database
The LDM database is where the dynamic partitions are defined and where the rules for
creating the logical volumes can be found. Microsoft has not published the exact layout
and structures of the LDM database, but groups on the Internet have identified some of
the internal data structures (one of the groups, Linux NTFS, is available at http://
linux-ntfs.sourceforge.net). From the published Microsoft references [Soloman and
Russinovich 2000], we know that the LDM database has four major sections. The Private
Header is similar to the boot sector of a file system. It describes the unique characteristics
of the disk and the logical volume. This structure contains a unique ID for the disk
(its Windows Globally Unique Identifier (GUID)) and the name of the disk group.
Windows has only one disk group, which is based on the name of your computer. The
Table of Contents section is next, and its size is 16 sectors. According to Solomon and
Russinovich, it “contains information regarding the databases’ layout,” which refers to
the next section of the LDM,
the database.
   The database area has entries to describe disks, partitions, components, and volumes.
A disk entry exists for each dynamic disk, which could be a DOS or GPT disk. The parti-
tion entries are used to describe how the dynamic disks are partitioned. The component
entries are used to describe how the partitions should be merged. Each of the partition
entries points to the component entry that it uses. Component entries exist for span-
ning, splitting, and mirroring. Lastly, the volume entries are used to describe a logical vol-
ume, which is the result of applying the component type to the partitions.
   I’ll give an example using two dynamic disks. We have a logical volume, and the first
part of the volume is from a 15MB partition on disk 1, the second part is from a 10MB
partition on disk 2, and the final part is from a 20MB partition on disk 1. Obviously,

these sizes are much smaller than we would ever encounter in the real world. This is the
same basic layout that was shown in Figure 7.10. The dmdiag.exe tool from Microsoft
(available at http://www.microsoft.com/window2000/techinfo/reskit/tools/existing/
dmdiag-o.asp) displays the entries in the database and the relevant output is as follows:

Disk:      Disk1 rid=0.1027 updated=0.1122
assoc:     diskid=6a565b54-b83a-4ebb-95eb-842ede926e88
flags:

Disk:      Disk2 rid=0.1063 updated=0.1112
assoc:     diskid=533fe4ab-0409-4ea6-98b3-9648bbc3bd12
flags:

  The previous two records are the disk entries for the two physical disks. Disk1 has an
ID of 0.1027, and Disk2 has an ID of 0.1063.

Group:     hashDg1 rid=0.1025 update=0.1028
id:        dgid=d4f40362-7794-429a-a6ad-a6dfc0553cee
diskset:   id=00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000
copies:    nconfig=all nlog=all
minors:    >= 0

  The previous record is a disk group entry and shows that the disk group is named
with the computer name, hash.

Subdisk:   Disk1-01 rid=0.1109 updated=0.1112
info:      disk=0.1027 offset=0 len=30720 hidden=0
assoc:     plex=0.1107 (column=0 offset=0)

Subdisk:   Disk1-02 rid=0.1121 updated=0.1122
info:      disk=0.1027 offset=30720 len=40960 hidden=0
assoc:     plex=0.1107 (column=0 offset=51200)

   The previous two entries are partition entries for the physical disk named Disk1 (ID:
0.1027). They both have a ‘plex’ value of 0.1107, which refers to the component entry
that is used to make the logical volume. The first entry, ID 0.1109, is for the 15MB
partition and has a sector offset of 0 and a length of 30,720 sectors. The second entry,
ID 0.1121, is for the 20MB partition and has an offset of sector 30,720 with a length of
40,960 sectors.

Subdisk:      Disk2-01 rid=0.1111 updated=0.1112
info:         disk=0.1063 offset=0 len=20480 hidden=0
assoc:        plex=0.1107 (column=0 offset=30720)

   The previous entry is a dynamic partition entry on Disk2 (ID: 0.1063). It is a partition
with ID 0.1111 with an offset of 0 sectors and a length of 20,480 sectors. We can see the
relationship between the physical disk and dynamic partition entries in Figure 7.11. The
direction of the arrow shows that the dynamic partition entries contain a pointer to the
physical disk.

                                 Physical Disk                           Physical Disk
                                    Disk1                                   Disk2
                                  ID: 0.1027                              ID: 0.1063

                  Dynamic Partition          Dynamic Partition         Dynamic Partition
                      Disk1-01                   Disk1-02                  Disk2-01
                     ID: 0.1109                 ID: 0.1121                ID: 0.1111

Figure 7.11    Relationship between the physical disk and dynamic partition entries in the LDM database.

Plex:         Volume1-01 rid=0.1107 update=0.1124
type:         layout=CONCAT
state:        state=ACTIVE
assoc:        vol=0.1105

    The previous record is a disk-spanning (CONCAT) component entry that describes
how the dynamic partitions should be combined to create a logical volume. We can see
that it has an ID of 0.1107, which we saw in each of the partition entries. We also see that
it is associated with Volume ID 0.1105, which is shown next.

Volume:   Volume1 rid=0.1105 update=0.1124 mountname=F:
info:     len=92160 guid=e40794d0-6e3c-4788-af3d-ff49d2ce769d
type:     parttype=7 usetype=gen
state:    state=ACTIVE
policies: read=SELECT
flags:    writeback

   Lastly, we see the previous record, which is for a volume entry for the logical volume.
Its mounting point is F:\, and its length is 92,160 sectors. We see that it has an ID of

0.1105 and a name of ‘Volume1.’ The relationship of these records can be seen in Figure
7.12. Note that all disks in the disk group contain the same database entries.

                                Physical Disk                           Physical Disk
                                   Disk1                                   Disk2
                                 ID: 0.1027                              ID: 0.1063

                 Dynamic Partition          Dynamic Partition         Dynamic Partition
                     Disk1-01                   Disk1-02                  Disk2-01
                    ID: 0.1109                 ID: 0.1121                ID: 0.1111

                                                 Component
                                                 Volume1-01
                                                  ID: 0.1107

                                                Logical Volume
                                                   Volume1
                                                  ID: 0.1105

Figure 7.12   Relationship between the entries in the LDM database.The arrow direction shows which
              objects have pointers to other objects.

  We can see the final layout and organization of the logical volume in Figure 7.13.
Notice that the order of the dynamic partitions is not consecutive in the logical volume.

                          Disk1-01           Disk1-02                 Disk2-01
              Disk1      Len: 30720         Len: 40960               Len: 20480         Disk2

              Volume1        Offset: 0           Offset: 30720   Offset: 51200
                            Len: 30720            Len: 20480      Len: 40960

Figure 7.13   Layout of example LDM disk with two physical disks, three dynamic partitions, and one
              logical volume.

           The final section of the LDM database is the Transactional Log, and it is a log of modi-
        fications to the LDM. In case of power failure or crash, this is used to put the disk in a
        safe state.

        Acquisition and Analysis
        Analysis of any logical volume is difficult, especially when it is implemented in software,
        and it is not trivial to recreate the volume in a read-only fashion. As previously men-
        tioned in the “RAID” section, the analysis of the system is easiest when the logical
        volume is acquired and standard analysis tools are used. However, this is not always pos-
        sible within Windows because it attempts to mount the disks when it boots. Acquiring a
        mounted file system can result in a corrupt image, and the mounting may modify data.
        There is also a risk when moving LDM disk groups between computers. Windows sup-
        ports only one disk group at a time, and any dynamic disks are added to the local group,
        if one exists [Microsoft 2003]. Therefore, if dynamic disks from a suspect system are
        imported into an analysis system that uses dynamic disks, the suspect disks are added to
        the local disk group, and this requires the OS to write new data to the LDM database.
            The Linux kernel comes with support for LDM disk spanning, although it is not
        always enabled by default. You may need to recompile the kernel if your distribution has
        not enabled it. If your kernel supports LDM, Linux will read the database and create
        devices for each of the dynamic partitions in each dynamic disk. For example,
        if we booted Linux with the two disks from the previous example, we could have
        had /dev/hdb1, /dev/hdb2, and /dev/hdd1 devices. We would then have to create an
        /etc/raidtab file to describe the layout so that the MD kernel driver could make a sin-
        gle device for them. If /dev/hdb1 had the first partition, /dev/hdd1 had the second, and
        /dev/hdb2 had the third, the following would be the raidtab file:

        raiddev /dev/md0
                raid-level      linear
                nr-raid-disks   3
                nr-spare-disks 0
                persistent-superblock   0
                chunk-size      4k
                device          /dev/hdb1
                raid-disk       0
                device          /dev/hdd1
                raid-disk       1
                device          /dev/hdb2
                raid-disk       2

   In the case of a ‘linear’ RAID volume, the chunk-size can be any size, but it must exist.
EnCase by Guidance Software and ProDiscover from Technology Pathways can import
the individual images from a Windows logical volume and merge them together.
   If only disk spanning is used, you can manually extract the partitions and put them
together manually from the disk images. We saw the layout details in the dmdiag.exe
output, but that tool can only examine the disks from within Windows and needs
to have the disks mounted. Therefore, we will use a different tool from Linux. The
Linux NTFS group has developed the ldminfo tool (http://linux-ntfs.sourceforge.
net/status.html#ldmtools) and it examines the LDM database entries of a Windows
dynamic disk and displays them in detail when the --dump flag is given. It can be run on
any of the raw devices or disk images in the volume span because all disks contain the
same database entries. The output contains all the same detailed info as dmdiag.exe did,
but we will only focus on the volume layout information from the example we previ-
ously used:

# ldminfo -–dump disk1.dd
...
VOLUME DEFINITIONS:
Volume1 Size: 0x00016800 (45 MB)
Disk1-01   VolumeOffset: 0x00000000 Offset: 0x00000000 Length: 0x00007800
Disk2-01   VolumeOffset: 0x00007800 Offset: 0x00000000 Length: 0x00005000
Disk1-02   VolumeOffset: 0x0000C800 Offset: 0x00007800 Length: 0x0000A000

   This output shows us that there are three partitions in the volume from two disks. We
can easily re-create the disk because it is using spanning and not splitting. We previously
saw from the output of mmls on the disk image that the partition area begins in sector 63.
Therefore, we need to add 63 to the disk offset values that we see in the ldminfo output
because those values are relative to the start of the partition area. The first partition is
extracted by extracting 30,720 sectors (0x7800) from the partition area of the first disk:

# dd if=disk1.dd skip=63 count=30720 > span.dd

   The second part of the disk span is from the first part of the second disk. We will
append this data to the end of the data from the first disk. Therefore, we will extract the
first 20,480 sectors (0x5000) from the partition area of the second disk:

# dd if=disk2.dd skip=63 count=20480 >> span.dd

   The final part of the disk span comes from the partition area of the first disk. It will be
appended to the end of what we extracted from the second disk. It starts in sector 30,720
(0x7800) of the partition area; therefore, it is sector 30,783 relative to the start of the
disk, and its length is 40,960 sectors.

# dd if=disk1.dd skip=30783 count=40960 >> span.dd

   We can now process the span.dd image as a normal file system image. If you have
LDM support from the kernel, then I would recommend that you try that before doing it
by hand. Also note that most third-party support drivers and tools for LDM have not
been developed from a detailed specification from Microsoft and, therefore, may not be
correct.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lewis, A.J. “The LVM HOWTO.” The Linux Documentation Project, 2002-2004.
http://tldp.org/HOWTO/LVM-HOWTO/.

Microsoft. “Description of Disk Groups in Windows Disk Management.” Microsoft
Knowledge Base Article 222189, November 21, 2003. http://support.microsoft.com/
kb/222189.

Microsoft. Microsoft Windows XP Professional Resource Kit Documentation, 2004.
http://www.microsoft.com/resources/documentation/Windows/XP/all/reskit/
en-us/prork_overview.asp.

Ostergaard, Jakob. “The Software-RAID HOWTO.” The Linux Documentation Project,
June 3, 2004. http://www.tldp.org/HOWTO/Software-RAID-HOWTO.html.
Patterson, David A., Garth Gibson, and Randy H. Katz. “A Case for Redundant Arrays of
Inexpensive Disks (RAID).” ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, June 1988.
PC Guide. “Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks.” April 17, 2001.
http://www.pcguide.com/ref/hdd/perf/raid/index.htm.

Solomon, David, and Mark Russinovich. Inside Microsoft Windows 2000. 3rd ed.
Redmond: Microsoft Press, 2000.
Sourceforge.net. “LDM Documentation.” Linux NTFS Project, 2002. http://
linux-ntfs.sourceforge.net/ldm/index.html.

