      File System Analysis
                                      8
File system analysis examines data in a volume (i.e., a partition or disk) and interprets
them as a file system. There are many end results from this process, but examples include
listing the files in a directory, recovering deleted content, and viewing the contents of a
sector. Recall that analyzing the contents of a file is application-level analysis and is not
covered in this book. In this chapter, we look at the general design of file systems and
different analysis techniques. This chapter approaches the topic in an abstract fashion
and is not limited to how a specific tool analyzes a file system. Instead, we discuss the
analysis in general terms. The remaining nine chapters discuss how specific file systems
are designed and what is unique about them with respect to digital investigations.

WHAT IS A FILE SYSTEM?
The motivation behind a file system is fairly simple: computers need a method for the
long-term storage and retrieval of data. File systems provide a mechanism for users to
store data in a hierarchy of files and directories. A file system consists of structural and
user data that are organized such that the computer knows where to find them. In most
cases, the file system is independent from any specific computer.
   For an analogy, consider a series of filing cabinets in a doctor’s office . The fictitious
National Association of Medical Record Filing Procedures (NAMRFP) could specify that all
patient records must be organized into filing cabinets and sorted by the last name of the
patient. The tag that is used to identify the record must be typed in English and have the
last name followed by the first name. Any person trained in this procedure would be able

        to file and retrieve patient records at an office that uses the procedure. It doesn’t matter if
        the office has 100 patients and one filing cabinet or 100,000 patients and 25 filing cabi-
        nets. All that matters is that the person recognizes what a filing cabinet is, knows how to
        open it, and knows how to read and create the tags. If that person visited an office that
        used the National Association of Medial Record Stacking Procedures method where all
        records were stacked in a corner, his filing cabinet training would be useless and he
        would not be able to find the needed records.
            File systems are similar to these record-storing procedures. File systems have specific
        procedures and structures that can be used to store one file on a floppy disk or tens of
        thousands of files in a storage array. Each file system instance has a unique size, but its
        underlying structure allows any computer that supports the type of file system to process it.
            Some data needs internal structure and organization inside the file. This is not unlike
        physical documents needing structure in the form of sections and chapters. The internal
        structure of a file is application dependent and outside the scope of this book. This book
        is concerned about the procedures and techniques needed to obtain the data inside of a
        file or the data that are not allocated to any file.

        As we examine each of the different file system types in this part of the book, it will be
        useful to have a basic reference model so that the different file systems can be more easily
        compared. Having such a reference model also makes it easier to determine where your
        evidence may be located. For example, a reference model makes it easier to compare the
        difference between FAT and Ext3 file systems. For this basic model, we will use five cate-
        gories: file system, content, metadata, file name, and application. All data in a file system
        belong to one of the categories based on the role they play in the file system. We will use
        these categories throughout this book when describing file systems, although some file
        systems, namely FAT, cannot be applied to this model as easily as others can. The tools in
        The Sleuth Kit (TSK) are based on these same categories.
            The file system category contains the general file system information. All file systems
        have a general structure to them, but each instance of a file system is unique because it
        has a unique size and can be tuned for performance. Data in the file system category may
        tell you where to find certain data structures and how big a data unit is. You can think of
        data in this category as a map for this specific file system.
            The content category contains the data that comprise the actual content of a file, which
        is the reason we have file systems in the first place. Most of the data in a file system
        belong to this category, and it is typically organized into a collection of standard-sized
        containers. Each file system assigns a different name to the containers, such as clusters
        and blocks, and I will use the general term data units until we discuss specific file systems.

                                                                          WHAT IS A FILE SYSTEM?

   The metadata category contains the data that describe a file; they are data that
describe data. This category contains information, such as where the file content is
stored, how big the file is, the times and dates when the file was last read from or written
to, and access control information. Note that this category does not contain the content
of the file, and it may not contain the name of the file. Examples of data structures in
this category include FAT directory entries, NTFS Master File Table (MFT) entries, and
UFS and Ext3 inode structures.
   The file name category, or human interface category, contains the data that assign a
name to each file. In most file systems, these data are located in the contents of a direc-
tory and are a list of file names with the corresponding metadata address. The file name
category is similar to a host name in a network. Network devices communicate with each
other using IP addresses, which are difficult for people to remember. When a user enters
the host name of a remote computer, the local computer must translate the name to an
IP address before communication can start.
   The application category contains data that provide special features. These data are
not needed during the process of reading or writing a file and, in many cases, do not
need to be included in the file system specification. These data are included in the speci-
fication because it may be more efficient to implement them in the file system instead of
in a normal file. Examples of data in this category include user quota statistics and file
system journals. These data can be useful during an investigation, but because they are
not needed to write and read a file, they could be more easily forged than other data.
   We can see the relationship between the five categories in Figure 8.1.

                                             File System Category   Application Category

                                               Layout and Size
                                                                        Quota Data
                                                 Information

                       File Name            Metadata                    Content
                       Category             Category                    Category

                                                  Times and           Content Data #1
                         file1.txt
                                                  Addresses

                                                                      Content Data #2

                                                  Times and           Content Data #1
                         file2.txt
                                                  Addresses

Figure 8.1   Interaction between the five data categories.

ESSENTIAL AND NON-ESSENTIAL DATA
In Chapter 1, “Digital Investigation Foundations,” we discussed the difference between
essential and non-essential data, and I will quickly review it again. Essential file system
data are those that are needed to save and retrieve files. Examples of this type of data
include the addresses where the file content is stored, the name of a file, and the pointer
from a name to a metadata structure. Non-essential file system data are those that are
there for convenience but not needed for the basic functionality of saving and retrieving
files. Access times and permissions are examples of this type of data.
    Why is it important to differentiate between essential and non-essential data? It is
important because we have to trust the essential data, but we do not have to trust the
non-essential data. For example, all file systems have some value that points to where the
file content is stored. This value is essential because it needs to be true. If it is false, the
user will not be able to read the file. On the other hand, a time value or a User ID is not
essential because it does not need to be true. If the time value is never updated, it will
not affect the user when she tries to read from or write to the file. Therefore, we should
trust the essential data more than the non-essential data because it is required and it is
needed for the file system to save and restore files.
    Some OSes may require a certain value to be set, but that does not mean it is essential.
For example, a very strict (and fictitious) OS might not mount a file system that has any
files with a last access time that is set in the future. Another OS may not have a problem
with the times and will mount the file system and save data to it. Microsoft Windows
requires that all FAT file systems start with a certain set of values even though they are
used only when the file system is bootable. Linux, on the other hand, has no require-
ments for those values.
    When viewed this way, it becomes apparent that knowing the OS that wrote to the file
system is just as important as knowing the type of file system. When discussing file
recovery, it is not enough to ask how to recover a file from a FAT file system. Instead, ask
how to recover a file that was deleted in Windows 98 on a FAT file system. Many OSes
implement FAT file systems, and each can delete a file using different techniques. For
example, most OSes do the minimal amount of work needed to delete a file, but there
could be others that erase all data associated with the file. In both cases, the end result
is a valid FAT file system.
    In this book, we will focus on the essential data. When available, I will describe
application-specific, non-essential information. However, it is important for an
investigator to verify and test the application-specific behavior in the context of a
specific incident.

The remainder of this chapter and book use the five data categories to describe analysis
techniques. In Chapter 1, we saw that we look for evidence by identifying the properties
that it should have and where we expect to find it. Based on where we expect to find the
evidence, we can identify the appropriate data category and analysis techniques to search
for it. For example, if we are searching for files with the “JPG” extension, we will focus on
file name category analysis techniques. If we are searching for a file with a certain value
in it, we will use the metadata category analysis techniques because that category con-
tains the data unit addresses.
    Many forensic analysis tools integrate analysis techniques from several categories;
therefore, the individual descriptions in this book may seem awkward. Each of the tech-
niques is separated to show all steps that are going on “under the hood” of the analysis
tool and to show where faults may occur. The techniques presented here are not specific
to any analysis tools. For many of the techniques, I have listed the tool from TSK that
performs it, and Appendix A, “The Sleuth Kit and Autopsy,” can be referred to for
more details.

The file system category contains the general data that identify how this file system is
unique and where other important data are located. In many cases, most of these data
are located in a standard data structure in the first sectors of the file system, similar to
having a map in the lobby of a building. With this information, the locations of other
data, which may vary depending on the size of the file system, can be found.
   Analysis of data in the file system category is required for all types of file system
analysis because it is during this phase that you will find the location of the data struc-
tures in the other categories. Therefore, if any of this data becomes corrupt or is lost,
additional analysis is more difficult because you have to find backup copies or guess
what the values were. In addition to general layout information, analysis of this category
might also show the version of file system, the application that created the file system,
the creation date, and the file system label. There is little data in this category that a
typical user would be able to set or view without the help of a hex editor. In many cases,
the non-layout data in this category is considered non-essential data and may not
be accurate.

Data in this category are typically single and independent values; therefore, there is not
much that can be done with them except to display them to the investigator or use them
in a tool. If you are recovering data by hand, the layout information might be useful. If
you are trying to determine on which computer a file system was created, a volume ID
or version might be useful. The data structures in this category frequently have unused
values and storage locations that could be used to hide small amounts of data. A consis-
tency check in this category is to compare the size of the file system with the size of the
volume in which it is located. If the volume is larger, the sectors after the file system are
called volume slack and could be used to hide data.
   TSK has a tool called fsstat that displays the file system category data for a file sys-
tem. The amount of information in the output is different for each file system type, as
will be shown in the following chapters.

The content category includes the storage locations that are allocated to files and direc-
tories so that they can save data. The data in this category are typically organized into
equal sized groups, which I am calling data units even though each file system has a
unique name for them, such as cluster or block. A data unit is either in an allocated or
unallocated state. There is typically some type of data structure that keeps track of the
allocation status of each data unit.
   When a new file is created or an existing file is made larger, the OS searches for an
unallocated data unit and allocates it to a file. The different search strategies will be
discussed in the following “Allocation Strategies” section. When a file is deleted, the data
units that were allocated to the file are set to the unallocated state and can be allocated to
new files. Most OSes do not wipe the contents of the data unit when it is unallocated,
although some “secure delete” tools and OSes provide that ability.
   Analysis of the content category is conducted to recover deleted data and conduct
low-level searches. There are a lot of data in this category; therefore, it is typically not
analyzed by hand. As a reference, if an investigator could examine a 512-byte sector in
five seconds, she could examine a 40GB drive in 388 days if she searched for 12 hours
per day.

In this section, we will look at how to address data units, how data units are allocated,
and how file systems handle damaged data units.

Logical File System Address
A sector can have multiple addresses, each from a different perspective. In our discussion
of acquisition techniques, we saw that every sector has an address relative to the start of
the storage media, which is its physical address. Volume systems create volumes and
assign logical volume addresses that are relative to the start of the volume.
    File systems use the logical volume addresses but also assign logical file system
addresses because they group consecutive sectors to form a data unit. In most file sys-
tems, every sector in the volume is assigned a logical file system address. An example of a
file system that does not assign a logical file system address to every sector is FAT.
    Figure 8.2 shows a volume with 17 sectors and their logical volume addresses. Below
them are the logical file system addresses. This fictitious file system created data units
that were each two sectors, and the file system did not assign addresses until sector 4.
This very small file system ends in sector 15, and sector 16 is volume slack.

        Logical
        Volume       0   1   2    3   4       5   6       7   8       9   10       11   12       13   14       15   16
        Address

          Logical
       File System                        0           1           2            3             4             5
         Address

Figure 8.2   An example volume where the file system has assigned addresses to sectors in groups of two
             and has not assigned addresses to some sectors.

Allocation Strategies
An OS can use different strategies for allocating data units. Typically, an OS allocates
consecutive data units, but that is not always possible. When a file does not have consec-
utive data units, it is called fragmented.
   A first available strategy searches for an available data unit starting with the first data
unit in the file system. After a data unit has been allocated using the first available strat-
egy and a second data unit is needed, the search starts again at the beginning of the file
system. This type of strategy can easily produce fragmented files because the file is not
allocated as a whole. For example, consider a theater that uses a first available strategy to
assign seats. If a group of four wanted tickets to a show, the box office would start with
the front row and scan for available seats. They may get all four seats together or two
people may get seats in front and the other two in the back. If someone returns a ticket
while the search is underway, the third person may end up getting a seat closer to the
front than the first two people did. In the example shown in Figure 8.3, data unit 1
would be allocated next using a first available strategy. An OS that uses first available

overwrites deleted data at the beginning of the file system more quickly than other algo-
rithms will. Therefore, if you encounter a system using this algorithm, you will probably
have better luck recovering deleted content from the end of the file system.

                   0          1       2         3         4   5    6       7

                       Allocated
                                                Last
                   Unallocated               Allocated

Figure 8.3   Example allocation status of 8 data units.

   A similar strategy is next available, which starts its search with the data unit that was
most recently allocated instead of at the beginning. For example, if data unit 3 in Figure
8.3 is allocated, the next search starts at data unit 4 instead of 0. In our theater example,
we would start the search from the last seat that was sold instead of starting in the front
row. With this algorithm, if a ticket at the front of the theater was returned while the
search was underway, it would not be sold until the search reached the last seat. This
algorithm is more balanced for data recovery because the data units at the beginning of
the file system are not reallocated until the data units at the end have been reallocated.
   Another strategy is best fit, which searches for consecutive data units that fit the
needed amount of data. This works well if it is known how many data units a file will
need, but when a file increases in size, the new data units will likely be allocated some-
where else and the file can still become fragmented. If the algorithm cannot find a loca-
tion for all the data, a first or next available strategy may be used. This is the algorithm
that typically occurs when assigning seats in a theater. The empty seats are scanned until
enough free consecutive seats can be found for the group. In our Figure 8.3 example, if
we had a two-data unit file, it would be allocated to data units 4 and 5 and not split up
between 1 and 4.
   Each OS can choose an allocation strategy for a file system. Some file systems specify
what strategy should be used, but there is no way to enforce it. You should test an imple-
mentation of the file system before assuming that it uses the strategy in the specification.
   In addition to testing the operating system to determine its allocation strategy, you
should also consider the application that creates the content. For example, when updat-
ing an existing file some applications open the original file, update it, and save the new
data over the original data. Another application might make a second copy of the origi-
nal file, update the second copy, and then rename the copy so it overwrites the original.

In this case, the file is located in new data units because it is part of a new file. This
behavior should not be confused with the allocation strategy of the OS because the OS
did not force new data units to be allocated.

Damaged Data Units
Many file systems have the ability to mark a data unit as damaged. This was needed with
older hard disks that did not have the capability to handle errors. The operating system
would detect that a data unit was bad and mark it as such so that it would not be allo-
cated to a file. Now, modern hard disks can detect a bad sector and replace it with a
spare, so the file system functionality is not needed.
   It is easy to hide data using the file system functionality, if it exists. Many consistency-
checking tools will not verify a data unit that the file system reports as being damaged is
actually damaged. Therefore, a user could manually add a data unit to the damaged list
and place data in it. Most acquisition tools report bad sectors, so that report can be
compared the damaged list to identify sectors that may have been manually added to
hide data.

Now that we have looked at the basic concepts of data in the content category, we will
look at how to analyze the data. This section covers different analysis techniques that can
be used when searching for evidence.

Data Unit Viewing
Data unit viewing is a technique used when the investigator knows the address where
evidence may be located, such as one allocated to a specific file or one that has special
meaning. For example, in many FAT32 file systems, sector 3 is not used by the file system
and is all zeros, but data could be hidden there, and viewing the contents of sector 3
shows the investigator if there are non-zero data.
    The theory behind this type of analysis is simple. The investigator enters the logical
file system address of the data unit and a tool calculates the byte or sector address of the
data unit. The tool then seeks to that location and reads the data. For example, consider
a file system where data unit 0 starts at byte offset 0 and each data unit is 2,048 bytes.
The byte offset of data unit 10 is 20,480 bytes, which we can see in Figure 8.4.
    There are many tools, such as hex editors and investigation tools, which perform this
function. In TSK, the dcat tool allows you to view a specific data unit and displays it in
raw or hexadecimal format.

               2,048
               bytes
                                                 20,480 bytes

                 0      1      2       3   4      5     6       7     8     9     10     11

                                                                          This is the content
                                                                          of data unit 10. It
                                                                           is all ASCII text.

Figure 8.4   Graphical representation where we view the contents of data unit 10.

Logical File System-Level Searching
In the previous technique, we knew where evidence could be, but we may not have
known what the evidence would be. In this technique, we know what content the evi-
dence should have, but we do not know where it is. A logical file system search looks in
each data unit for a specific phrase or value. For example, you may want to search for the
phrase “forensics” or a specific file header value. We can see this in Figure 8.5 where we
are looking at each data unit for the string “forensics.”

                    Is the string
                 “forensics” in this
                     data unit?

                 0      1       2      3   4      5     6       7     8     9     10     11

Figure 8.5   A logical file system search looks in each data unit for a known value.

   This search technique has historically been called a physical search because it used the
physical ordering of the sectors, but I do not feel this is accurate. This was accurate when
a single disk was being analyzed, but this is not true for systems that use disk spanning
and RAID. For those systems, the order of the sectors is not the physical order, and a
more precise name should be used.

    Unfortunately, files do not always allocate consecutive data units, and if the value you
are searching for is located in two non-consecutive data units of a fragmented file, a logi-
cal file system search will not find it. We will see in the “Logical File Searching” section
that a logical file search will find this value. Many forensic tools offer the capability to do
both logical volume and logical file searches. To determine what search techniques your
analysis tool uses, you can use some of the keyword search test images at the Digital
Forensic Tool Testing (DFTT) site [Carrier 2004] that I maintain.
    If we return to the theater analogy from the “Allocation Strategies” section, we may
want to search for a specific family. A logical file system search of the theater for the fam-
ily would start in the front row and examine each group of four consecutive people. If
the family did not have consecutive seats, this search would fail. The search could be
repeated by searching for only one person in the family, but that would probably result
in many false hits from people who look similar.

Data Unit Allocation Status
If we do not know the exact location of the evidence, but we know that it is unallocated,
we can focus our attention there. Some tools can extract all unallocated data units from
the file system image to a separate file, and others can restrict their analysis to only the
unallocated areas. If you extract only the unallocated data, the output will be a collection
of raw data with no file system structure, so you cannot use it in any file system
analysis tools.
   We can see this in Figure 8.6 where the bitmap for the first 12 data units are shown. A
bitmap is a data structure that has a bit for each data unit. If the bit is 1, the data unit is
allocated, and if it is 0, it is not. If we were going to extract the unallocated data units, we
would extract units 2, 6, 7, and 11.

             Data
                      0      1       2     3    4     5      6     7     8      9     10    11
             Units

                                 Bitmap   1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0

Figure 8.6     To extract the unallocated data units, we examine the allocation bitmap and extract the data
               units that have a given value.

   Many digital forensic analysis tools allow you extract the unallocated space of a file
system, although the definition of unallocated space may vary. I have observed that some
tools consider any data not allocated to a file to be unallocated data, including the data
in the file system and metadata categories. Alternatively, some tools recover deleted files
and consider the data units of the deleted files to be allocated, even though they are tech-
nically unallocated. Do you know what your analysis tool considers unallocated data?
   In TSK, you can use the dls tool to extract the unallocated data to a file. After you find
interesting data, you might want to know which data unit in the file system it was in, and
you can use the dcalc tool to determine that. TSK considers unallocated data to be the
data units in the content category that have an allocation status set to unallocated. If
there are data units that are used by the file system and do not have an allocation status,
they are considered allocated.

Data Unit Allocation Order
I previously discussed some of the strategies an OS can use when it allocates data units.
The strategy that is used is, in general, OS dependent; therefore, it is in the realm of
application-level analysis. For example, Windows ME could use a different allocation
strategy for a FAT file system than Windows 2000, yet they both still produce a valid FAT
file system.
    If the relative allocation order of two or more data units is important, you can con-
sider using the allocation strategies of the OS to help determine this. This is very difficult
because it requires you to determine the strategy used by the OS, and you will need to
examine each of the scenarios that could have caused the data unit’s status. This involves
application-level information and is out of the scope of this book. This technique is used
during event reconstruction, which occurs after we have already recognized the data
units as evidence.

Consistency Checks
Consistency checks are an important analysis technique for every data category. They
allow us to determine if the file system is in a suspicious state. One consistency check in
the content category uses data from the metadata category and verifies that every allo-
cated data unit has exactly one allocated metadata entry pointing to it. This is done to
prevent a user from manually setting the allocation status to a data unit without having a
name for the data. Allocated data units that do not have a corresponding metadata struc-
ture are called orphan data units. We see this in Figure 8.7 where data units 2 and 8 are
allocated. Data unit 2 does not have a metadata entry pointing to it; therefore, it is an
orphan. Data unit 8 has two metadata entries pointing to it, which is not allowed by
most file systems.

                                                 Metadata Entry 1        Metadata Entry 2

                 0     1     2      3     4      5     6     7      8     9     10    11

Figure 8.7   A consistency check should verify that all data units have one and only one metadata entry
             pointing to them.

    Another check examines each of the data units that are listed as damaged. If you have
an image of the hard disk and it contains damaged sectors, many of the acquisition tools
will fill in the damaged data with zeros. Therefore, any data unit that is in the damaged
list should have zeros in it (if your acquisition tool fills in zeros for bad data). Any non-
zero data should be examined because it could be data that was hidden by the user.

Now that we have discussed how we would analyze data in this category, we will discuss
how a user could make your life harder. Most wiping, or “secure delete,” tools operate in
the content category and write zeros or random data to the data units that a file allocated
or to all unused data units.
   Secure deletion is becoming more common and a standard feature on some operating
systems. Wiping tools that are built into the OS are the most effective at wiping all data.
The third-party applications frequently rely on the OS to act in a certain way; therefore,
they may not be as effective. For example, many years ago there was a Linux-based tool
that wrote zeros to the data unit before it was unallocated, but the OS did not immedi-
ately write the zeros to disk. Later, the OS would notice that the data unit had been unal-
located, and it did not bother writing the zeros to disk. Similarly, many tools assume that
when it writes data to an existing file that the OS will use the same data units. An OS
could choose to allocate new data units, and, in that case, the file content will still exist.
   Detection of wiping tools in this category can be difficult. Obviously, if all unallocated
data units contain zeros or random values, you may suspect a wiping tool. If the tool
writes random values or makes copies of other existing data units, detection is virtually
impossible without application-level evidence that a tool was used. Of course, if you find
a wiping tool on the system, you should check whether it was used and what its last
access time was. You may also find temporary copies of the file if each file had to be
explicitly wiped.

The metadata category is where the descriptive data reside. Here we can find, for exam-
ple, the last accessed time and the addresses of the data units that a file has allocated.
Few tools explicitly identify metadata analysis; instead, it is typically merged with file
name category analysis. We separate them, though, in this book to show where the data
are coming from and why some deleted files cannot be recovered.
   Many metadata structures are stored in a fixed or dynamic-length table, and each
entry has an address. When a file is deleted, the metadata entry is set to the unallocated
state, and the OS may wipe some of the values in the entry.
   Analysis is conducted in the metadata category to determine more details about a
specific file or to search for a file that meets certain requirements. This category tends
to have more non-essential data than other categories. For example, the last accessed or
written times may not be accurate or the OS may not have enforced the access control
settings on a file; therefore, an investigator cannot conclude that a user did or did not
have read access to a file. Additional evidence is needed to support the non-essential data
in this category.

In this section, we will look at the basic concepts of the metadata category. We will look
at another addressing scheme, slack space, deleted file recovery, compressed files, and
encrypted files.

Logical File Address
   We previously looked at how a data unit had a logical file system address. A data unit
that is allocated to a file also has a logical file address. A data unit’s logical file address is
relative to the start of the file to which it is allocated. For example, if a file allocated two
data units, the first data unit would have a logical file address of 0, and the second would
have a logical file address of 1. The name or metadata address for the file is needed to
make a unique logical file address. We can see this in Figure 8.8, which expands on a pre-
vious example. It shows two files that have allocated five data units. Note that logical file
system address 1 is not allocated; therefore, it does not have a logical file address.

       Logical
       Volume       0    1    2    3    4       5     6       7     8       9   10       11    12       13   14       15   16
       Address

         Logical
      File System                           0             1             2            3              4             5
        Address

       Logical
         File                                   0               1                    0              1             2
       Address
                                                    file1.jpg                                 index.html

                     Allocated

                    Unallocated

Figure 8.8   Two files have allocated five data units, and logical file addresses have been assigned to the
             data units.

Slack Space
Slack space is one of the buzzwords of digital forensics that most people have heard at
one time or another. Slack space occurs when the size of a file is not a multiple of a data
unit size. A file must allocate a full data unit, even if it needs only a small part of it, and
the unused bytes in the last data unit are called slack space. For example, if a file is 100
bytes, it needs to allocate a full 2,048-byte data unit, and the final 1,948 bytes would be
slack space.
    Slack space is interesting because computers are lazy. Some of them do not wipe the
unused bytes, so the slack space contains data from previous files or from memory. By
the design of most computers, there are two interesting areas of slack space. The first
area is located in between the end of the file and the end of the sector in which the file
ends. The second area is located in the sectors that contain no file content. There are two
distinct areas because hard disks are block-based and can be written to in only 512-byte
sector-sized chunks. In the previous example, the OS cannot write only 100 bytes to the
disk, it must write 512 bytes. Therefore, it needs to pad the 100 bytes with 412 bytes of
data. This is similar to shipping an item and having only one size of a box. The smaller
the item is, the more packing material will be needed so that the box is full.
    The first area of slack space is interesting because the OS determines what to pad the
file content with. The obvious method is to fill in the sector with zeros, and that is what
most OSes do. This is like filling a box with white packing paper. Some older OSes,
namely DOS and early Windows, fill the remainder of the sector with data from mem-
ory. This is similar to filling a box with copies of your financial statements. This area of

slack space was called RAM slack [NTI 2004], and it is now typically filled with zeros.
RAM slack from memory could reveal passwords and other data that was not supposed
to be written to disk.
   The second area of slack space is the remaining unused sectors in the data unit. This
area is interesting because some OSes wipe the sectors and others ignore them. If
ignored, the sectors will contain data from the file that previously allocated them.
   Consider an NTFS file system with a 2048-byte cluster and 512-byte sectors. Our file
is 612 bytes, so it uses the entire first sector and 100 bytes of the second sector in the
cluster. The remaining 412 bytes of the second sector are padded with data of the OSes
choice. The third and fourth sectors may be wiped with zeros by the OS, or they might
not be touched and might keep the data from a deleted file. We can see this in Figure 8.9,
where the grayed areas are the file content and the white space is the slack space.

                                                Cluster 4910

                               Sector 1     Sector 2     Sector 3     Sector 4

Figure 8.9   Slack space of a 612-byte file in a 4096-byte cluster.

   A common analogy for slack space is VHS videotape [Kruse 2003]. One night you
record a 60-minute episode of the latest criminal investigation TV show. Eventually, you
get around to watching the show, and then you rewind the tape. Later in the week, you
tape a 30-minute TV program. At this point, the tape is “allocated” to the 30-minute TV
show, but there are still 30 minutes of the previous show at the end of the tape.
   All file systems have slack space because all file systems allocate data in multiple-byte
chunks instead of in individual bytes. Slack space is interesting because of the OS and
what it writes, not because of the file system. It is important to note that slack space is
considered allocated data. It may contain data from a previously deleted file, but it is
currently allocated to a file. If you extract the unallocated data from a file system, it
should not include the slack space of a file.

Metadata-based File Recovery
In some cases, you might want to search for evidence in deleted files. There are two
major methods for recovering deleted files: metadata-based and application-based.
We will discuss application-based analysis techniques at the end of this chapter and will
discuss metadata-based here. Metadata-based recovery works when metadata from the

deleted file still exists. If the metadata was wiped or if the metadata structure was reallo-
cated to a new file, you will need to rely on application-based techniques.
   After you find the metadata structure for the file, recovery is easy. It is no different
from reading the contents of an allocated file. For example, Figure 8.10(A) shows an
example where the unallocated metadata entry still has its data unit addresses, and we
can easily read the contents. On the other hand, Figure 8.10(B) shows an example where
the OS has cleared the addresses when the file was deleted. We will discuss specific recov-
ery techniques in the following file system chapters.

                  A)                                      B)
                       Metadata Entry 67                          Metadata Entry 67

                       9,009      10,003                            0          0

                   Data unit       Data unit                   Data unit     Data unit
                    9,009           10,003                      9,009         10,003

Figure 8.10   Two scenarios where in (A) the data unit pointers are not wiped when the entry is unallo-
              cated and in (B) they are wiped.

    We need to be careful when doing metadata-based recovery because the metadata
structures and the data units can become out of sync because the data units are allocated
to new files. Consider the example given in Figure 8.10. The contents of data unit 9,009
would be overwritten if they were allocated by metadata entry 70, even though entry 67
still points to them. When we try to recover the contents of metadata 67, we will get data
from the file using metadata entry 70.
    This is similar to linking a person with a hotel room in which they stayed. After the
person checks out, there may still be a record that he stayed in room 427, but the state of
the room from that point on may have nothing to do with him.
    When recovering deleted files, it can be difficult to detect when a data unit has been
reallocated. Let’s consider a sequence of allocations and deletions to reinforce this point.
Metadata entry 100 allocates data unit 1,000 and saves data to it. The file for entry 100 is
then deleted, and both entry 100 and data unit 1,000 are unallocated. A new file is
created in metadata entry 200, and it reallocates data unit 1,000. Later, that file is also
deleted. If we analyzed this system, we would find two unallocated metadata entries that
have the same data unit address. We can see this in Figure 8.11(A).

   We need to determine which of the entries allocated the file most recently. One
method of doing this is to use the time information from each entry (or other external
data), but we may not be able to trust it. Another method is to use the file type, if the
metadata records that information. For example, metadata entry 200 could have been for
a directory, so we could analyze the content of data unit 1,000 to see if it has the format
of a directory.

              A)                                          B)

               Entry #100                                   Entry #100
                                       Data Unit                                     Data Unit
                                        1,000                                         1,000
                                     (Entry #200)                                  (Entry #300)
               Entry #200                                   Entry #200

                                                            Entry #300
              C)

               Entry #100
                                       Data Unit
                                        1,000
               Entry #200            (Entry #300)
                                                                          Unallocated

                                                                           Allocated
               Entry #300
                                       Data Unit
                                        2,000
                                     (Entry #300)

Figure 8.11    The sequence of states where files are allocated and deleted and in (C) it is not clear from
               where the data in data unit 1,000 came.

   Even if we can determine that entry 200 allocated the data unit after entry 100, we do
not know if entry 200 was the last entry to allocate it. To show this, consider entry 300
allocating data unit 1,000 after it was unallocated by entry 200. That file is then deleted,
and we see the result in Figure 8.11(B), where there are three unallocated entries that
have the same data unit address.
   Next, a new file was created and entry 300 was reallocated for it with a new data unit,
data unit 2,000. If we analyzed the system in this state, we would not find any evidence
that entry 300 allocated data unit 1,000, even though the content in the data unit is from
entry 300. We would only find evidence that entries 100 and 200 allocated it. This is
shown in Figure 8.11(C).

   The point of this example is that even if an unallocated metadata structure still con-
tains the data unit addresses, it is very difficult to determine if the content in the data
unit corresponds to that file or a file that was created after the metadata structure was
unallocated. You can verify that a recovery was accurate by trying to open it up in the
application that you think created it. If a new file allocated one of the data units in the
deleted file and wrote data to it, the internal structure of the file may be corrupt and a
viewer cannot open it.
   Many tools offer some form of file recovery. There is unfortunately very little pub-
lished in terms of the procedures used to perform recovery when metadata is missing, so
you should test and compare your tools. There are some recovery test images on the
Digital Forensic Tool Testing (DFTT) site to help you with this.

Compressed and Sparse Files
Some file systems allow data to be stored in a compressed format so that they occupy
fewer data units on the disk. For files, compression can occur in at least three levels. At
the highest level is when data inside a file format are compressed. A JPEG file is an exam-
ple of this where the data that stores the image information are compressed, but the file
header is not. The next level is when an external program compresses an entire file and
creates a new file.1 The compressed file must be uncompressed to another file before it
can be used.
    The last and lowest level of compression is when the file system compresses the data.
In this case, an application that writes the file does not know that the file is being com-
pressed. There are two basic compression techniques used by file systems. The most intu-
itive technique is to use the same compression techniques that are used on files and
apply them to the file’s data units. The second technique is to not allocate a physical data
unit if it is going to be filled with all zeros. Files that skip data units filled with zeros are
called sparse files, and an example can be seen in Figure 8.12. There are several ways that
this can be implemented, for example, the Unix File System (UFS) writes a 0 to the field
that usually stores the address of a block. No file can allocate block 0, so the OS knows
that this means a block of all 0s.
    Compressed files can present a challenge for an investigation because the investigation
tool must support the compression algorithm. Further, some forms of keyword search-
ing and file recovery are ineffective because they examine the compressed data instead of
the uncompressed data.

1. Examples of external compression programs include WinZip, www.winzip.com, and gzip,
   http://www.gnu.org/software/gzip/gzip.html.

           File Contents
                              2938270192837          0000000000000          0081927314514

           Stored Data
                              2938270192837          0081927314514

Figure 8.12   A file stored in a sparse format where the data unit of zeros is not written.

Encrypted Files
File content can be stored in an encrypted form to protect it against unauthorized access.
Encryption can be applied by the application that creates the file, by an external applica-
tion that reads an unencrypted file and creates an encrypted file,2 or by the OS when it
creates the file. Before a file is written to disk, the OS encrypts the file and saves the
cipher text to the data units. The non-content data, such as the file name and last access
time, are typically not encrypted. The application that wrote the data does not know the
file is encrypted on the disk. Another method of encrypting file content is to encrypt an
entire volume.3 In this case, all data in the file system are encrypted and not only the
content. In general, the volume that contains the OS is not entirely encrypted.
    Encrypted data can present a challenge to an investigator because most of the files are
inaccessible if she does not know the encryption key or password. It is even worse if the
encryption technique is not known. Some tools exist to guess every key or password
combination, called a brute force attack, but those are not useful if the algorithm is
not known. If only select files and directories were being encrypted, copies of the
unencrypted data may be found in temporary files or in unallocated space [Casey 2002;
Wolfe 2004].

We now look at how to analyze data in the metadata category. We will use the metadata
to view file contents, search for values, and locate deleted files.

2. Common examples of this include PGP, www.pgp.com, and GPG, www.gpg.org.
3. Examples of this include PGP Disk, www.pgp.com, Macintosh encrypted disk images, www.apple.com,
   and Linux AES encrypted loopback images.

Metadata Lookup
In many cases, we analyze metadata because we found the name of a file that points to a
specific metadata structure and we want to learn more about the file. We, therefore, need
to locate the metadata and process its data structure. For example, if we are looking
through the directory contents and find a file named “badstuff.txt,” we might want to
know what its contents are and when it was created. Most tools automatically perform
this lookup when listing the file names in a directory and allow you to sort the output
based on the metadata values.
    The exact procedures for this technique are file system-dependent because the meta-
data could be located in various places in the file system. In TSK, the istat tool shows
you the values from the metadata data structure. We see this in Figure 8.13, where our
sample file system has metadata structures located in data unit 371. Our tool reads the
data unit and shows the contents of two metadata entries. One of the entries is a deleted
file and the other is an allocated directory.

                     Data Unit 371
                    101010101110
                    100000101011                Process
                    010101010000                raw data
                    001101001011
                    101011111100

              Del     Type     Size           Last Written         Data Unit 1    Data Unit 2
              Yes      File    1,389     Jan 03, 2004 03:12:03      300,140            0
              No       Dir    315,668    Jan 03, 2004 03:12:15      300,147        300,148

Figure 8.13    Process for viewing the contents of a metadata entry.

Logical File Viewing
After we look up the metadata for a file, we can view the file contents by reading the data
units allocated to the file. We do this when we are searching for evidence in the content
of a file. For example, after we have determined the data unit addresses for our
“badstuff.dat” file, now we want to look at the actual contents.
   This process occurs in both the metadata and content categories. We use the metadata
lookup technique to find the data units allocated to the file and then use the content-
viewing technique to find the actual content. We can see this in Figure 8.14 where the
data units allocated to metadata entries 1 and 2 are listed. Many graphical tools combine
this procedure with listing file names. When you select a file, the tool will lookup the
data units listed in the file’s metadata.

   During this process, we need to keep slack space in mind because the file may not be
using the entire final data unit. We can calculate how much of the final data is being used
by dividing the size of the file by the size of each data unit.
   In TSK, the icat tool allows you to view the contents of the data units that are allo-
cated to a metadata structure. If the -s flag is given, the slack space is shown and the -r
flag attempts to recover deleted files.

                                 Metadata Entry 1               Metadata Entry 2

                 0     1     2       3     4        5       6       7       8      9   10   11

              Metadata Entry 1 Contents:       2        3       4       6

              Metadata Entry 2 Contents:       5        8

Figure 8.14   We can combine the information from the metadata entries and the data units to view the
              file content.

Logical File Searching
The previous technique assumed that you had a specific file and wanted to look at its
contents. Many times, this is not the case, and we are trying to find a file based on its
content. For example, we want all files with the term “forensics” in it. That is when we
use a logical file search. This search uses the same techniques we saw for the logical file
viewing technique, but we search the data for a specific value instead of viewing it.
   This process may sound very similar to the logical file system search. It is, except that
now we are searching the data units in the order that they are used by files and not by
their order in the volume. We can see this in Figure 8.15 where we have two metadata
entries and the data units that they have allocated. In this case, we search data units 2, 3,
4, and 6 as a set. The benefit of this search over a logical file system search is that values
that cross-fragmented data units or sectors will be found. For example, in this case we
are looking for the term “forensics,” and it starts in data unit 4 and ends in data unit 6.
We would not find it in the previous logical file system search because it is not contained

in consecutive data units. A variation of this search is to search for a file with a specific
MD5 or SHA-1 cryptographic hash.
   Keep in mind that only allocated data units have logical file addresses. Therefore, you
should conduct a logical volume search of the unallocated data units for the same value.
For example, a logical file search of the setup in Figure 8.15 would not have looked at
data units 0 and 1, so we should do a second search that includes 0, 1, 7, 9, 10, 11, and
so on.

                      Is the "forensics"
                       string located in or       What is your
                            this file?            MD5 hash?

                                  Metadata Entry 1               Metadata Entry 2

                 0     1      2       3       4          5   6       7       8      9    10   11

                                                     2           3       4           6
                                                                                 sics
                       Metadata Entry 1
                          Contents
                                                                         foren

Figure 8.15   A logical file search looks into the data units allocated to a metadata entry.

   It is important to know whether your analysis tool includes the slack space of a file in
a logical file search because some do and some do not. You can use the keyword search
test images on DFTT to determine whether your favorite tool includes the slack space.

Unallocated Metadata Analysis
If you are searching for deleted content, you should not limit yourself to only the deleted
file names that are shown in a directory listing. We will see some examples in the “File
Name Category” section, but it is possible for the name of a deleted file to be reused
before the metadata structure is. Therefore, your evidence could be sitting in an unallo-
cated metadata entry and you cannot see it because it no longer has a name. Most analy-
sis tools will list the unallocated entries for you to search or view. In TSK, the ils tool
can list the unallocated data structures.

Metadata Attribute Searching and Sorting
It is also common to search for files based on one of their metadata values. For example,
maybe you have an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) alert and want to find all files that
were created within a two-minute window around the time of the alert. Or, maybe you
are investigating a user and want to find all files to which he can write. In general, we
may need to search for a metadata value at some point during an investigation. I will
look at some of the examples in this section.
    File times can be easily changed on any system, but they can also provide many clues.
For example, if we have a hypothesis that an attacker gained access to the computer at
8:13 p.m. and installed attack tools, we can test the hypothesis by searching for all files
created between time 8:13 p.m. and 8:23 p.m. If we do not find any files of interest in
that time span, but we do find some attack tools that were created at a different time, the
times are incorrect, our hypothesis is incorrect, or both.
    Temporal data also can be used when you are faced with a computer that you know
little about. The temporal data show what files were recently accessed and created. That
information can give you hints about how the computer was used.
    Some tools create a timeline of the file activity. In many timelines, each file has as
many entries in the timeline as it has temporal values. For example, if it has a last
accessed, last written, and last modified entry, it will have three entries in the timeline.
The first entry in the timeline is the file with the oldest temporal data, and the last entry
is the file with the most recent temporal data. You can scan through it for evidence of
events. In TSK, the mactime tool is used to make timelines of file activity. An example of
the mactime output for the C:\Windows directory is shown here:

Wed Aug 11 2004 19:31:58      34528 .a. /system32/ntio804.sys
                              35392 .a. /system32/ntio412.sys
[REMOVED]
Wed Aug 11 2004 19:33:27       2048 mac /bootstat.dat
                               1024 mac /system32/config/default.LOG
                               1024 mac /system32/config/software.LOG
Wed Aug 11 2004 19:33:28     262144 ma. /system32/config/SECURITY
                             262144 ma. /system32/config/default

   In the previous output, we can see the file activity at each second. The first column
has the date stamp, the second column is the file size, and the third column shows if this
entry is for a content modification (m-time), content access (a-time), or metadata
change (c-time). The last column gives the file name and the actual output contains
much more information, but it is too wide for the book.
   Note that you should understand how a file system stores its time stamps before try-
ing to correlate file times and log entries from multiple computers. Some time stamps

are stored in UTC, which means that you will need to know the time zone offset where
the computer was located to determine the actual time value. For example, if I access a
file at 2:00 p.m. in Boston, MA, the OS will record that I accessed it at 7:00 p.m. UTC
because Boston is five hours behind UTC. When an investigator analyzes the file, they
need to convert the 7:00 p.m. time to the actual local time. Other file systems store the
time with respect to the local time zone and would store 2:00 p.m. in the previous exam-
ple. Daylight savings also introduces problems with some tools.
    You might also want to search for files to which a given user had write access. This
shows which files a suspect could have created, if we assume that the OS enforced the
permissions and the suspect did not have administrator rights. You also can search for
the owner ID, if it exists. These can be used when you are investigating a specific user.
    If we previously conducted a logical file system search and found interesting data in
one of the data units, we might want to search the metadata entries for the data unit
address. This might show which file allocated the data unit, and we could then find the
other data units that are part of the same file. An example of this can be found in Figure
8.16 where we have found evidence in data unit 34. We search the metadata and find that
structure 107 has allocated it, as well as data units 33 and 36. If the OS does not wipe the
address values when a file is deleted, then this process also can identify unallocated meta-
data structure. The ifind tool in TSK will do this for you.

                  Metadata Structures
          105    Units: 03,04,05,10
          106    Units: 38,39,40
          107    Units: 30,33,34
          108    Units: 36

                                                                  !
                                              31     32    33     34     35    36     37    38

Figure 8.16   It can be useful to search the metadata structures to find one that has allocated a given
              data unit.

Data Structure Allocation Order
If you need to know the relative allocation times of two entries, you may be able to use
the allocation strategy of the OS to determine it. This is very OS dependent and difficult.
Metadata entries are typically allocated using a first available or next available strategy. A
full discussion of this analysis technique is out of the scope of this book because it is
application dependent.

Consistency Checks
A consistency check with the metadata may reveal attempts to hide data or may reveal
that the file system image has some internal errors that will prevent you from seeing
accurate information. The only data that we can draw conclusions about in a consistency
check is the essential data, which includes the data unit addresses, the size, and the allo-
cation status of each metadata entry.
   One check that can be performed is to examine each allocated entry and verify that
the data units allocated to it are also allocated. It should be verified that the number of
data units allocated is consistent with the size of the file. Most file systems do not allocate
more data units than are needed. In the “Content Category Consistency Check” section,
we discussed verifying that every allocated data unit was pointed to by exactly one allo-
cated metadata entry.
   You also should verify that entries for special types of files do not have data units allo-
cated to them. For example, some file systems can have special files called sockets that are
used by processes to communicate with each other, and they do not allocate data units.
   Another consistency check uses information from the file name category of data and
verifies that every allocated directory entry has an allocated name that points to it.
Checks also can be performed on the ranges of dates or other non-essential data, but
a more precise check cannot generally be applied.

Wiping Techniques
Metadata can be wiped when a file is deleted to make it more difficult to recover the files.
The times, size, and data unit addresses can be wiped with zeros or random data. An
investigator may be able to detect wiping by finding a zeroed or otherwise invalid entry
in between two valid entries. A more intelligent wiping tool would fill the values in with
valid data that has no correlation to the original file. A more extreme version of a meta-
data wiping tool would shift the remaining entries so that there would be no unused
entry. This, however, would be very time intensive.

The file name category includes the names of files, and it allows the user to refer to a file
by its name instead of its metadata address. At its core, this category of data includes
only a file’s name and its metadata address. Some file systems may also include file type
information or temporal information, but that is not standard.
   An important part of file name analysis is to determine where the root directory is
located because we need it to find a file when its full path is given. The root directory is

the base directory. For example, in Windows C:\ is the root directory of the C: drive.
Each file system has its own way of defining the location of the root directory.

In this section, we look at the general concepts of the file name category. The file name
category is relatively simple and we need to look only at name-based file recovery.

File Name-based File Recovery
    We saw in the “Metadata Category” section that deleted files can be recovered using
their metadata. With file name-based recovery, we use a deleted file name and its corre-
sponding metadata address to recover the file content using metadata-based recovery. In
other words, the hard stuff is done at the metadata layer, and all we are doing in this layer
is identifying the metadata entries on which to focus.
    We can see this in Figure 8.17 where we have two file names and three metadata
entries. The favorites.txt file is deleted, and its name points to an unallocated meta-
data entry. We can try to recover its contents using the metadata-based recovery tech-
niques. Note that the content from metadata entry 2 also can be recovered, but it no
longer has a name. This section covers some of the issues associated with recovering files
based on their names.

                      badstuff.txt                                         favorites.txt

                    Metadata Entry 1           Metadata Entry 2           Metadata Entry 3

                0       1     2        3   4       5     6        7   8       9     10       11

                        Allocated

                       Unallocated

Figure 8.17   We can recover files based on their unallocated name, but we still rely on metadata-based
              recovery techniques.

    In the “Metadata-based Recovery” section, I gave several examples of how recovery
was complicated because the data units were reallocated before the metadata was and
they became out of sync. Now I am going to expand on those examples to show how file
names and metadata can become out of sync.
    Consider a file that had a file name structure with the name file1.dat in it and it
pointed to metadata entry 100, which is shown in Figure 8.18(A). That file was deleted
and both the file name and metadata structures were unallocated, but the pointer in the
file name data structure was not wiped. A new file named file2.dat was created in a
new file name structure, and it reallocated metadata entry 100 as shown in Figure
8.18(B). Later, the file2.dat was deleted and both the file name and metadata structures
were unallocated as shown in Figure 8.18(C). If we were to examine the system in this
state, we would find two unallocated file names pointing to the same metadata entry. We
would not know if the content pointed to by metadata entry 100 was for file1.dat or
file2.dat.

              A)                                            B)
               file1.dat                    Data Unit       file1.dat
                            Entry #100                                                       Data Unit
                                               1,000
                             (file1.dat)                                   Entry #100           1,000
                                            (file1.dat)
                                                                            (file2.dat)      (file2.dat)
                                                            file2.dat

          C)
              file1.dat                     Data Unit
                            Entry #100         1,000                           Unallocated
                             (file2.dat)    (file2.dat)
              file2.dat                                                         Allocated

Figure 8.18      The sequence of states after file allocation and deletion where in (C) there are two deleted
                 file names that point to the same metadata structure, and it is unknown to which the con-
                 tent corresponds.

   To add more confusion, let’s continue with this example. file3.dat is created in a new
name structure, a new metadata entry 200, and data unit 1,000 from the previous exam-
ple. This is shown in Figure 8.19(A). file3.dat is deleted and the file name structure is
reallocated to the file4.dat file (which we do not care about). Next, the file5.dat file is
created and it reallocates metadata entry 100 and data unit 1,000, as shown in Figure
8.19(C). file5.dat, is also deleted. Finally, file6.dat is created and it reallocates the
same file name entry as file5.dat, and it uses a new metadata entry 300 and new data
unit 2,000, which is shown in Figure 8.19(C).

   Now let’s assume that we are investigating the system in this state. We are faced with
the following problems:

• Data unit 1,000 has two metadata entries pointing to it, and we aren’t sure which one
  was the last one or if there were other metadata entries that pointed to it at one time
  that have since been reallocated.
• Metadata entry 100 has two file names pointing to it and we aren’t sure which one was
  the last one or if there were other names that were pointing to it that have since been
  reallocated. In this case, file5.dat was the last to allocate it, but it no longer exists.
• Metadata entry 200 has no file names pointing to it, so we don’t know the name of
  any files that allocated it.

  A)                                                      B)
   file1.dat                                               file1.dat
                     Entry #100         Data Unit                           Entry #100         Data Unit
                      (file2.dat)          1,000                             (file5.dat)          1,000
   file2.dat                            (file3.dat)        file2.dat                           (file5.dat)

                     Entry #200                                             Entry #200
   file3.dat          (file3.dat)                          file4.dat         (file3.dat)

                                                           file5.dat
  C)
   file1.dat         Entry #100
                      (file5.dat)       Data Unit
                                           1,000
   file2.dat                            (file5.dat)                    Unallocated
                     Entry #200
                                                                        Allocated
                      (file3.dat)
   file4.dat
                                        Data Unit
                     Entry #300            2,000
   file6.dat                            (file6.dat)
                      (file6.dat)

Figure 8.19    The sequence of states where files are allocated and deleted and in (C) there are several
               pointers that are out of sync.

   There are several ways that these problems affect the investigator. Consider an analysis
tool that lists the files in a directory and lists the associated time values next to the name.
The time information and content for file1.dat and file2.dat will be incorrect because

the data actually corresponds to the file5.dat file, for which the name no longer exists.
The values associated with metadata entry 200 will not be seen from the file listings
because there is no file name associated with it. This type of situation illustrates why I
have separated the file name and metadata categories in this discussion because it can be
misleading to think they are more closely linked.
   In summary, when examining deleted files from the file name perspective, keep in
mind that the metadata and data units could have been reallocated to a new file. Also
remember that you will need to examine the unallocated metadata structures to find
ones that no longer have names pointing to them.

This section looks at the analysis techniques that can be performed with data from the
file name category.

File Name Listing
The purpose of the file name category is to assign names to files; therefore, it should not
be surprising that one of the most common investigation techniques is to list the names
of the files and directories. We do this when we are searching for evidence based on the
name, path, or extension of a file. After a file has been recognized, we can use its meta-
data address to get more information. Variations on this technique will sort the files
based on a file extensions so that files of the same reported type can be grouped.
    Many file systems do not clear the file name of a deleted file, so deleted file names can
also be shown in the listing. In some cases, though, the metadata address is cleared when
a file is deleted, and you will not be able to obtain more information.
    The basic theory behind this technique is to first locate the root directory of the file
system. This process is typically the same as we previously saw for the logical file viewing
technique in the “Metadata Category” section. The layout of the root directory is stored
in a metadata entry, and we need to locate the entry and the data units that the directory
has allocated.
    After we locate the directory contents, we process them and obtain a list of files and
corresponding metadata addresses. If a user wants to view the contents of a file that is
listed, then we can use the logical file viewing technique using the metadata address
listed. If a user wants to list the contents of a different directory, we load and process the
contents of the directory. In either case, this process is based on logical file viewing.
    Most analysis tools offer this technique, and many merge the data from the file name
category with the data from the metadata category so that you can also see, for example,
the dates and times associated with the file name in one view. Figure 8.20 shows an

example of this analysis process where we process data unit 401 and find two names. We
are interested in the favorites.txt file and notice that its metadata is in entry 3. Our file
system stores that metadata structure in data unit 200, so we process the relevant data
from that data unit and get the size and content addresses for the file.

      Data Unit 401                                               Data Unit 200
     101010101110                                                101000110111
     100000101011                 Process                        010001010101
     010101010000                file name                       010010010101
     001101001011                    data                        101101011011
     101011111100                                                100101110001

                  Del          Name          Metadata
                  No        badstuff.txt        1
                                                                   Process
                  Yes       favorites.txt       3                  metadata

                      Del   Type        Size             Last Written         Data Unit 1   Data Unit 2
                      No     File       2,001       Jan 03, 2004 03:12:03       1,003         1,004

Figure 8.20   We view file names by processing a data unit and listing the names and sometimes the
              metadata associated with it.

   Most tools offer this analysis capability. In TSK, the fls tool lists the allocated and
deleted file names.

File Name Searching
Listing the file names works well if we know for what file we are looking, but that is not
always the case. If we don’t know the full file name, we can search for the part that we do
know. For example, we may know its extension, or we may know its file name but not its
full path. A search will show a series of files that meet the search pattern. In Figure 8.20,
if we did a name search for .txt, the tool would examine each entry and report both
badstuff.txt and favorites.txt. Note that searching by extension does not necessarily
return files of a given type because the extension may have been changed to hide the file.
Application-level analysis techniques that rely on the file structure can be used to find all
files of a given type.

    The process required to search for a name is similar to what we saw for file name
listing. We load and process the contents of a directory. We compare each entry in the
directory with the target pattern. When we find a directory, we might search it as well if
we are doing a recursive search.
    Another search in this category is to search for the name of the file that has allocated a
given metadata entry. This is needed when you find evidence in a data unit and then
search for the metadata structure that allocated it. After you find the metadata structure,
you need to search the file names for the full name of the file that allocated the evidence.
The ffind tool in TSK will do this.

Data Structure Allocation Order
As we already discussed with content and metadata, the allocation order of file name
structures can be used to find the relative creation time of two names. As was previously
stated, this is OS dependent and out of the scope of this book.

Consistency Checks
Consistency checks for the file name data include verifying that all allocated names point
to allocated metadata structures. It is valid for some file systems to have multiple file
names for the same file, and many of them implement this functionality by having more
than one file name entry with the same metadata address.

A wiping tool in this category clears the name and metadata address from the structure.
One wiping technique might write over the values in the file name structure, so the
analysis will show that an entry existed but the data are no longer valid. For example, the
file name setuplog.txt could be replaced with abcdefgh.123. With some OSes, this is
difficult because the OS will place the new name at the end of a list, using a next avail-
able strategy.
    Another technique for wiping file names is to reorganize the list of names so that one
of the existing file names overwrites the deleted file name. This is much more complex
than the first method and much more effective as a hiding technique because the investi-
gator may never know that anything is out of the ordinary in this directory.

Some file systems contain data that belongs in the application category. These data are
not essential to the file system, and they typically exist as special file system data instead
of inside a normal file because it is more efficient. This section covers one of the most
common application category features, which is called journaling.
   Technically, any file that an OS or an application creates could be designed as a feature
in a file system. For example, Acme Software could decide that its OS would be faster if
an area of the file system were reserved for an address book. Instead of saving names and
addresses in a file, they would be saved to a special section of the volume. This might
cause a performance improvement, but it is not essential for the file system.

As any computer user knows, it is not uncommon for a computer to halt and crash. If
the OS was writing data to the disk or if it was waiting to write some data to disk when
the crash occurred, the file system could be in an inconsistent state. There could be an
allocated metadata structure with allocated data units, but no pointers between them
and no file name pointing to the metadata structure.
    To find the inconsistencies, an OS runs a program that scans the file system and looks
for missing pointers and other signs of corruption. This can take a very long time for
large file systems. To make the scanning program’s job easier, some file systems imple-
ment a journal. Before any metadata changes are made to the file system, an entry is
made in the journal that describes the changes that will occur. After the changes are
made, another entry is made in the journal to show that the changes occurred. If the
system crashes, the scanning program reads the journal and locates the entries that were
not completed. The program then either completes the changes or rolls them back to the
original state.
    Many file systems now support journaling because it saves time when booting large
systems. The journal is in the application category because it is not needed for the file
system to operate. It exists to make the consistency checking faster.
    File system journals may turn out to be useful in investigations, although to date they
have not been fully utilized. A journal shows which file system events recently occurred,
and this could help with event reconstruction of a recent incident. Most forensic tools do
not process the contents of a file system journal. TSK has tools called jls and jcat that
list the contents of some journals.

APPLICATION-LEVEL SEARCH TECHNIQUES
I said in the beginning of this book that I was going to focus primarily on the volume
and file system layers of the analysis model. This is one of the sections where I will
move into the application layer and discuss a couple of techniques that can be used to
recover deleted files and to organize allocated files for analysis. These are file system-
independent; therefore, they will not be discussed again in the subsequent chapters.
   Both of these techniques rely on the fact that many files have structure to them,
including a signature value that is unique to that type of file. The signature can be used
to determine the type of an unknown file. The file command comes with many Unix
systems and has a database of signatures that it uses to identify the structure of an
unknown file (ftp://ftp.astron.com/pub/file/).

APPLICATION-BASED FILE RECOVERY (DATA CARVING)
Data carving is a process where a chunk of data is searched for signatures that corre-
spond to the start and end of known file types. The result of this analysis process is a
collection of files that contain one of the signatures. This is commonly performed on the
unallocated space of a file system and allows the investigator to recover files that have no
metadata structures pointing to them. For example, a JPEG picture has standard header
and footer values. An investigator may want to recover deleted pictures, so she would
extract the unallocated space and run a carving tool that looked for the JPEG header and
extract the data in between the header and footer.
   An example tool that performs this is foremost, (http://foremost.sourceforge.net)
which was developed by Special Agents Kris Kendall and Jesse Kornblum of the United
States Air Force Office of Special Investigations. foremost analyzes a raw file system or
disk image based on the contents of a configuration file, which has an entry for each
signature. The signature contains the known header value, the maximum size of the file,
whether the header value is case sensitive, the typical extension of the file type, and an
optional footer value. An example can be seen here for a JPEG:

jpg     y        200000   \xff\xd8         \xff\xd9

    This shows that the typical extension is ‘jpg,’ the header and footer are case sensitive,
the header is 0xffd8, and the footer is 0xffd9. The maximum size of the file is 200,000
bytes, and if the footer is not found after reading this amount of data, the carving will
stop for that file. In Figure 8.21 we can see an example set of data where the JPEG header
is found in the first two bytes of sector 902 and the footer value is found in the middle of

sector 905. The contents of sectors 902, 903, 904, and the beginning of sector 905 would
be extracted as a JPEG picture.

               Sector 901   Sector 902   Sector 903   Sector 904   Sector 905      Sector 906
                            0xffd8...

                                                                       ...0xffd9

Figure 8.21   Blocks of raw data that can be carved to find a JPEG picture in sectors 902 to 905.

  A similar tool is lazarus (available in The Coroner’s Toolkit at http://www.porcupine.
org/forensics/tct.html) by Dan Farmer, which examines each sector in a raw image
and executes the file command on it. Groups of consecutive sectors that have the same
type are created. The end result is a list with an entry for each sector and its type. This is
basically a method of sorting the data units by using their content. This is an interesting
concept, but the implementation is in Perl and can be slow.

File type can also be used to organize the files in a file system. If the investigation is look-
ing for a specific type of data, an investigator can sort the files based on their content
structure. An example technique would be to execute the file command on each file
and group similar file types together. This would group all pictures together and all exe-
cutables together. Many forensics tools have this feature, but it is not always clear if they
are sorting based on file name extension or by file signature. The sorter tool in TSK
sorts files based on their file signature.

The remaining chapters in this book will examine how FAT, NTFS, Ext2/Ext3, and UFS
store data and will apply the five categories to them. For latter reference, Table 8.1 contains
the names of the data structures in each data category for the file systems in this book.

Table 8.1     The data structures in each data category for the file systems in this book.

            File System        Content             Metadata             File Name            Application

ExtX        Superblock,        Blocks, block       Inodes, inode        Directory entries    Journal
            group descriptor   bitmap              bitmap, extended
                                                   attributes

FAT         Boot sector,       Clusters, FAT       Directory entries, Directory entries      N/A
            FSINFO                                 FAT

NTFS        $Boot, $Volume,    Clusters, $Bitmap $MFT, $MFTMirr, $FILE_NAME,                 Disk Quota,
            $AttrDef                               $STANDARD_       $IDX_ROOT,               Journal,
                                                   INFORMATION,      $IDX_                   Change Journal
                                                   $DATA,           ALLLOCATION,
                                                   $ATTRIBUTE_      $BITMAP
                                                   LIST, $SECURITY_
                                                   DESCRIPTOR

UFS         Superblock,        Blocks, fragments, Inodes, inode         Directory entries    N/A
            group descriptor   block bitmap,      bitmap, extended
                               fragment bitmap attributes

   There are other file systems not included in this book, but which you may encounter.
HFS+ is the default file system of Apple computers. Apple has published the data struc-
tures and details of the file system [Apple 2004]. ReiserFS is one of the Linux file sys-
tems, and it is the default file system on some distributions, such as SUSE [Reiser 2003].
The standard ReiserFS documents do not provide much data structure details, but
Florian Bucholz [2003] and Gerson Kurz [2003] have documented them. The Journaled
File System (JFS) for Linux is from IBM, and it is another file system that is used by
Linux systems. Note that this is different from the JFS file system that IBM has
developed for its AIX systems. IBM has documented the file system layout and structure
[IBM 2004].

SUMMARY
File system analysis is used to produce most of the evidence in current digital investiga-
tions. In this chapter, we introduced categories of data in a file system so that we can
have a consistent framework when discussing specific file systems. We also discussed
analysis techniques for each category of data (in a rather academic way). Table 8.2 pro-
vides a summary of the analysis techniques that can be used based on what type of data
you are search for.

                                                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY

Table 8.2   The search methods and locations, depending on what evidence you are looking for.

Analysis Needs                         Data Category          Search Technique

A file based on its name, extension,   File name              File name search or listing directory
or directory                                                  contents

An allocated or unallocated file based File name and          Metadata attribute searching
on its time values                     metadata

An allocated file based on a value     File name (using      Logical file search
in its content                         metadata and content)

An allocated file based on its SHA-1   File name (using      Logical file search with hashes
hash value                             metadata and content)

An allocated file or an unallocated    File name (using      Logical file search with metadata-based file
data unit based on a value in its      metadata and content) recovery and logical file system search
content

An unallocated file based on its       Application and        Application-based file recovery
application type                       content                (data carving) of unallocated data units

Unallocated data based on its content Content                 Logical file system search
(and not its application type)

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Apple. “Technical Note TN1150—HFS Plus Volume Format.” March 2004. http://
developer.apple.com/technotes/tn/tn1150.html.

Buchholz, Florian. “The Structure of the Reiser File System.” August 17, 2003.
http://www.cerias.purdue.edu/homes/florian/reiser/reiserfs.php.

Carrier, Brian. “Digital Forensic Tool Testing Images.” 2004. http://
dftt.sourceforge.net.

Casey, Eoghan. “Practical Approaches to Recovering Encrypted Digital Evidence.”
International Journal of Digital Evidence, 1(3), 2002. http://www.ijde.org.
IBM. “Journaled File System Technology for Linux.” 2004. http://www.ibm.com/
developerworks/oss/jfs/.

Kruse, Warren. “Computer Forensics Primer.” CSI 30th Annual Computer Security
Conference, November 3, 2003. http://csiannual.com/classes/j1.pdf.

Kurz, Gerson. “ReiserFS Docs.” 2003. http://p-nand-q.com/download/rfstool/
reiserfs_docs.html.

NTI Dictionary. “File Slack Defined.” January 6, 2004. http://www.forensics-intl.
com/def6.html.

Reiser, Hans. “Reiser4.” 2003. http://www.namesys.com.
Wolfe, Hank. “Penetrating Encrypted Evidence.” Journal of Digital Investigation,
1(2), 2004.

