              NTFS Concepts
                             11
The New Technologies File System (NTFS) was designed by Microsoft and is the default
file system for Microsoft Windows NT, Windows 2000, Windows XP, and Windows
Server. At the time of this writing, Microsoft has discontinued the sale of the Windows
98 and ME lines, and the home version of Windows XP is standard among new con-
sumer systems. FAT will still exist in mobile and small storage devices, but NTFS will
likely be the most common file system for Windows investigations. NTFS is a much
more complex file system than FAT because it has many features and is very scalable.
Because of the complexity of NTFS, we will need three chapters to discuss it. This chap-
ter discusses the core concepts of NTFS that apply to all the five categories in our model.
Chapter 12, “NTFS Analysis,” discusses the analysis of NTFS and uses the five-category
model to show where we can find evidence. Chapter 13, “NTFS Data Structures,” shows
the data structures associated with NTFS.

INTRODUCTION
NTFS was designed for reliability, security, and support for large storage devices.
Scalability is provided by the use of generic data structures that wrap around data struc-
tures with specific content. This is a scalable design because the internal data structure
can change over time as new demands are placed on the file system, and the general
wrapper can remain constant. One example of a generic wrapper is that every byte of
data in an NTFS file system is allocated to a file. We will be discussing the concept of an
NTFS file in this chapter.

   NTFS is a complex file system and, unfortunately, there is no published specification
from Microsoft that describes the on-disk layout. High-level descriptions of the file sys-
tem components have been published, but low-level details are sparse. Fortunately, other
groups have published what they think the on-disk data structures are [Linux NTFS
2004], and those are included in this book and we use them to dissect a disk by hand. It
should be stressed, though, that it is unknown if the data structures presented here are
exactly what exists on-disk.
   NTFS is standard in many Windows systems and becoming common in most of the
free Unix distributions. The combination of no official specification and one dominant
application that creates the file system makes it difficult to differentiate between the
application-specific properties and the general properties of the file system. For example,
there are other methods that could be used to initialize a file system that Microsoft does
not use, and it is not clear if they should be considered “valid NTFS” file systems.
Microsoft has made changes to the file system with each new release of Windows, and
I have noted the differences here.

EVERYTHING IS A FILE
One of the most important concepts in understanding the design of NTFS is that impor-
tant data are allocated to files. This includes the basic file system administrative data that
are typically hidden by other file systems. In fact, the files that contain the administrative
data can be located anywhere in the volume, like a normal file can. Therefore, an NTFS
file system does not have a specific layout like other file systems do. The entire file system
is considered a data area, and any sector can be allocated to a file. The only consistent
layout is that the first sectors of the volume contain the boot sector and boot code.

MFT CONCEPTS
The Master File Table (MFT) is the heart of NTFS because it contains the information
about all files and directories. Every file and directory has at least one entry in the table,
and the entries by themselves are very simple. They are 1 KB in size, but only the first 42
bytes have a defined purpose. The remaining bytes store attributes, which are small data
structures that have a very specific purpose. For example, one attribute is used to store
the file’s name, and another is used to store the file’s content. Figure 11.1 shows the basic
layout of an MFT entry where there is some header information and three attributes.

                                                                                         MFT CONCEPTS

                    MFT Entry                                                      Unused
                     Header                  Attributes                            Space

                 MFT
                 Entry

Figure 11.1   An MFT entry has a small header, and the rest of it is used to store different types of attrib-
              utes.This entry has three attributes.

   Microsoft calls each entry in the table a file record, but I think calling each entry an
MFT entry is simpler and results in fewer terms to remember. Each entry is given an
address based on its location in the table, starting with 0. To date, all entries have been
1,024 bytes in size, but the exact size is defined in the boot sector.
   Like everything in NTFS, the MFT is a file. What makes this confusing is that the MFT
has an entry for itself. The first entry in the table is named $MFT, and it describes the on-
disk location of the MFT. In fact, it is the only place where the location of the MFT is
described; therefore, you need to process it to determine the layout and size of the MFT.
The starting location of the MFT is given in the boot sector, which is always located in
the first sector of the file system. We can see this in Figure 11.2 where the boot sector is
used to find the first MFT entry, which shows that the MFT is fragmented and goes from
clusters 32 to 34 and 56 to 58. Like FAT, NTFS uses clusters, which are groups of consec-
utive sectors.

                          Boot
        Cluster 0        Sector

                                                                   $MFT - Clusters: 32-34, 56-58
                           Cluster 32

                           Cluster 33

                           Cluster 34

                           Cluster 56

                           Cluster 57

                           Cluster 58

Figure 11.2   The relationship between the boot sector and $MFT with respect to determining the layout
              of the MFT.

   In Microsoft’s implementation of NTFS, the MFT starts as small as possible and
expands when more entries are needed. In theory, an OS could create a fixed number of
entries when the file system is created, but the dynamic nature of Microsoft’s implemen-
tation allows it to easily make the file system larger when more space is added from vol-
ume spanning. Microsoft does not delete MFT entries after they have been created.

MFT ENTRY CONTENTS
The size of each MFT entry is defined in the boot sector, but all versions from Microsoft
have used a size of 1,024 bytes. The first 42 bytes of the data structure contain 12 fields,
and the remaining 982 bytes are unstructured and can be filled with attributes. You can
think of an MFT entry as a large box that is used to store your possessions. On the out-
side of the box is basic information, such as your name and address. The basic informa-
tion is equivalent to an MFT entry’s fixed fields. The inside of the box is initially empty,
but it can be used to store anything as long as it is in a container that is smaller than the
box. This is similar to how an MFT entry has no internal structure and it contains sev-
eral attributes that contain specific information.
   The first field in each MFT entry is the signature, and a standard entry will have the
ASCII string “FILE.” If an error is found in the entry, it may have the string “BAAD.”
There is also a flag field that identifies if the entry is being used and if the entry is for a
directory. The allocation status of an MFT entry also can be determined from the
$BITMAP attribute in the $MFT file, which is shown in Chapter 13.
   If a file cannot fit its attributes into one entry, it can use multiple entries. When this
occurs, the first entry is called the base file record, or base MFT entry, and each of the
subsequent entries contains the address of the base entry in one of its fixed fields.
   Chapter 13 shows the data structure for an MFT entry and dissects our example file
system image.

MFT ENTRY ADDRESSES
Each MFT entry is sequentially addressed using a 48-bit value, and the first entry has an
address of 0. The maximum MFT address changes as the MFT grows and is determined
by dividing the size of $MFT by the size of each entry. Microsoft calls this sequential
address the file number.
   Every MFT entry also has a 16-bit sequence number that is incremented when the
entry is allocated. For example, consider MFT entry 313 with a sequence number of 1.
The file that allocated entry 313 is deleted, and the entry is reallocated to a new file.
When the entry is reallocated, it has a new sequence number of 2. The MFT entry and

                                                                                           MFT CONCEPTS

sequence number are combined, with the sequence number in the upper 16-bits, to form
a 64-bit file reference address, as is shown in Figure 11.3.

                                  MFT Entries
                                               Seq         File Reference Address
                        312         [...]    0x0040           0040    0000 0000 0138
                        313         [...]    0x0001           0001    0000 0000 0139
                        314         [...]    0x000a           000a    0000 0000 013a
                        315         [...]    0x0003           0003    0000 0000 013b
                        316         [...]    0x0003           0003    0000 0000 013c

Figure 11.3    Example of the MFT entry address and sequence number combining to form a file
               reference address.

    NTFS uses the file reference address to refer to MFT entries because the sequence
number makes it easier to determine when the file system is in a corrupt state. For exam-
ple, if the system crashes at some point while the various data structures for a file are
being allocated, the sequence number can determine whether a data structure contains
an MFT entry address because the previous file used it or because it is part of the new
file. We also can use it when recovering deleted content. For example, if we have an unal-
located data structure with a file reference number in it, we can determine if the MFT
entry has been reallocated since this data structure used it. The sequence number can be
useful during an investigation, but in this chapter I will primarily refer to the file num-
ber, or MFT entry address, for simplicity.

FILE SYSTEM METADATA FILES
Because every byte in the volume is allocated to a file, there must exist files that store the
file system’s administrative data. Microsoft calls these files metadata files, but this may
cause confusion because we also refer to file metadata. I will refer to these special files as
file system metadata files.
    Microsoft reserves the first 16 MFT entries for file system metadata files.2 The reserved
entries that are not used are in an allocated state and have only basic and generic

2. Microsoft documentation says it reserves only the first 16 entries, but in practice the first entry that is
   allocated to a user file or directory is entry 24. Entries 17 to 23 are sometimes used as overflow when the
   reserved entries are not enough.

information. Every file system metadata file is listed in the root directory, although they
are typically hidden from most users. The name of each file system metadata file begins
with a “$,” and the first letter is capitalized. We will cover each of the file system metadata
files in Chapter 12, but they are listed in Table 11.1 as an easy reference.

Table 11.1   The standard NTFS file system metadata files.

Entry              File Name          Description

0                  $MFT               The entry for the MFT itself.

1                  $MFTMirr           Contains a backup of the first entries in the MFT. See the “File
                                      System Category” section in Chapter 12.

2                  $LogFile           Contains the journal that records the metadata transactions. See
                                      the “Application Category” section in Chapter 12.

3                  $Volume            Contains the volume information such as the label, identifier, and
                                      version. See the “File System Category” section in Chapter 12.

4                  $AttrDef           Contains the attribute information, such as the identifier values,
                                      name, and sizes. See the “File System Category” section in
                                      Chapter 12.

5                  .                  Contains the root directory of the file system. See the “File Name
                                      Category” section in Chapter 12.

6                  $Bitmap            Contains the allocation status of each cluster in the file system.
                                      See the “Content Category” section in Chapter 12.

7                  $Boot              Contains the boot sector and boot code for the file system. See the
                                      “File System Category” section in Chapter 12.

8                  $BadClus           Contains the clusters that have bad sectors. See the “Content
                                      Category” section in Chapter 12.

9                  $Secure            Contains information about the security and access control for the
                                      files (Windows 2000 and XP version only). See the “Metadata
                                      Category” section in Chapter 12.

10                 $Upcase            Contains the uppercase version of every Unicode character.

11                 $Extend            A directory that contains files for optional extensions. Microsoft
                                      does not typically place the files in this directory into the reserved
                                      MFT entries.

                                                              MFT ENTRY ATTRIBUTE CONCEPTS

MFT ENTRY ATTRIBUTE CONCEPTS
An MFT entry has little internal structure and most of it is used to store attributes, which
are data structures that store a specific type of data. There are many types of attributes,
and each has its own internal structure. For example, there are attributes for a file’s
name, date and time, and even its contents. This is one of the ways that NTFS is very dif-
ferent from other file systems. Most file systems exist to read and write file content, but
NTFS exists to read and write attributes, one of which happens to contain file content.
   Consider the previous analogy that described an MFT entry as a large box that is ini-
tially empty. Attributes are similar to smaller boxes inside the larger box where the
smaller boxes can be any shape that most efficiently stores the object. For example, a hat
can be stored in a short-round box, and a poster can be stored in a long-round box.
   While each type of attribute stores a different type of data, all attributes have two
parts: the header and the content. Figure 11.4 shows an MFT entry with four header and
content pairs. The header is generic and standard to all attributes. The content is specific
to the type of attribute and can be any size. If we think of our boxes analogy, there is
always the same basic information on the outside of each small box, but the shape of
each box may be different.

                                    Attribute          Attribute
                   MFT Entry        Headers            Content                Unused
                    Header                                                    Space

                MFT
                Entry

Figure 11.4   Our example MFT entry with the header and content locations specified.

ATTRIBUTE HEADERS
The attribute header identifies the type of attribute, its size, and its name. It also has flags
to identify if the value is compressed or encrypted. The attribute type is a numerical
identifier based on the data type and we will discuss the default attribute types in the
“Standard Attribute Types” section. An MFT entry can have multiple attributes of the
same type.
   Some of the attributes can be assigned a name and it is stored in UTF-16 Unicode in
the attribute header. An attribute also has an identifier value assigned to it that is unique

to that MFT entry. If an entry has more than one attribute of the same type, this identi-
fier can be used to differentiate between them. The attribute header data structure is
given in the “Attribute Header” section of Chapter 13.

ATTRIBUTE CONTENT
The content of the attribute can have any format and any size. For example, one of the
attributes is used to store the content for a file, so it could be several MB or GB in size. It
is not practical to store this amount of data in an MFT entry, which is only 1,024 bytes.
   To solve this problem, NTFS provides two locations where attribute content can be
stored. A resident attribute stores its content in the MFT entry with the attribute header.
This works for only small attributes. A non-resident attribute stores its content in an
external cluster in the file system. The header of the attribute identifies if the attribute is
resident or non-resident. If an attribute is resident, the content will immediately follow
the header. If the attribute is non-resident, the header will give the cluster addresses. In
Figure 11.5 we see the example MFT entry that we saw previously, but now its third
attribute is too large to fit in the MFT, and it has allocated cluster 829.

                                    Attribute         Attribute
                   MFT Entry        Headers           Content      Unused
                    Header                                         Space

                MFT
                Entry

                                                         Cluster
                                                          829

Figure 11.5   Our example MFT entry where the third attribute has become too large and became
              non-resident.

   Non-resident attributes are stored in cluster runs, which are consecutive clusters, and
the run is documented using the starting cluster address and run length. For example, if
an attribute has allocated clusters 48, 49, 50, 51, and 52, it has a run that starts in cluster
48 with a length of 5. If the attribute also allocated clusters 80 and 81, it has a second run
that starts in cluster 80 with a length of 2. A third run could start at cluster 56 and have a
length of 4. We can see this in Figure 11.6.

                                                                MFT ENTRY ATTRIBUTE CONCEPTS

                                                           48     49   50   51   52
                        Runs
                 1   Start: 48 Len: 5
                 2   Start: 80 Len: 2                      56     57   58   59
                 3   Start: 56 Len: 4

                                                           80     81

Figure 11.6   Example runlist with three runs of allocated clusters.

   Throughout this book, we have differentiated between the different types of
addresses. For example, we defined the logical file system address as the address assigned
to file system data units and the logical file address as relative to the start of a file. NTFS
uses different terms for these addresses. The Logical Cluster Number (LCN) is the same as
the logical file system address, and the Virtual Cluster Number (VCN) is the same as a
logical file address.
   NTFS uses VCN-to-LCN mappings to describe the non-resident attribute runs. If we
return to our previous example, this attribute’s run shows that VCN addresses 0 to 4
map to LCN addresses 48 to 52, VCN addresses 5 to 6 map to LCN addresses 80 to 81,
and VCN addresses 7 to 10 map to LCN addresses 56 to 59. The runlist data structure is
given in the “Attribute Header” section of Chapter 13.

STANDARD ATTRIBUTE TYPES
So far we have been speaking in general terms about attribute types. Now we are going to
look at the basics of some of the standard attributes. Many of these will be discussed in
detail in Chapter 12.
   As was previously mentioned, a number is defined for each type of attribute, and
Microsoft sorts the attributes in an entry using this number. The standard attributes
have a default type value assigned to them, but we will later see that it can be redefined
in the $AttrDef file system metadata file. In addition to a number, each attribute type has
a name, and it has all capital letters and starts with “$.” Some of the default attribute
types and their identifiers are given in Table 11.2. Not all these attribute types and identi-
fiers will exist for every file. In addition to the more detailed descriptions in Chapter 12,
the data structures for many are given in Chapter 13.

Table 11.2   List of default MFT entry attribute types.

Type Identifier    Name                       Description

16                 $STANDARD_                 General information, such as flags; the last accessed, written,
                   INFORMATION                and created times; and the owner and security ID.

32                 $ATTRIBUTE_LIST            List where other attributes for file can be found.

48                 $FILE_NAME                 File name, in Unicode, and the last accessed, written, and
                                              created times.

64                 $VOLUME_VERSION            Volume information. Exists only in version 1.2
                                              (Windows NT).

64                 $OBJECT_ID                 A 16-byte unique identifier for the file or directory. Exists
                                              only in versions 3.0+ and after (Windows 2000+).

80                 $SECURITY_                 The access control and security properties of the file.
                   DESCRIPTOR

96                 $VOLUME_NAME               Volume name.

112                $VOLUME_                   File system version and other flags.
                   INFORMATION

128                $DATA                      File contents.

144                $INDEX_ROOT                Root node of an index tree.

160                $INDEX_                    Nodes of an index tree rooted in $INDEX_ROOT attribute.
                   ALLOCATION

176                $BITMAP                    A bitmap for the $MFT file and for indexes.

192                $SYMBOLIC_LINK             Soft link information. Exists only in version 1.2
                                              (Windows NT).

192                $REPARSE_POINT             Contains data about a reparse point, which is used as a soft
                                              link in version 3.0+ (Windows 2000+).

208                $EA_INFORMATION            Used for backward compatibility with OS/2 applications
                                              (HPFS).

224                $EA                        Used for backward compatibility with OS/2 applications
                                              (HPFS).

256                $LOGGED_UTILITY_           Contains keys and information about encrypted attributes
                   STREAM                     in version 3.0+ (Windows 2000+).

                                                            MFT ENTRY ATTRIBUTE CONCEPTS

    Nearly every allocated MFT entry has a $FILE_NAME and a $STANDARD_
INFORMATION type attribute. The one exception is non-base MFT entries, which are
discussed next. The $FILE_NAME attribute contains the file name, size, and temporal
information. The $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute contains temporal, owner-
ship, and security information. The latter attribute exists for every file and directory
because it contains the data needed to enforce data security and quotas. In an abstract
sense, there is no essential data in this attribute, but the application-level features of the
file system require it to be there. Both of these attributes are always resident.
    Every file has a $DATA attribute, which contains the file content. If the content is over
roughly 700 bytes in size, it becomes non-resident and is saved in external clusters. When
a file has more than one $DATA attribute, the additional attributes are sometimes
referred to as alternate data streams (ADS). The default $DATA attribute that is created
when a file is created does not have a name associated with it, but additional $DATA
attributes must have one. Note that the attribute name is different from the type name.
For example, $DATA is the name of the attribute type, and the attribute’s name could be
“fred.” Some tools, including The Sleuth Kit (TSK), will assign the name “$Data” to the
default $DATA attribute.
    Every directory has an $INDEX_ROOT attribute that contains information about
the files and subdirectories that are located in it. If the directory is large, $INDEX_
ALLOCATION and $BITMAP attributes are also used to store information. To make
things confusing, it is possible for a directory to have a $DATA attribute in addition to
the $INDEX_ROOT attribute. In other words, a directory can store both file content
and a list of its files and subdirectories. The $DATA attribute can store any content that
an application or user wants to store there. The $INDEX_ROOT and $INDEX_
ALLOCATION attributes for a directory typically have the name “$I30.”
    Figure 11.7 shows the example MFT entry that we previously used, and its attributes
have been given names and types. It has the three standard file attributes. In this exam-
ple, all the attributes are resident.

                  $STANDARD_INFORMATION
                         Type Id: 16
                   MFT Entry         $FILE_NAME            $DATA            Unused
                    Header            Type Id: 48        Type Id: 128       Space

                MFT
                Entry

Figure 11.7   Our example MFT entry where the type names and identifiers have been added to
              the attributes.

The previous section looked at the basic concepts that apply to all NTFS attributes.
Although not every attribute is basic, and this section looks at the more advanced con-
cepts. In particular, we look at what happens when a file has too many attributes and we
look at ways that the contents of an attribute can be compressed and encrypted.

BASE MFT ENTRIES
A file can have up to 65,536 attributes (because of the 16-bit identifier), so it may need
more than one MFT entry to store all the attribute headers (even non-resident attributes
need their header to be in the MTF entry). When additional MFT entries are allocated to
a file, the original MFT entry becomes the base MFT entry. The non-base entries will
have the base entry’s address in one of their MFT entry fields.
    The base MFT entry will have an $ATTRIBUTE_LIST type attribute that contains a
list with each of the file’s attributes and the MFT address in which it can be found.
The non-base MFT entries do not have the $FILE_NAME and $STANDARD_
INFORMATION attributes in them. We will examine the $ATTRIBUTE_LIST attribute
in the “Metadata Category” section of Chapter 12.

SPARSE ATTRIBUTES
NTFS can reduce the space needed by a file by saving some of the non-resident $DATA
attribute values as sparse. A sparse attribute is one where clusters that contain all zeros
are not written to disk. Instead, a special run is created for the zero clusters. Typically, a
run contains the starting cluster location and the size, but a sparse run contains only the
size and not a starting location. There is also a flag that indicates if an attribute is sparse.
   For example, consider a file that should occupy 12 clusters. The first five clusters are
non-zero, the next three clusters contain zeros, and the last four clusters are non-zero.
When stored as a normal attribute, one run of length 12 may be created for the file, as
shown in Figure 11.8(A). When stored as a sparse attribute, three runs are created and
only nine clusters are allocated, which can be seen in Figure 11.8(B).

                    A)                                    B)
                         12-Cluster File                           12-Cluster File

                              Runs                                     Runs
                      1 Start: 160 Len: 12                     1 Start: 160 Len: 5
                                                               2 Start: --- Len: 3
                                                               3 Start: 165 Len: 4

Figure 11.8   A 12-cluster file that is stored in A) normal layout and B) sparse layout with a sparse run of
              three clusters.

COMPRESSED ATTRIBUTES
NTFS allows attributes to be written in a compressed format, although the actual algo-
rithm is not given. Note that this is a file system-level compression and not an external
application-level compression that can be achieved by using zip or gzip. Microsoft says
that only the $DATA attribute should be compressed, and only when it is non-resident.
NTFS uses both sparse runs and compressed data to reduce the amount of space needed.
The attribute header flag identifies whether it is compressed, and the flags in the
$STANDARD_INFORMATION and $FILE_NAME attribute also show if the file con-
tains compressed attributes.
   Before the attribute contents are compressed, the data are broken up into equal sized
chunks called compression units. The size of the compression unit is given in the attribute
header. There are three situations that can occur with each compression unit:

1. All the clusters contain zeros, in which case a run of sparse data is made for the size
   of the compression unit and no disk space is allocated.
2. When compressed, the resulting data needs the same number of clusters for storage
   (i.e., the data did not compress much). In this case, the compression unit is not com-
   pressed, and a run is made for the original data.
3. When compressed, the resulting data uses fewer clusters. In this case, the data is com-
   pressed and stored in a run on the disk. A sparse run follows the compressed run to
   make the total run length equal to the number of clusters in a compression unit.

   Let’s look at a simple example to examine each of these scenarios. Assume that the
compression unit size is 16 clusters and we have a $DATA attribute that is 64 clusters in
length, as shown in Figure 11.9. We divide the content into four compression units and
examine each. The first unit compresses to 16 clusters, so it is not compressed. The sec-
ond unit is all zeros, so a sparse run of 16 clusters is made for it, and no clusters are allo-
cated. The third unit compresses to 10 clusters, so the compressed data is written to disk
in a run of 10 clusters, and a sparse run of six clusters is added to account for the com-
pressed data. The final unit compresses to 16 clusters, so it is not compressed and a run
of 16 clusters is created.

                        Original
                        Content
                                                                compress
                      Compression
                                                     Sparse            Sp
                         Units

                          Ondisk
                          Layout

                        Runs
                 1 Start: 100 Len: 16
                 2   Start: --- Len: 16
                 3   Start: 150 Len: 10
                 4   Start: --- Len: 6
                 5   Start: 160 Len: 16

Figure 11.9   An attribute with two compression units that do not compress, one unit that is sparse, and
              one unit that compresses to 10 clusters.

    When the OS, or forensics tool, reads this attribute, it sees that the compression flag is
set and organizes the runs into compression unit-sized chunks. The first run is the same
size as a compression unit, so we know it is not compressed. The second run is the same
size as a compression unit, and it is sparse, so we know that there are 16 clusters of zeros.
The third and fourth runs combine to make a compression unit, and we see that it is
only 10 clusters and needs to be uncompressed. The final run is a compression unit and
it is not compressed.
    The last example was too simple, so I will present the more challenging file shown in
Figure 11.10. The reason this is more complex is because the layout is not initially organ-
ized using compression units. To process this file, we need to first organize all the data in

the six runs and then organize the data into compression units of 16 clusters. After
merging the fragmented runs, we see that there is one run of content, one sparse run,
more content, and another sparse run. The merged data are organized into compression
units, and we see that the first two units have no sparse runs and are not compressed.
The third and fifth units have a sparse run and are compressed. The fourth unit is sparse,
and the corresponding data are all zeros.

                  Run List
         1 Start: 100 Len: 20
         2     Start: 210 Len: 14
         3     Start: 289 Len: 02
         4     Start: ---- Len: 28
         5     Start: 359 Len: 04
         6 Start: ---- Len: 12

                       Merged
                                                                   Sparse             Sparse
                        Runs

                    Compression
                       Units
                                                         decompress               decompress
                       Original
                       Content

Figure 11.10     A compressed attribute with fragmented runs that do not lie on compression
                 unit boundaries.

ENCRYPTED ATTRIBUTES
NTFS provides the capability for attribute contents to be encrypted. This section gives
an overview of how it is done and what exists on disk. In theory, any attribute could be
encrypted, but Windows allows only $DATA attributes to be encrypted. When an attrib-
ute is encrypted, only the content is encrypted and the attribute header is not. A
$LOGGED_UTILITY_STREAM attribute is created for the file, and it contains the keys
needed to decrypt the data.
   In Windows, a user can choose to encrypt a specific file or a directory. An encrypted
directory does not have any encrypted data, but any file or directory that is created in the
directory will be encrypted. An encrypted file or directory has a special flag set in the
$STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute, and each attribute that is encrypted will have
a special flag set in its attribute header.

Cryptography Basics
Before we get into how cryptography is implemented in NTFS, I will give a brief
overview of basic cryptographic concepts. Encryption is a process that uses a crypto-
graphic algorithm and a key to transform plaintext data to ciphertext data. Decryption
is a process that uses a crypgraphic algorithm and a key to transform ciphertext data to
plaintext data. If someone is shown the ciphertext data, they should not be able to deter-
mine the plaintext data without knowing the key.
    There are two categories of cryptographic algorithms: symmetric and asymmetric. A
symmetric algorithm uses the same key to encrypt and decrypt data. For example, the key
“spot” could be used to encrypt the plaintext into ciphertext, and the same key could be
used to decrypt the ciphertext into plaintext. Symmetric encryption is very fast, but it is
difficult when sharing the ciphertext data. If we encrypt a file with symmetric encryp-
tion and want multiple people to access it, we need to either encrypt it with a key that
everyone knows or make a copy of the file for each user and encrypt each with a key that
is unique to that user. If we use one key for everyone, it is difficult to revoke access from
a user without changing the key. If we encrypt it for every user, we waste a lot of space.
    Asymmetric encryption uses one key for encryption and a different key for decryption.
For example, the key “spot” could be used to encrypt the plaintext into ciphertext, and
the key “felix” could be used to decrypt the ciphertext. The most common use of asym-
metric encryption is where one of the keys is made public, such as “spot,” and the other
is kept private, such as “felix.” Anyone can encrypt data with the public key, but it can be
decrypted with only the private key. Obviously, a real situation would use keys that are
much longer than “spot” and “felix.” In fact, they are typically over 1,024-bits long.

NTFS Implementation
When an NTFS $DATA attribute is encrypted, its contents are encrypted with a symmet-
ric algorithm called DESX. One random key is generated for each MFT entry with
encrypted data, and it is called the file encryption key (FEK). If there are multiple $DATA
attributes in the MFT entry, they are all encrypted with the same FEK.
   The FEK is stored in an encrypted state in the $LOGGED_UTILITY_STREAM attrib-
ute. The attribute contains a list of data decryption fields (DDF) and data recovery fields
(DRF). A DDF is created for every user who has access to the file, and it contains the
user’s Security ID (SID), encryption information, and the FEK encrypted with the user’s
public key. A data recovery field is created for each method of data recovery, and it con-
tains the FEK encrypted with a data recovery public key that is used when an adminis-
trator, or other authorized user, needs access to the data. We can see this process in
Figure 11.11.

         File               User1's                                User1's
        Content            Public Key                                             $LOGGED_UTILITY_STREAM
                                                                  Encrypted
                                                                                         Attribute
                                                Encrypt             FEK

         Encrypt           Random Key
         (DESX)               (FEK)

                                                Encrypt            User2's
        Encrypted           User2's                               Encrypted
          File             Public Key                               FEK                    $DATA
         Content                                                                           Attribute

Figure 11.11     Encryption process starting with file content and public keys and ending with encrypted
                 content and encrypted keys.

To decrypt a $DATA attribute, the $LOGGED_UTILITY_STREAM attribute is processed
and the user’s DDF entry is located. The user’s private key is used to decrypt the FEK,
and the FEK is used to decrypt the $DATA attribute. When access is revoked from a user,
her key is removed from the list. A user’s private key is stored in the Windows registry
and encrypted with a symmetric algorithm that uses her login password as the key.
Therefore, the user’s password and the registry are needed to decrypt any encrypted files
that are encountered during an investigation. This process is shown in Figure 11.12.
               $DATA
               Attribute

                                                                                                  Encrypted
      $LOGGED_UTILITY_STREAM                                                                        File
             Attribute                                                                             Content
                                   User1's
                                  Encrypted
                                    FEK                                       Random Key           Decrypt
                                                           Decrypt
                                                                                 (FEK)             (DESX)

                User1's                                     User1's                                 File
                                    Decrypt
               Password                                   Private Key                              Content

          Registry Value
                                    User1's
                                  Encrypted
                                  Private Key

Figure 11.12     Decryption process starting with encrypted content, keys, and a user password, and ending
                 with the decrypted content.

    Several security tools can perform a brute force attack against a user’s login password,
and this can be used to decrypt the data. Unencrypted copies of file content might also
exist in unallocated space if only some directories and files were encrypted. In fact, there
is a small flaw in the NTFS design because it creates a temporary file named EFS0.TMP
and it contains the plaintext version of the file being encrypted. After the OS finishes
encrypting the original file, it deletes the temporary file, but the contents are not wiped.
Therefore, a plaintext version of the file exists, and recovery tools might be able to
recover the file if its MFT entry has not been reallocated. The swap space or page file
might also provide copies of unencrypted data. It has been reported that if the adminis-
trator, domain controller, or other account that is configured as the recovery agent is
compromised, any file can be decrypted because that account has access to all files
[Microsoft 1999].

INDEXES
NTFS uses index data structures in many situations, and this section describes them.
An index in NTFS is a collection of attributes that is stored in a sorted order. The most
common usage of an index is in a directory because directories contain $FILE_NAME
attributes.
    Prior to version 3.0 of NTFS (which came with Windows 2000), only the $FILE_
NAME attribute was in an index, but now there are several other uses of indexes and
they contain different attributes. For example, security information is stored in an
index, as is quota information. This section shows what an index looks like and how
it is implemented.

B-TREES
An NTFS index sorts attributes into a tree, specifically a B-tree. A tree is a group of data
structures called nodes that are linked together such that there is a head node and it
branches out to the other nodes. Consider Figure 11.13(A), where we see node A on top
and it links to nodes B and C. Node B links to node D and E. A parent node is one that
links to other nodes, and a child node is one that is linked to. For example, A is a parent
node to B and C, which are children of A. A leaf node is one that has no links from it.
Nodes C, D, and E are leaves. The example shown is a binary tree because there are a
maximum of two children per node.

                                                                                               INDEXES

                       A)                                    B)
                                A                                     A       7

                            B         C                           B   5           C   9

                   D            E                        D    2           E   6

Figure 11.13   Examples of A) a tree with 5 nodes and B) the same tree that is sorted by the node values.

    Trees are useful because they can be used to easily sort and find data. Figure 11.13(B)
shows the same tree as we saw on the left side, but now with values that are assigned to
each node. If we are trying to look up a value, we compare it to the root node. If the root
node is larger, we go to the child on the left. If the root node is smaller, we go to the child
on the right. For example, if we want to find the value 6, we compare it to the root value,
which is 7. The node is larger, so we go to the left-hand child and compare its value,
which is 5. This node is smaller, so we go to the right-hand child and compare its value,
which is 6. We have found our value with only three comparisons. We could have found
the value 9 in only two comparisons instead of five if the values were in a list.
    NTFS uses B-trees, which are similar to the binary tree we just saw, but there can be
more than two children per node. Typically, the number of children that a node has is
based on how many values each node can store. For example, in the binary tree we stored
one value in each node and had two children. If we can store five values in each node, we
can have six children. There are many variations of B-trees, and there are more rules
than I will describe here because the purpose of this section is to describe their concepts,
not to describe how you can create a B-tree.
    Figure 11.14 shows a B-tree with names as values instead of numbers. Node A con-
tains three values and four children. If we were looking for the file ggg.txt, we would
look at the values in the root node and determine that the name alphabetically falls in
between eee.txt and lll.txt. Therefore, we process node C and look at its values. We
find the file name in that node.
    Now let’s make this complex by looking at how values are added and deleted. This is
an important concept because it explains why deleted file names are difficult to find in
NTFS. Let us assume that we can fit only three file names per node, and the file jjj.txt
is added. That sounds easy, but as we will see it results in two nodes being deleted and
five new nodes being created. When we locate where jjj.txt should fit, we identify that

it should be at the end of node C, following the iii.txt name. The top of Figure 11.15
shows this situation, but unfortunately, there are now four names in this node, and it can
fit only three. Therefore, we break node C in half, move ggg.txt up a level, and create
nodes F and G with the resulting names from node C. This is shown at the bottom of
Figure 11.15.

                                  A eee.txt             lll.txt       ttt.txt

         B aaa.txt     bbb.txt                               D ooo.txt            rrr.txt        E   vvv.txt   zzz.txt

                                  C       fff.txt      ggg.txt        iii.txt

Figure 11.14   A B-tree with file names as values.

                                  A eee.txt              lll.txt       ttt.txt

          B aaa.txt     bbb.txt                               D ooo.txt             rrr.txt      E   vvv.txt   zzz.txt

                                  C        fff.txt     ggg.txt          iii.txt        jjj.txt

                      A eee.txt           ggg.txt        lll.txt       ttt.txt

        B aaa.txt     bbb.txt                                 D ooo.txt             rrr.txt      E   vvv.txt   zzz.txt

                                      F      fff.txt     G         iii.txt        jjj.txt

Figure 11.15   The top tree shows ‘jjj.txt’ added to node C, and the bottom tree is the result of removing
               node C because each node can have only three names.

                                                                                                                                               INDEXES

  Unfortunately, node A now has four values in it. So we divide it in half and move
ggg.txt to the top-most node. The final result can be found in Figure 11.16. Adding one
file results in removing nodes A and C and adding nodes F, G, H, I, and J. Any remnant
data in nodes A and C from previously deleted files may now be gone.

                                   H       ggg.txt

                  I    eee.txt                                J             lll.txt             ttt.txt

      B aaa.txt       bbb.txt      F      fff.txt                   D ooo.txt                     rrr.txt              E   vvv.txt   zzz.txt

                                                       G          iii.txt             jjj.txt

Figure 11.16    The final state from adding the ‘jjj.txt’ file.

   Now delete the zzz.txt file. This action removes the name from node E and does not
require any other changes. Depending on the implementation, the details of zzz.txt file
may still exist in the node and could be recovered.
   To make things more difficult, consider if fff.txt was deleted. Node F becomes
empty, and we need to fill it in. We move eee.txt from node I to node F and move
bbb.txt from node B to node I. This creates a tree that is still balanced where all leaves
are the same distance from node H. The resulting state is found in Figure 11.17.

                                           H        ggg.txt

                         I      bbb.txt                                 J              lll.txt             ttt.txt

               B aaa.txt                   F    eee.txt                        D ooo.txt                     rrr.txt        E    vvv.txt

                                                                   G         iii.txt             jjj.txt

Figure 11.17    Tree after deleting the ‘zzz.txt’ file and the ‘fff.txt’ file.

    Node B will contain bbb.txt in its unallocated space because bbb.txt was moved to
node I. Our analysis tool might show that the bbb.txt file was deleted, but it really
wasn’t. It was simply moved because fff.txt was deleted.
    The point of walking through the process of adding and deleting values from the tree
was to show how complex the process could be. With file systems, such as FAT, that use a
list of names in a directory, it is easy to describe why a deleted name does or does not
exist, but with trees it is very difficult to predict the end result.

NTFS INDEX ATTRIBUTES
Now that we have described the general concept of B-trees, we need to describe how they
are implemented in NTFS to create indexes. Each entry in the tree uses a data structure
called an index entry to store the values in each node. There are many types of index
entries, but they all have the same standard header fields, which are given in Chapter 13.
For example, a directory index entry contains a few header values and a $FILE_NAME
attribute. The index entries are organized into nodes of the tree and stored in a list. An
empty entry is used to signal the end of the list. Figure 11.18 shows an example of a node
in a directory index with four $FILE_NAME index entries.

                              Index        Index        Index       Index
                             Entry 1      Entry 2      Entry 3     Entry 4
                    Index
                    Node

                    Index Entry $FILE_NAME
                      Header      Attribute

Figure 11.18   A node in an NTFS directory index tree with four index entries.

   The index nodes can be stored in two types of MFT entry attributes. The
$INDEX_ROOT attribute is always resident and can store only one node that contains a
small number of index entries. The $INDEX_ROOT attribute is always the root of the
index tree.
   Larger indexes allocate a non-resident $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute, which can
contain as many nodes as needed. The content of this attribute is a large buffer that con-
tains one or more index records. An index record has a static size, typically 4,096 bytes,
and it contains a list of index entries. Each index record is given an address, starting with
0. We can see this in Figure 11.19 where we have an $INDEX_ROOT attribute with three

                                                                                                 INDEXES

index entries and a non-resident $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute that has allocated
cluster 713, and it uses three index records.
   An $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute can have allocated space that is not being used
for index records. The $BITMAP attribute is used to manage the allocation status of the
index records. If a new node needs to be allocated for the tree, $BITMAP is used to find
an available index record; otherwise, more space is added. Each index is given a name
and the $INDEX_ROOT, $INDEX_ALLOCATION, and $BITMAP attributes for the
index are all assigned the same name in their attribute header.
   Each index entry has a flag that shows if it has any children nodes. If there are chil-
dren nodes, their index record addresses are given in the index entry. The index entries
in a node are in a sorted order, and if the value you are looking for is smaller than the
index entry and the index entry has a child, you look at its child. If you get to the empty
entry at the end of the list, you look at its child.

                   $STANDARD_INFORMATION                           $INDEX_ALLOCATION
                                               $INDEX_ROOT             (non-resident)
                                    $FILE_NAME    (resident)

                    MFT
                    Entry

           Index
          Record                                   Cluster 713
               0
               1
               2

                      Index Entry

Figure 11.19       This directory has three index entries in its resident $INDEX_ROOT attribute and three
                   index records in its non-resident $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute.

   Let us go over some examples. Consider an index with three entries that fit into
$INDEX_ROOT. In this case, only a $INDEX_ROOT is allocated, and it contains three
index entry data structures and the empty entry at the end of the list. This can be seen in
Figure 11.20(A). Now consider an index with 15 entries, which do not fit into an
$INDEX_ROOT but fit into an $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute with one index
record. It can be seen in Figure 11.20(B). After we fill up the index entries in the index
record, we need to add a new level, and we create a three-node tree. This scenario is

shown in Figure 11.20(C). This has one value in the root node and two children nodes.
Each child node is located in a separate index record in the same $INDEX_ALLOCA-
TION attribute, and it is pointed to by the entries in the $INDEX_ROOT node.

                   A)                    $INDEX_ROOT

                                1         2         3          X

                   B)                    $INDEX_ROOT

                                X

                                           $INDEX_ALLOCATION

                            1       2     3    4        ...   15   X      index record 1

                   C)                    $INDEX_ROOT

                             14           X

                                           $INDEX_ALLOCATION

                            1        2     3    4       ...   13   X      index record 1
                           15       16    17   18       ...   25   X      index record 2

Figure 11.20   Three scenarios of NTFS indexes, including A) a small index of three entries, B) a larger
               index with two nodes and 15 entries, and C) a three-node tree with 25 entries.

ANALYSIS TOOLS
All the tools mentioned in Chapter 1 support NTFS images, and they may give different
amounts of access to individual attributes. If you are interested in viewing the different
attributes you have on a Windows system, you can use the nfi.exe tool from Microsoft
[Microsoft 2000]. It displays the MFT contents of a live system, including the attribute
names and the cluster addresses. This is not useful for a forensic investigation because
the system must be live, but it is useful for learning about NTFS. The NTFSInfo tool
[Russinovich 1997] from Mark Russinovich provides similar information about a
live system.

                                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY

    TSK allows you to view the contents of any attribute. To make the examples in the
next two chapters more clear, I will describe the syntax needed to view the different
attributes. Recall that each attribute has a type value and each attribute in an MFT entry
is assigned a unique identifier. With these two values, we can display any attribute.
    Instead of specifying only the metadata address, we will give icat the address and the
attribute type. If there is more than one attribute of that type, we will give the unique
identifier. For example, if we are examining MFT entry 34, we can see its $FILE_NAME
attribute (type 48) by specifying ‘34-48.’ If we want to view its $DATA attribute (type
128), we specify ‘34-128.’ If there are multiple $DATA attributes, we also specify the
unique attribute identifier. If the attribute we want has an ID of 3, we specify ‘34-128-3.’
    The istat tool in TSK lists all the attributes for a file. Here is the output that shows
the attributes for an MFT entry:

[REMOVED]
Type: $STANDARD_INFORMATION (16-0)   Name: N/A   Resident   size: 72
Type: $FILE_NAME (48-2)   Name: N/A   Resident   size: 84
Type: $OBJECT_ID (64-8)   Name: N/A   Resident   size: 16
Type: $DATA (128-3)   Name: $Data   Non-Resident, Encrypted   size: 4294
94843 94844 94845 94846 94847 94848 102873 102874
102875
Type: $DATA (128-5)   Name: ADS   Non-Resident, Encrypted   size: 4294
102879 102880 102881 102882 102883 102884 102885 102886
102887
Type: $LOGGED_UTILITY_STREAM (256-7)   Name: $EFS   Non-Resident   size: 552
102892 102893

SUMMARY
Everything important in NTFS is associated with a file or an index. In this chapter, we
have looked at the core NTFS concepts, which are MFT entries, attributes, and indexes.
Using these basic concepts, we can now examine the specific attributes and analysis
categories in Chapter 12.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Cooperstein, Jeffrey, and Richter, Jeffrey. “Keeping an Eye on Your NTFS Drives: The
Windows 2000 Change Journal Explained.” Microsoft Systems Journal, September 1999.
http://www.microsoft.com/msj/0999/journal/journal.aspx.

Cooperstein, Jeffrey, and Richter, Jeffrey. “Keeping an Eye on Your NTFS Drives, Part II:
Building a Change Journal Application.” Microsoft Systems Journal, October 1999.
http://www.microsoft.com/msj/1099/journal2/journal2.aspx.

Linux NTFS Project. NTFS Documentation. 1996-2004. http://linux-ntfs.
sourceforge.net/ntfs/index.html.

Microsoft. “Analysis of Reported Vulnerability in the Windows 2000 Encrypting File
System (EFS).” 1999. http://www.microsoft.com/technet/security/news/
analefs.mspx.

Microsoft. “Description of NTFS Date and Time Stamps for Files and Folders.”
Microsoft Knowledge Base Article 299648, 2003. http://support.microsoft.com/
default.aspx?scid=kb;en-us;299648.

Microsoft. “INFO: Understanding Encrypted Directories.” Knowledge Base Article
248723, 2003. http://support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=kb;en-us;
248723&sd=tech.

Microsoft. “Overview of FAT, HPFS, and NTFS File Systems.” Knowledge Base Article
100108, 2003. http://support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=kb;EN-US;100108.
Microsoft. “Windows NT 4.0 and Windows 2000 OEM Support Tools.” February 2, 2000.
http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?FamilyId=82D6AB58-890C-405F-
B532-B751D9217CA4&displaylang=en.

Microsoft. “Windows Server 2003 Technical Reference.” Storage Technologies Collection
Section, 2004. http://www.microsoft.com/resources/documentation/WindowsServ/
2003/all/techref/en-us/Default.asp?url=/resources/documentation/windowsServ/
2003/all/techref/en-us/W2K3TR_ntfs_intro.asp.

Microsoft. “Windows XP Professional Resource Kit Documentation.” Chapter 13—File
Systems, 2004. http://www.microsoft.com/resources/documentation/Windows/XP/all/
reskit/en-us/Default.asp?url=/resources/documentation/Windows/XP/all/reskit/
en-us/prork_overview.asp.

Microsoft MSDN Library. “Change Journals.” 2004. http://msdn.microsoft.com/
library/default.asp?url=/library/en-us/fileio/base/change_journals.asp.

Microsoft TechNet. “Encrypting File System in Windows XP and Windows Server 2003.”
2002. http://www.microsoft.com/technet/prodtechnol/winxppro/deploy/
cryptfs.mspx#XSLTsection122121120120.

                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY

Russinovich, Mark. “Inside Encrypting File System.” Part 1, Windows and .Net Magazine
Network, June 1999. http://www.winntmag.com/Articles/Print.cfm?ArticleID=5387.
Russinovich, Mark. “Inside Encrypting File System.” Part 2, Windows and .Net Magazine
Network, July 1999. http://www.winntmag.com/Articles/Print.cfm?ArticleID=5592.
Russinovich, Mark. “Inside Win2K NTFS.” Part 1,Windows and .Net Magazine Network,
November 2000. http://www.winnetmag.com/Articles/Print.cfm?ArticleID=15719.
Russinovich, Mark. “Inside Win2K NTFS.” Part 2, Windows and .Net Magazine Network,
Winter 2000. http://www.winnetmag.com/Articles/Print.cfm?ArticleID=15900.
Russinovich, Mark. “NTFSInfo.” 1997. http://www.sysinternals.com/ntw2k/source/
ntfsinfo.shtml

Solomon, David, and Mark Russinovich. Inside Windows 2000. 3rd ed. Redmond:
Microsoft Press, 2000.

This page intentionally left blank
