     Ext2 and Ext3
  Concepts and Analysis
                             14
The Ext2 and Ext3 file systems, which I will lump into the term ExtX from now on, are
the default file systems for many distributions of the Linux operating system. Ext3 is the
newer version of Ext2 and adds file system journaling, but the basic Ext2 construction
remains the same. ExtX are based on the UNIX File System (UFS). ExtX removed many
of the components of UFS that are no longer needed, so it is easier to understand and
explain and will be covered first. Unlike other operating systems, Linux supports a large
number of file systems, and each distribution can choose which file system will be the
default. At the time of this writing, Ext3 is the default file system of most distributions,
but the Reiser file system is also popular, and its design is nothing like ExtX. This chapter
examines how ExtX works, and Chapter 15, “Ext2 and Ext3 Data Structures,” examines
what the data structures look like. You can read this chapter and the next in parallel or
in series.

INTRODUCTION
ExtX takes its design from UFS, which was designed to be fast and reliable. Copies of
important data structures are stored throughout the file system, and all data associated
with a file are localized so that the hard disk heads do not need to travel much when
reading them. The layout of the file system starts with an optional reserved area, and the
remainder of the file system is divided into sections, which are called block groups. All
block groups, except for the last, contain the same number of blocks, which are used to
store file names, metadata, and file content. If we return to our analogy from Chapter 8,

“File System Analysis,” about the allocation of seats in a theater, block groups are like
sections in a theater. Each section is numbered, and all sections have the same number
of seats.
    The basic layout information of ExtX is stored in the superblock data structure, which
is at the beginning of the file system. File content is stored in blocks, which are groups of
consecutive sectors. The metadata for each file and directory are stored in a data struc-
ture called an inode, which has a fixed size and is located in an inode table. There is one
inode table in each block group. The name of a file is stored in a directory entry struc-
ture, which is located in the blocks allocated to the file’s parent directory. Directory entry
structures are simple data structures that contain the name of the file and a pointer to
the file’s inode entry. The relationship between the directory entry, inode, and blocks can
be seen in Figure 14.1.

          Directory Entries
                                            Inodes                     Content Blocks
               file1.txt
                                           [Metadata]

               file10.txt                  [Metadata]

Figure 14.1   Relationship between ExtX directory entries, inodes, and data blocks that are used to store
              file content.

   ExtX has optional features that are organized into three categories based on what the
operating system should do if it encounters a file system with a feature that it does not
support. The first category is the compatible features, and if the OS does not support one
of these features, it can still mount the file system and continue as normal. Examples of
this include allocation methods, the existence of a file system journal, and extended
attributes. There are also incompatible features, and if an OS encounters one of these, it
should not mount the file system. An example of this includes compression. Lastly, a fea-
ture can be a read only compatible feature. When an OS encounters one of these features
that it does not support, the file system should be mounted as read only. Examples of
this include large file support and using B-trees to sort directories instead of an
unsorted list.
   ExtX has many experimental components and features that have not been imple-
mented into the major distributions of Linux. That is not to say that the computer you
are investigating does not have the features installed. With Linux, the local administrator

can add any kernel features that she wants to, so we cannot make assumptions about the
OS. If you are investigating a Linux system that was used as a corporate server, it might
have a more standard build. On the other hand, if you are investigating a Linux system
that was the desktop system of a person suspected of breaking into other systems, it
might have some experimental features. Examining the kernel and what modifications
were made falls into the application analysis arena and is out of the scope of this book.
The flags that identify which features are being used may show you that the file system
has experimental features that are not described in this book.
   In the rest of this chapter, we will examine the five-category data model with respect
to Ext2 and Ext3. Each section will discuss the basic properties of the category and then
the details of ExtX. The more stable features will be discussed, but keep in mind that
they could change and be out of date by the time you are reading this.

The file system category of data is where the general data about a file system are located.
This section looks at where this category of data is located and then looks at how to ana-
lyze the data.

OVERVIEW
In ExtX, there are two data structures that store data in the file system category: the
superblock and the group descriptor. The superblock is located in the beginning of the
file system and contains the basic size and configuration information. It is similar to the
boot sector data structures in an NTFS or FAT file system. As previously mentioned, the
file system is organized into block groups and each group has a group descriptor data
structure that describes the layout of the group. The group descriptors are located in the
group descriptor table, which is located in the block after superblock. Backup copies of
the superblock and group descriptor tables exist throughout the file system in case the
primary copies are damaged.

Superblock
The ExtX superblock is located 1,024 bytes from the start of the file system and is 1,024
bytes in size, although most of the bytes are not used. This data structure contains only
configuration values and no boot code. Backup copies of the superblock are typically
stored in the first block of each block group.

    The superblock contains basic information, such as the block size, the total number of
blocks, the number of blocks per block group, and the number of reserved blocks before
the first block group. The superblock also contains the total number of inodes and the
number of inodes per block group. Nonessential data in the superblock includes the vol-
ume name, the last write time, the last mount time, and the path where the file system
was last mounted. There are also values that identify if the file system is clean or if a con-
sistency check needs to be run on it. The superblock also keeps some bookkeeping data
about the total number of free inodes and blocks. These are used when new inodes and
blocks are allocated.
    To determine the file system layout, we first use the block size and number of blocks
to calculate the file system size. If this value is less than the volume size, there could be
hidden data following the file system, which is called volume slack. The first block group
is located in the block following the reserved area. Figure 14.2 shows which values are
used to determine the layout. Note that the last group in this figure does not have the
same number of blocks as the first four.

                 Reserved
                   Area
                                 Group 0    Group 1      Group 2       Group 3   Group 4

                    First Data             Blocks per
                      Block                  Group

                                              Total Number of Blocks

Figure 14.2   Layout of ExtX with five block groups.

   The superblock defines what features the file system has enabled. Recall from the
“Introduction” section that there are three categories of features: compatible, incompati-
ble, and read only compatible. For simplicity, the details of each feature will be discussed
in their respective section of this chapter. Here I will only discuss the read only compati-
ble feature called “sparse superblock.” When the sparse superblock feature is used, only
some block groups contain backup copies of the superblock and the group descriptor
table. In a sample file system, I found that groups 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 had backup copies, and
the next copies did not occur until groups 25 and 27. When an ExtX file system is created
in Linux, the sparse superblock feature is enabled by default. This feature should not
have an effect on an investigation except that you should not assume that every group
has reserved space for a superblock backup.

   With Linux, the volume label in the superblock can be used to identify the file system.
For example, the default way to refer to a file system in Unix is to use its device name,
/dev/hda5 for example. Another way of referring to it is by its volume label and the
system configuration files may refer to the label instead of the device name. For example,
the /etc/fstab in Linux lists the file systems that should be mounted and it could refer
to the /dev/hda4 device as “LABEL=rootfs” if the volume label is rootfs.1
   For the data structure layout and an example of a superblock, refer to the next chapter.
The output from running fsstat on the file system will be shown later in this section.

Block Group Descriptor Tables
In the block following the superblock is the group descriptor table, which contains a
group descriptor data structure for every block group in the file system. Backup copies of
the table exist in each of the block groups, unless the sparse superblock feature is
enabled. In addition to file content, block groups contain administrative data, such as
superblocks, group descriptor tables, inode tables, inode bitmaps, and block bitmaps.
The group descriptor describes where these data can be found. The basic layout of a
block group is shown in Figure 14.3.

        Backup    Group
         Super    Desc       Block Inode         Inode                    File
         Block    Table     Bitmap Bitmap        Table                   Content

                                                                                        ...

Figure 14.3    Layout of a sample block group

   The block bitmap manages the allocation status of the blocks in the group, and its
starting block address is given in the group descriptor. Its size in bytes can be calculated
by dividing the number of blocks in the group by eight. When Linux creates a file sys-
tem, it defines the number of blocks per group to be equal to the number of bits in a
block. Therefore, the block bitmap will require exactly one block.

1. While this configuration can be useful for normal systems, it can be dangerous for a forensic analysis sys-
   tem because if a suspect drive is placed in the system and it has the same labels as the analysis drive, it
   could be mounted by the OS. You should make sure that your analysis and acquisition systems are config-
   ured to use device names and not volume labels.

   The inode bitmap manages the allocation status of the inodes in the group, and its
starting block address is also given in the group descriptor. Its size in bytes can be calcu-
lated by dividing the number of inodes per group by eight. In general, there are fewer
inodes than blocks per group, but a user can choose these values when they create the file
system. Lastly, the starting block address of the inode table is given in the group descrip-
tor, and its size is calculated by multiplying the number of inodes per group by the size
of each inode, which is 128 bytes.
   The group descriptor also contains the number of free blocks and inodes in the block
group. The superblock contains the total number of free blocks and inodes in all groups.
The group descriptor data structure is given in Chapter 15.

Boot Code
If an ExtX file system contains the OS kernel, it may have boot code. All other non-boot
file systems should not have boot code. When boot code exists, it will be in the 1,024
bytes before the superblock (i.e., the first two sectors). The boot code will be executed
after control is passed to it from the boot code in the Master Boot Record (MBR) in sector
0 of the disk. The ExtX boot code typically knows which blocks have been allocated to
the kernel and will load it into memory.
    Many Linux systems do not have boot code in the file system with the kernel. Instead,
there is a boot loader in the MBR, and it knows in which blocks the kernel is located. In
that case, the code in the MBR will load the kernel, and no additional boot code in the
file system is needed.

Example Image
We will be using an example image in this chapter, and this section contains the output of
running fsstat from The Sleuth Kit (TSK) on that image. We will use some of these val-
ues in later examples. This is the same image that is manually parsed in the next chapter.

# fsstat –f linux-ext3 ext3.dd
--------------------------------------------
File System Type: Ext3
Volume Name:
Volume ID: e4636f48c4ec85946e489517a5067a07

Last Written at: Wed Aug 4 09:41:13 2004
Last Checked at: Thu Jun 12 10:35:54 2003

Last Mounted at: Wed Aug   4 09:41:13 2004

Unmounted properly
Last mounted on:

Source OS: Linux
Dynamic Structure
Compat Features: Journal,
InCompat Features: Filetype, Needs Recovery,
Read Only Compat Features: Sparse Super, Has Large Files,

Journal ID: 00
Journal Inode: 8

--------------------------------------------
Inode Range: 1 - 1921984
Root Directory: 2
Free Inodes: 1917115

--------------------------------------------
Block Range: 0 - 3841534
Block Size: 4096
Free Blocks: 663631

--------------------------------------------
Number of Block Groups: 118
Inodes per group: 16288
Blocks per group: 32768

Group: 0:
  Inode Range: 1 - 16288
  Block Range: 0 - 32767
  Layout:
    Super Block: 0 - 0
    Group Descriptor Table: 1 - 1
    Data bitmap: 2 - 2
    Inode bitmap: 3 - 3
    Inode Table: 4 - 512
    Data Blocks: 513 - 32767
  Free Inodes: 16245 (99%)
  Free Blocks: 0 (0%)
  Total Directories: 11

Group: 1:
  Inode Range: 16289 - 32576
  Block Range: 32768 – 65535
[REMOVED]

   The output shows the general data from the superblock, such as the total number of
inodes and blocks and the block sizes. The layout details for each block group are also
given, and those for group 0 are shown. We can see the block and inode range for group
0 and the locations of the bitmaps and inode table. The feature flags and temporal infor-
mation also are shown.

Analysis of the file system category of data involves processing key data structures so that
the layout of the file system can be determined, which leads to more advanced and fruit-
ful analysis techniques. With ExtX, the first step is to locate the superblock, which is easy
because it is always located at an offset of 1,024 bytes from the start of the file system.
After the superblock has been located, it is straightforward to process it. This structure is
essential to an investigation because it gives the size and locations for key data structures.
If it is corrupt, many backup copies should exist. The features flags will identify if this
file system has any unique features that are not supported by the analysis tool or OS. The
size of the file system can be calculated using the block size and the number of blocks in
the file system.
    In the block following the superblock, the group descriptor table can be found. This
contains an entry for each group and is used to locate the data structures that will deter-
mine the allocation status of blocks and inodes. Backup copies of this also can be found
in each group that has a superblock. Using the superblock and group descriptors, we can
locate all of the data structures that are used by files and directories.

Like every other file system, this category contains essential information that describes
the layout of the file system, but it does not contain many values that are supplied by the
user and contain evidence of an event. There is a lot of unused space in the superblock
and it could be used to hide data. After reading Chapter 15 and the UFS chapters, you
will see that the ExtX superblock is much cleaner than the UFS superblock, and this
makes it easier to detect values that are being used to hide data. The 1,024 bytes before
the start of the superblock are reserved for boot code, but they may not be needed and

might contain hidden data. Also compare the file system size with the volume size to
determine if there could be unused sectors after the file system.
   The group descriptor table has entries that efficiently use the data allocated to them,
but there could be unused space at the end of the table. That should be checked, includ-
ing the backup copies, for hidden data.
   If the superblock cannot be found or it is corrupt, a search can be conducted for the
backup copies. One search method is to look for the data structure’s signature value,
which is 0xef53 in bytes 56 to 57. You also can try to determine the block group bound-
aries using the expected block size and the fact that the size of a block group is frequently
based on how many bits there are in one block. Therefore, if you multiply the block size
by eight and add one, then you should find a backup copy in that sector. For example, if
the file system had a block size of 1,024 bytes, then each block group should have 8,192
blocks, and the backup superblock should be in block 8,192 (if there are no reserved
blocks). Backup copies of the data structure could be used to detect any manual
modifications.

Consider a scenario where you encounter a system that has no partition table. In
Chapter 4, “Volume Analysis,” we saw an example where gpart was used to find file sys-
tems when the partition table was missing or corrupt. Here we will do what a gpart-like
tool may do.
   We think that our disk was used as a Linux system, so we search for an ExtX file sys-
tem. The computer also could have used Reiser or another file system, so we should not
limit our searches to only ExtX. Also remember that many Linux systems will frequently
use multiple file systems and partitions on the same disk. It is not uncommon for the
first file system to be fairly small because it is used for only the boot code and the kernel.
   The ExtX superblock has the signature value 0xef53 in bytes 56 to 57. We will search
for that value to try and locate the start of the file system. We should expect to find many
false hits during this search because it is a short signature. To determine if a hit is false,
we can check other values that should be in the superblock to make sure they are valid
(for example is the block size reasonable). We also can use the fact that backup copies
exist in each block group, so when we find an actual ExtX superblock, we should see a
series of equally spaced hits. Further, the block groups are typically based on the size of
a block so the distance between the superblocks should be 8,192, 16,384, or 32,768 if
the default creation procedure was used. We also will need to keep in mind that the
sparse superblock feature could be in use, and we will not see a backup copy in every
block group.

    You can search for the signature in any tool that allows hexadecimal values to be
searched for. Note that a tool like grep will not work in this case because it supports only
ASCII values. For this example, we will use the sigfind tool from TSK. The hex signature
is stored on the disk in little-endian ordering, so you may need to configure your tool
appropriately or reverse the order of the signature when you input it (i.e. use 0x53ef).
The output from sigfind is shown here (split up by my commentary):

# sigfind –o 56 –l ef53 disk-8.dd
Block size: 512 Offset: 56
Block: 298661 (-)
Block: 315677 (+17016)
Block: 353313 (+37636)
Block: 377550 (+24237)

   The sigfind tool prints the sector where the signature was found and the distance
from the previous hit. These distances are not powers of two, and they are not consis-
tently spaced. Therefore we will not bother with them until later (an automated tool
would probably examine them, though). We do, however, have some interesting data
later in the output.

[REMOVED]
Block: 2056322 (+274327)
Block: 2072706 (+16384)
Block: 2105474 (+32768)
Block: 2138242 (+32768)
Block: 2171010 (+32768)
Block: 2203778 (+32768)

    Notice that the last four entries are all the same distance apart, and the entry before
those is 16,384 sectors away from the previous hit. All these distances are what we would
expect between block groups. Therefore our initial hypothesis is that the first superblock
is in sector 2,056,322, and backup copies exist in sectors 2,072,706, 2,105,474 and so on.
There are probably 16,384 sectors per block group, and the sparse superblock feature is
being used so that not all groups have a superblock.
    To test this hypothesis, we extract 1,024 bytes starting at sector 2,056,322. We apply
the superblock data structure and examine the various values. We see that the block size
is 1,024 bytes and that the sparse superblock feature is enabled. There are a total of
104,422 blocks in the file system and 8,192 blocks per group. Therefore, the backup copy
of the superblock should be 16,384 sectors away (because there are two sectors per
block), which is what we saw.

   The final test is to determine if the superblock in sector 2,056,322 is the first one of
the file system or if it is a backup copy. The superblock has a field that identifies which
block group it is part of, and it has a value of 0. Similarly, the superblock in sector
2,072,706 has a value of 1. Therefore, we can assume that the file system starts in sector
2,056,320 (2 before the superblock) and that it extends until sector 2,265,164.
   Note that you may be inclined to simply compare the different superblocks to deter-
mine which are the same so that you can group them as backup copies. Unfortunately,
this will not work because the backup copies are not updated as frequently as the pri-
mary copy. The primary copy contains temporal data and dirty status flags, and those
values are not updated on backup copies. Further, there is the value that shows which
block group the superblock is in, so no two backup copies should be identical.
   The previous example was very clean and nice because it was for the /boot partition,
which does not have many updates. The next set of hits is not as clean, though. Notice
that the next hit is two sectors after where we calculated the previous file system
should end.

Block: 2265167 (+61389)
Block: 2265733 (+566)
Block: 2265985 (+252)
Block: 2266183 (+198)
Block: 2266357 (+174)
Block: 2266457 (+100)
[REMOVED]

   Based on the location of sector 2,265,167 relative to the end of the previous partition,
we would think that this could be the start of a new file system. On the other hand, the
hits that follow it are not spaced as though they were backup copies, and there are over
200 of these entries, many having only 20 sectors in between them. So we may be
inclined to ignore these hits. Let’s skip a couple of hundred entries and move on.

[REMOVED]
Block: 2278273 (+2800)
Block: 2281551 (+3278)
Block: 2282617 (+1066)
Block: 2314319 (+31702)
Block: 2347087 (+32768)
Block: 2379855 (+32768)
Block: 2412623 (+32768)

   Now we see hits that have spacing that is expected for backup copies. When we exam-
ine the contents of sector 2,314,319 we see that it is Ext3 with a 1,024-byte block size and
8,192 blocks per group. We also notice that it reports to be from block group 3.
Therefore, block group 0 must have started 49,152 sectors ago, which is sector 2,265,167
and the one that comes right after the end of the previous file system.
   The reason that we had hundreds of hits for the superblock signature was because
there were copies of the primary superblock inside the file system journal file, which is
located at the beginning of the file system. We will see at the end of the chapter that Ext3
will record all superblock updates and the first two hundred superblocks were copies
that were saved to the journal. We can see this scenario in Figure 14.4. It shows some
false hits at the start and end of the disk. We also see a lot of sectors that have the signa-
ture value in the start of the second file system, which is where the journal is located.

                                 FS #1                FS #2

                 False                      Journal                False         False
                  Hits                      Copies                  Hits          Hits

                            Superblock
                             Signature

Figure 14.4   Hits where the superblock signature was found, including many hits in the journal.

   In this scenario, we were able to use the magic value in the superblock to find the
locations of ExtX in a disk. The extra copies of the superblock in the file system journal
makes this process more tedious to find the start of the file system, but it means that
there are more backup copies in case there is major disk failure.

The content category of data includes file and directory contents. This section describes
the ExtX content category of data and how to analyze it.

OVERVIEW
ExtX uses blocks as its data unit and a block is a group of consecutive sectors. It is similar
to a cluster in FAT or NTFS. This section describes block sizes and addresses as well as
how to determine their allocation status.

Blocks
An ExtX block can be 1,024; 2,048; or 4,096 bytes, and the size is given in the superblock.
If you are reading this chapter in parallel with Chapter 15, you might have noticed refer-
ences to fragments. UFS, on which ExtX is based, breaks a block into fragments. The
Linux code for ExtX does not support this, although there is a field in the superblock
that can be used to document the fragment size. As there are no major systems that sup-
port fragments, it is unknown how they should be handled, so this book assumes that
the fragment size is the same as a block size.
   All blocks are given an address, starting with 0, and block 0 is located in the first sec-
tor of the file system. All blocks belong to a block group, except in cases where the
superblock has defined a reserved area at the beginning of the file system. In that case,
the reserved blocks do not belong to a group, and group 0 starts immediately following
the reserved blocks. To determine the group to which a block belongs, we use the follow-
ing calculation (using the number of blocks per group, which is given in the superblock):

group = (block – FIRST_DATA_BLOCK) / BLOCKS_PER_GROUP

   For example, if there is no reserved area and there are 32,768 blocks per group, block
60,000 would be part of group 1.

Allocation Status
The allocation status of a block is determined by the group’s block bitmap, the location
of which is given in the group descriptor. The block bitmap will have a full block allo-
cated to it, and each bit corresponds to a block in the group. To determine which bit cor-
responds to a given block, we need to first determine the block’s address relative to the
start of the group. This can be thought of as the block’s logical group address. The calcu-
lation for determining the first block in a group is a variation of the previous one.

first_block = group * BLOCKS_PER_GROUP + FIRST_DATA_BLOCK

   Next, we subtract the block’s address from the address of the first block in the group.
For example, the base for group 1 in our example is 32,768, so block 60,000 is at a bit off-
set of 27,232. It would, therefore, be in byte 3,404 of the bitmap. An example of an ExtX
bitmap is given in the next chapter.
   The tools that Linux uses to create the file system will create the block group sizes
such that the block bitmap needs only one block. Therefore, all file systems with a 4,096-
byte block will, by default, have 32,768 blocks per group. The user can override this value
when the file system is created, and other applications could use a different algorithm.
   Unlike NTFS, not every allocated block is allocated to a file. There are many allocated
blocks that contain administrative file system data and are not allocated to a file.
Examples include the superblocks, group descriptor tables, the bitmaps for the blocks
and inodes, and the inode tables.
   The dstat tool in TSK will show the allocation status of a block and the block group
to which it belongs. An example from our image is shown here:

# dstat -f linux-ext3 ext3.dd 14380
Block: 14380
Allocated
Group: 0

   We see that block 14,380 is located in block group 0 and that it is allocated. This block
will be allocated by the inode in our example in the “Metadata” section.

With Linux, allocation of blocks is done on a group basis, but other OSes could choose a
different method. When a block is allocated to an inode, Linux will use a first-available
strategy and try to allocate a block in the same group as the inode. The goal of this is to
reduce the amount of movement that a disk head has to make when it reads the file. If an
existing file is being made larger, Linux will first try a next-available strategy and look at
the blocks after the end of the current file. There is a compatible file system feature that
will preallocate blocks for directories so that they will not become fragmented when they
need additional blocks.
   If there is no more space in the group, a block in a different group will be used. Note
that this is application-specific, and not every OS uses this technique for allocation.
For example, an OS could just as easily ignore groups and use a first available algorithm
that starts at the beginning of the file system instead of at the beginning of a specific
block group.

   ExtX will typically prevent a user from allocating every block in the file system. The
superblock has a value that defines how many blocks should be reserved for a specific
user, typically the root user. When the number of available blocks drops to the minimum
value, normal users are no longer allowed to create files, but the administrator can still
login to clean the system. This is application-specific, though, and not all OSes may
enforce this policy.
   When Linux writes data to a block, it zeros out the unused bytes. Therefore, there
should not be any data in the slack space of the last file block.

When analyzing the content category of ExtX, we need to be able to locate any block,
read its contents, and determine its allocation status. Locating a given block is easy
because the first block starts in the first sector of the file system, and the block size is
given in the superblock.
   Determining the allocation status of any block is a three-step process. First, we must
determine to which block group the block belongs. Next, we locate the group’s entry in
the group descriptor table and determine where its block bitmap is stored. Lastly, we
process the block bitmap and examine the bit associated with the block in question. If
the bit is set, then the block is allocated.
   If we wanted to extract all unallocated blocks from the file system, we would sequen-
tially go through each entry in the group descriptor table. For each entry we would
load the block bitmap and search it for 0s. Any block whose bit is a 0 would be extracted.
For ExtX, the superblocks, group descriptors, inode tables, and bitmaps are all allocated
data even though they are not allocated to a file. If there are reserved sectors at the begin-
ning of the file system, it is less clear what their allocation status should be because there
is no bitmap entry for them. This will likely be tool-dependent.

The allocation algorithms of the ExtX file systems might help when it comes to recover-
ing deleted content. If the OS allocated blocks in the same group as the inode, searches
can generally be restricted to the group instead of to the entire file system. For example,
if you are looking for a file that had a keyword in it and you know of which group the
file was a member, the group can be searched for evidence. This is much faster than
searching the entire file system. This should not be the only method of searching,
though, because other copies of the file may exist in other groups and the OS might not

have allocated blocks in the same group as the inode. The group location can be deter-
mined using the output of fsstat in TSK, as we previously saw, and other tools may give
the same information.
   The time it takes to have deleted data overwritten will be different with ExtX than
with NTFS or FAT. Data in groups that already have a lot of data and little activity will
not be overwritten as fast as data in groups that have a lot of write activity. With NTFS
and FAT, any cluster had the same chances of being over written; whereas in ExtX it
depends on in which group a block is located.

Consider a scenario where we need to read the contents of the last block in the file
system because that is where a rootkit saves its password (I am actually not aware of a
rootkit that does this, but we will ignore that). This process requires us to determine the
block size and the number of blocks in the file system. Both of these are in the
superblock. The trick is that we have only a hex editor that works in 512-byte sectors.
   We read the superblock, which is in sector 2 of the file system. The block size is
located in bytes 24 to 27, which have the value 2. The block size is stored as the number
of bit places that we need to shift the number 1024 (0x0400), and our file system
requires us to shift it twice to the left. Shifting it once gives 2048 (0x0800), and shifting it
a second time gives 4096 (0x1000). If you did not follow that, remember that 0x4 is 0100
in binary, and 0x8 is 1000 in binary. When we shifted 0x400 by 1 to the left, the bit in 0x4
moved to form 0x8.
   Next, we need to determine the last block in the file system. This is stored in bytes 4 to
7 and requires no fancy calculations. There are 512,064 blocks in the file system, which
means that we need to seek ahead 512,063 blocks, and each block is 4,096 bytes, or eight
sectors. Therefore, we need to view sectors 4,096,504 to 4,096,511 in our hex editor.
   In this scenario, we performed the basic process of locating where a specific block is
located. Most analysis tools will do this for you, but it is a common process, and it is use-
ful to know what needs to occur.

The metadata category includes the data that describe a file or directory. This section
describes where the data are stored and how to analyze them.

OVERVIEW
In ExtX, a file’s primary metadata is stored in an inode data structure. Additional meta-
data may be stored in extended attributes. We will discuss each of these data structures in
this section.

Inodes
All ExtX inodes are the same size, which can be defined in the superblock. One inode is
allocated to every file and directory, and each inode has an address, starting with 1. A set
of inodes, whose size is given in the superblock, is assigned to each block group. The
inodes in each group are stored in a table, whose location is given in the group descrip-
tor. Given an inode address, its group can be determined with the following calculation:

group = (inode – 1) / INODES_PER_GROUP

    Inodes 1 to 10 are typically reserved and should be in an allocated state. The
superblock has the value of the first non-reserved inode. Of the reserved inodes, only
number 2 has a specific function, and it is used for the root directory. Inode 1 keeps
track of bad blocks, but it does not have any special status in the Linux kernel. The jour-
nal typically uses inode 8, but this can be redefined in the superblock. The first user file
is typically allocated in inode 11, and this is frequently used for the lost+found directory.
File system consistency checkers use the lost+found directory, and any inode that is allo-
cated but does not have a file name pointing to it is added to this directory with a new
name.
    Each inode has a static number of fields, and additional information might be stored
in extended attributes and indirect block pointers, which will be discussed later in this
section. The allocation status of an inode is determined using the inode bitmap, whose
location is given in the group descriptor.
    An inode contains the file’s size, ownership, and temporal information. The size value
in newer versions of ExtX is 64 bits, but older versions had only 32 bits and therefore
could not handle files over 4GB. Newer versions utilize an unused field for the upper 32
bits of the size value and set a read-only compatible feature flag when a large file exists.
    “Ownership” information is stored using the user and group ID. In Unix, every user is
assigned a user ID, and the /etc/passwd file is used to translate the user ID to a user
name. Similarly, the /etc/groups file is used to translate the group ID to a group name.
Note that the user ID in the inode does not necessarily mean that the user created the
file. The user and group IDs in the inode can be changed at any time using the chown

and chgrp commands. Also note that a user name does not have to exist in /etc/
password for every user ID. The standard system tools will simply show the ID if it
cannot translate it to a name.
    For temporal information, the inode contains times for the last access, modification,
change, and deletion. The times are stored as the number of seconds since January 1,
1970 UTC. The last modified, accessed, and changed times also exist in UFS and are fre-
quently referred to as MAC times. The last accessed time, or A-time, corresponds to the
time that the file content was last accessed. The last modified time, or M-time, corre-
sponds to the time that the file content was last modified, and the last changed time, or
C-time, corresponds to when the file metadata was last changed. When a file is created,
all three values are typically set to the current time. The deletion, or D-time, corresponds
to when the file was deleted. In Linux and other Unix systems, it is fairly easy to assign an
arbitrary M- and A-time to a file using the touch command. The touch command allows
a user to assign any value to the M- and A-time, but the C-time is updated during
the process.
    The type of the file is stored in the mode field, which also contains basic permission
values. Everything is a file in Unix, and therefore there are many file types. A normal file
that a user creates is called a regular file, and a directory is, intuitively, called a directory.
Beyond that, the names become less intuitive to non-Unix people, and the “files” do not
allocate any blocks. The files are simply there as a name for programs to use when refer-
ring to hardware devices or other communication services.
    Hardware devices are assigned one or more file names, and each will have a file type
of a block or a character device. A block device is used for devices that operate on only
block-sized chunks of data, such as hard disks, for example. As we saw in Chapter 2,
“Computer Foundations,” to read any data from a hard disk, you need to read at least
512 bytes. If an application reads less than a sector from a block device, then the OS will
read the needed sectors and return only what the application requested. On the other
hand, a character device, also called a raw device, is used for devices that do not need to
operate in blocks, such as keyboards. A block device typically also has a character device
created for it, but an error is generated if it is used to read and write data using non-
block sized chunks. The inode space that usually stores information about what blocks
has been allocated to a file are used to store device identifier information.
    Other file types are used to send data between processes. A FIFO, also called a named
pipe, provides one-way data transmission between two or more processes. A process can
open the file and receive data that has been written to it by another process. The data is
stored in kernel memory and not on disk. If two-way communication is needed between
processes, a Unix socket is used. A Unix socket is a file that processes open using special
functions, and it allows bi-directional communication. As with named pipes, the data is

not written to disk. The last type of file is a symbolic link, which is a soft link. Symbolic
links will be discussed more in the “File Name Category” section, but they provide a
shortcut to another file or directory.
    In addition to the file type, the mode field contains basic permissions. These permis-
sions allow read, write, and execute commands for the owner, group, or all users. For
example, if the permissions allow group read access and deny access to all other users,
only users in the group whose ID is stored in the inode can read the file. The group
members can be determined using the /etc/groups file. This is of course, nonessential
data because an OS might not enforce the permissions.
    Lastly, the mode field identifies special properties that a file or directory may have. If
the “sticky bit” is set on an executable file, then some of the process data will remain in
memory after the process ends. When it is set on a directory, only the owner of a file can
delete the directory contents. When the set user ID (SUID) and set group ID (SGID) bits
are set for an executable, the process takes on the user and group identifies from the file
instead of the user that actually started the process. This allows a non-privileged user to
execute specific programs as a privileged user. When the SGID bit is set on a directory, all
files in the directory are assigned the same group ID as the directory.
    Each inode contains a link count value that is equal to the number of file names that
point to the inode. When this value equals 0 and no process has the file open, the inode
will be unallocated. When the value equals 0 and a process does have it open, it becomes
an orphan inode and will be deleted when the process closes it. The inode also has a gen-
eration ID value, which is used by the Network File System (NFS) to determine when a
new file has been allocated. When the inode is allocated to a new file, this value changes
and allows the server to know that a new file exists. This is similar to the sequence num-
ber we saw in NTFS. Linux assigns this value with an event counter, and it could poten-
tially be used to determine the order of file allocation.
    For the data structure layout and an example of an inode, refer to the next chapter.

Block Pointers
ExtX, like UFS, was designed for efficiency of small files. Therefore, each inode can store
the addresses of the first 12 blocks that a file has allocated. These are called direct point-
ers. If a file needs more than 12 blocks, a block is allocated to store the remaining
addresses. The pointer to the block is called an indirect block pointer. The addresses in
the block are all four bytes, and the total number in each block is based on the block size.
The indirect block pointer is stored in the inode.
   If a file has more blocks than can fit in the 12 direct pointers and the indirect block, a
double indirect block is used. A double indirect block is when the inode points to a block
that contains a list of single indirect block pointers, each of which point to blocks that

contain a list of direct pointers. Lastly, if a file needs still more space, it can use a triple
indirect block pointer. A triple indirect block contains addresses of double indirect
blocks, which contain addresses of single indirect blocks. The graphical representation of
each of these types of data structures can be found in Figure 14.5. Each inode contains
12 direct pointers, one single indirect pointer, one double indirect block pointer, and one
triple indirect pointer.

                                                 Content
       Single Indirect
       Block Pointer
                                                 Content

                                                                       Content

      Double Indirect
       Block Pointer                                                   Content

                                                                                 Content

       Triple Indirect                                                           Content
       Block Pointer

                                                                                 Content

Figure 14.5   Examples of a single, double, and triple indirect block pointer.

   ExtX allows a file to have sparse blocks. Sparse blocks exist when the original block
was either undefined or all zeros. Undefined blocks exist because the program that cre-
ated the file forced the file to be a specific size but never wrote data to some parts.
Instead of allocating a block of all 0s, the OS will place the address 0 in the block pointer.
Analysis tools and the OS should process this as a block of all 0s.

Attributes
Each inode has attributes, which are described in the flags field, but they may not be
actually supported by the current OS. Some of the attributes are experimental, and
others are no longer supported by Linux. The supported attributes include one that does
not update the A-time of files and directories. Another is used to identify files that
should be written to disk as soon as its data changes instead of being cached. Two attrib-
utes are for security, and one makes files append only so that data cannot be removed
from them, and the other makes files immutable so that data cannot be added or
changed. Lastly, the dump attribute identifies files that should not be saved when the
dump command is used to backup files.
    The attributes that are not generally supported at the time of this writing include
secure deletion, compression, and undelete. Secure deletion would wipe the blocks asso-
ciated with a file, and undelete would make a backup copy of the file when it was deleted
so that it could be recovered. Linux kernels that have been built with experimental
patches could use some of these attributes.
    In addition to the attributes just described, a file also may have extended attributes.
With Linux, extended attributes can be used only when the file system has been mounted
with the user_xattr option and when the kernel has support for them, which was added
in version 2.4. You can check if the file system was, by default, mounted with the
user_xattr option by looking in the /etc/fstab file. If a file system has extended attrib-
utes, a compatible feature flag should be set.
    An extended attribute is a list of name and value pairs. A user can create any pair, such
as “user.source = http://www.digital-evidence.org,” using the setfattr command. In this
case, user is the name space, and there are also trusted and security name spaces. The
extended attributes are stored in a block that has been allocated to the file. If more than
one file has the same extended attributes, they will share the same block. The block lists
all of the name and value pairs. The 2.6 Linux kernel requires that the extended attrib-
utes be stored in one block.
    One of the ways that the OS uses the extended attributes is for POSIX access control
lists (ACL). ACLs are a more advanced method of restricting access to a file than what
normally exists with ExtX. With an ACL, selected users can be allowed access instead of
having to use Unix groups. The ACL information is stored in an extended attribute. With
Linux, a user sets the ACL with the setfacl command, and the file system needs to be
mounted with the acl option. The data structures and an example of extended attributes
can be found in the next chapter.

Example Image
To show sample data that can come from a file, I have included the output from running
istat on a file in our example file system image. This inode is processed in the next
chapter, but here is the nicely formatted summary:

# istat –f linux-ext3 ext3.dd 16
inode: 16
Allocated
Group: 0
Generation Id: 199922874
uid / gid: 500 / 500
mode: -rw-r--r--
size: 10240000
num of links: 1

Inode Times:
Accessed:       Fri Aug   1 06:32:13 2003
File Modified: Fri Aug    1 06:24:01 2003
Inode Modified: Fri Aug   1 06:25:58 2003

Direct Blocks:
14380 14381 14382 14383 14384 14385 14386 14387
14388 14389 14390 14391 14393 14394 14395 14396
[REMOVED]
16880 16881 16882 16883

Indirect Blocks:
14392 15417 15418 16443

   We can see that the file is 10 MB, and it required four indirect block pointers to point
to all the allocated blocks. This output shows us the permissions and file type as well as
the MAC times.

This section discusses my observations and the Linux kernel source code with respect to
how ExtX metadata is allocated. Another OS or a custom Linux kernel could use differ-
ent allocation algorithms. These results are from a standard Fedora Core 2 system.

Inode Allocation
When a new inode is needed for a file or directory, the first consideration that Linux
makes is the block group in which the inode should exist. If the inode is for a

non-directory, Linux allocates an inode in the same block group as the parent directory.
This helps to ensure that all information for a directory is in the same general area. If the
group has no free inodes or free blocks, a search is performed for another group. Linux
uses a quadratic hash to select a random group. The quadratic hash process selects
groups by starting with the current block group and adding powers of 2 to it (1, 2, 4, 8,
16, etc.). If the selected group has a free inode, it is used. If the process fails to find a
group with a free inode, a linear search is done starting with the current group. Both
processes use a first available search to find an available inode.
    If the inode is for a directory, the goal is to place it in a group that has not been used
much. This helps ensure that all groups are equally used. The first part of this search
process is to calculate the average number of free inodes and free blocks per group. This
is calculated by using the total number of free inodes and blocks, which are stored in the
superblock. Linux then searches each of the groups, starting with 0, and uses the first one
whose free inode and block counts are less than the averages. If no group is found with
both values that are less than average, the group with the smallest number of directories
and largest number of free inodes is used. Both of these values are stored in the group
descriptors.
    When an inode is allocated, its contents are cleared, and the M-time, A-time, and C-
time are set to the current time. The D-time is set to 0. The link count, which identifies
how many file names are pointing to the inode is set to 1 for the file name. Directories
will have a link count of 2 because of the ‘.’ entry inside of the directory. Linux also
assigns the generation field with the current value of a counter.
    When a file is deleted in Linux, the link value in the inode is decremented by one. If
the link count becomes zero, then it is unallocated. If a process still has the file open,
then it becomes an orphan file and it is added to a list in the superblock. When the
process closes the file or when the system is rebooted, the inode will be deallocated.
    Ext2 and Ext3 handle file deletion differently. Ext3 sets the file size to 0 and wipes the
block pointers in the inode and in the indirect blocks. Ext2, on the other hand, does not
wipe these values, which makes file recovery easier. The M-time, C-time, and D-time are
also updated to reflect the time of deletion. If the file was deleted because it was moved
to a different volume, its A-time also will be set to when the content was read. This could
help to distinguish between a delete and a move.

Time Value Updating
ExtX inodes have four temporal values, and we also need to discuss when they are
updated. In my testing, Linux updates the A-time when the content of the file or direc-
tory is read. For a file, this occurs when a process reads the contents, when the file is
copied, and when the file is moved to a new volume. If the move is to the same volume,
the content does not move, and therefore this time does not change. For a directory, the

A-time is updated when a directory listing is done on its contents or when a file or sub-
directory is opened. As we will later see, the contents of a directory’s blocks are the
names of the files in the directory.
    The M-time corresponds to the last file modification, and the time is updated when
the content of a file or directory changes. For files, this occurs when any of the file con-
tent changes. For directories, this occurs when a file is created or deleted inside of it.
When a file is moved, the M-time on the destination file is the same as the original
because the file content did not change during the move. When a file is copied, the M-
time on the destination file is updated to reflect the current time because it is considered
new file content. Note that when a file is moved to a network attached drive, the M-time
on the destination file might have an updated time because the network server considers
it a new file.
    The C-time corresponds to the last inode change, and this occurs when the metadata
for a file or directory changes. This can occur when a file or directory is created and
when the permissions or ownership of a file are changed. It also occurs when the content
of a file or directory changes. If a file is moved then the C-time of the file will be
updated. The D-time corresponds to when a file was deleted, and it is set only when a file
has been deleted. It is cleared when the inode is allocated. Many deleted files have the M-
and C-times equal to the D-time.
    In summary, when a file is created then the file’s M-, A-, and C-times are updated to
the time of creation, the D-time is set to 0, and the parent directory’s M- and C-times are
updated. When a file is copied the original file and parent directory have an updated A-
time; the destination file has new M-, A-, and C-times; and the destination parent direc-
tory has new M- and C-times. When a file is moved, the parent directory of the original
file has updated M-, A-, and C-times, the parent directory of the destination file has
updated M- and C-times, and the destination file has the same M- and A-times as the
original and an updated C-time. If the move is inside of the same volume, the same
inode will be used, but if the move is to a new volume, the source inode will be unallo-
cated and the M-, A-, C-, and D-times will be updated.

Analysis of the metadata category of data involves locating and processing the data
structures that store file and directory metadata so that we can collect more details about
a given file. With ExtX, this involves locating and processing the inode data structures. To
locate a specific inode, we need to first determine which block group it is part of. Next,
we process the group descriptor for that group and locate the group’s inode table. Lastly,
we identify which entry in the table is for our inode and process it.

   With the exception of the indirect block pointers and extended attributes, the inode
data structure is self-contained and stores all the metadata. To identify the blocks that are
allocated to a file or directory, we read the 12 direct block pointers. If the file has more
blocks allocated, then we process the single, double, and triple indirect block pointers,
which point to blocks that contain a list of block addresses where content is stored. If the
block pointer has an address of 0, the file is sparse, and a block was not allocated for that
part of the file because it would have been filled with 0s.
   To determine the allocation status of an inode, we examine the inode bitmap for the
group. The address of the bitmap is given in the group descriptor. If the corresponding
bit is a 1, the inode is allocated.
   It is sometimes useful to examine the unallocated inode entries because they contain
temporal data about when the file was deleted. With an Ext3 file system, deleted file
names will point to their inode entries, but Ext2 deletes the link. Even with Ext3, the file
names may be overwritten before the inode data is. Therefore, in both cases we need to
examine each unallocated inode entry to find data about all deleted files. We can
typically determine if an unallocated inode entry has been used if some of its values
are non-zero.
   The extended attributes could contain important data associated with the file. We
locate them by using the pointer in the inode and processing the associated block. The
block has a collection of name and value pairs that can be assigned by a user.

The allocation strategies that are used by UFS-based file systems might allow an unallo-
cated inode entry to exist for a longer amount of time if it is in a group with little activ-
ity. The M-, C, and D-time values also may show when the file was deleted.
    In Linux, and most Unix systems, a user can easily set the M- and A-times by using
the touch command, so finding independent sources of temporal information, such as
logs or network packets, can be useful when assessing the reliability of the times on an
allocated file. Also the time values are stored with respect to UTC, so your analysis tool
needs to know the time zone where the computer was located so that the time values that
it shows are accurate.
    Slack space is an operating system-dependent feature, but Linux will write 0s to the
unused bytes of a block. Therefore, data from deleted files will exist only in unallocated
blocks. You can check if your search tools will look at the slack space of an Ext3 file
system by using the test images from the Digital Forensic Tool Testing (DFTT) site
[Carrier 2003].

    Unfortunately, the file size and allocated blocks will probably be wiped from unallo-
cated inode entries, so file recovery will need to rely on application level techniques.
Further, the indirect block pointers could be located in between the blocks with content,
so carving tools should not, when possible, include the indirect block pointers in the
final file. You may be able to identify indirect block pointers because they contain a list of
4-byte addresses that could have increasing or similar values. An investigator can use the
allocation strategy to her benefit when carving data because she can carve only the unal-
located data from a specific block group instead of the full file system if she is targeting a
specific file or directory.
    If you encounter an ExtX with a deleted file whose size and block pointers were not
wiped, special considerations must be made with respect to indirect block pointers. If
the indirect block pointers point to blocks that have been reallocated, the block contents
may no longer contain a list of block addresses, or the address may be for a different file.
    The extended attributes of a file also should be examined for possible evidence. Test if
your analysis tools include those values during a keyword search. These are similar to
alternate data streams in NTFS, but their size is much smaller.
    One file-hiding method is to have a process open a file for reading or writing and then
delete the file name. In this case, the link count of the inode is 0, but it is not unallocated.
When this occurs, the kernel should add the orphan inode to a list in the superblock, and
it should be examined during an investigation. With TSK, you can find these files by
looking at the fsstat output.

While investigating a Linux incident, a directory with a suspicious name is found, and
we are trying to determine which user account created the files inside of it. A file’s inode
contains the User ID of the owner, and we use the /etc/passwd file to correlate the ID
with an actual name.
   As we are translating some of the User ID values, we find some that do not exist in the
password file. There are two scenarios that cause this. One is when a user account was
created during the incident, the files were created, and then the account was deleted. The
second scenario is when the files came from an archive file, such as tar, and it saved the
User ID from the computer where the archive file was created. Therefore, there was never
a user with that ID on the computer being investigated.
   We test the first theory by searching the unallocated blocks of the file system that con-
tains the /etc/ directory for a deleted copy of the password file. For our search term, we
copy a string from the current file. This could result in us finding a version of the file
with the new user account. This search is unsuccessful.

   To test the second theory, we search the system for tar files that may contain the files
in question. For an actual system where the second scenario occurred, refer to the
Forensic Challenge [Honeynet Project 2001] that was released by the Honeynet Project
in 2001. The challenge is of a compromised Linux system, and it contains files with User
IDs that are not in the password file. When a timeline of the system is created in TSK, we
get the following values:

[REMOVED]
Wed Nov 08 2000 08:51:56
..c -/-rwxr-xr-x 1010      users     /usr/man/.Ci/ /Anap
..c -/-rwxr-xr-x 1010      users     /usr/man/.Ci/bx
Wed Nov 08 2000 08:52:09
m.c l/lrwxrwxrwx root      root      /.bash_history -> /dev/null
m.c l/lrwxrwxrwx root      root      /root/.bash_history -> /dev/null
[REMOVED]

   The two files in /usr/man/.Ci have a changed time of 08:51:56, and their User ID is
1010. Normally, the timeline tool translates the ID to the user name, as you can see in the
bottom two entries where the User ID of 0 is translated to root. The search of our system
finds a tar file that contains the suspicious directory. The User ID of a file can be
changed using the chown command, and even if the ID exists in the password file, there is
no proof that it is the user who created the file. If we want to know who created the sus-
picious named directory, we should examine the permissions of its parent directory. In
this case, the parent directory is /usr/local/, and it is owned by root, and only it has
write permissions. This is a common setup, so we will assume that the attacker did not
change the permissions after he created the directory. This means that the attacker likely
had access to the root account.

The file name category of data includes the data structures that store the name of each
file and directory. This section describes where the data are stored and how to
analyze them.

OVERVIEW
ExtX has several methods for assigning names to a file or directory, and this section
examines three of them. The first subsection looks at directory entries, which are the

basic data structure used to assign names. We next look at hard and soft links and then
hash trees.

Directory Entries
An ExtX directory is just like a regular file except that it has a special type value in its
inode. Directories allocate blocks that will contain a list of directory entry data struc-
tures. A directory entry is a simple data structure that contains the file name and the
inode address where the file’s metadata can be found. The size of the directory corre-
sponds to the number of blocks that it has allocated and is irrelevant to how many files
actually exist.
    Every directory starts off with directory entries for the ‘.’ and ‘..’ directories, which are
for the current and parent directory. Following them are entries for every file and subdi-
rectory in the directory. The root directory is always located in inode 2.
    A directory entry has a dynamic length because the file name can be anywhere from 1
to 255 characters long. Therefore, the data structure has a field that identifies how long
the name is and where the next directory entry can be found. The length of the entry is
rounded up to a multiple of four. We can see this in Figure 14.6(A), where we have three
files in a directory. The first two entries are for ‘.’ and ‘..’ and the last entry points to the
end of the allocated block. The space after the c.txt file is unused.

        A)

                  .         ..         a.txt       b.txt        c.txt
              inode 410 inode 900   inode 419   inode 429    inode 482

        B)

                  .         ..         a.txt       b.txt        c.txt
              inode 410 inode 900   inode 419   inode 429    inode 482

Figure 14.6    Directory entries contain the file name and inode.They also contain a pointer to the next
               entry. Unused entries are skipped over by increasing the pointer of the previous entry.

  When a file or directory is deleted, its name needs to be modified so that the OS does
not print it. The OS hides a directory entry by increasing the record length of the previ-
ous directory entry so that it points to the entry after the one being hidden. We can see

this in Figure 14.6(B) where the b.txt file was deleted and the pointer in a.txt was incre-
mented to point to c.txt. A directory listing would skip over it, but the data still exists.
   When a new entry is created, the OS examines each existing entry and compares its
record length with the name length. Each directory entry has eight bytes of static fields
in addition to the name, so the minimum record length can be determined by adding
eight to the name length and rounding up to a multiple of four. If the record length of an
entry is larger than it needs to be and the difference is more than the size of the entry
being added, the entry is placed in the unused space. For example, consider a new direc-
tory that has only a ‘.’ and ‘..’ entries in a 4,096-byte block. There will be two entries with
the values given in Table 14.1.

Table 14.1   Directory entry values for a new directory.

Name               Name Length                Record Length

.                  1                          12

..                 2                          4,084

   The final ‘..’ entry has a record length of 4,084 bytes because it needs to point to the
end of the block, but it needs only 12 bytes. Therefore, the new entry will be added 12
bytes after the start of the ‘..’ entry, and the record length of the new entry will point to
the end of the block. The new entries would have the fields given in Table 14.2.

Table 14.2   Directory entry values after creating a new file.

Name               Name Length                Record Length

.                  1                          12

..                 2                          12

File1.dat          8                          4,072

   There are actually two versions of directory entry structures. An older version has
only the name, inode address, and length values. The updated version uses one of the
bytes in the file name length field and uses it to store the file type, such as file, directory,
or character device. We will later see how this can be used to detect when an inode has
been reallocated since a file name was deleted. The data structures of both types of
directory entries are given in the next chapter.

    Here is the output of running fls on a directory in our file system image. It shows one
deleted file, the file with the “*” before it. The first column shows the file type according to
the directory entry and then according to the inode. Notice that the types for the deleted
file are still the same, which means that the inode may not have been reallocated yet.

# fls -f linux-ext3 –a ext3.dd 69457
d/d 69457:      .
d/d 53248:      ..
r/r 69458:      abcdefg.txt
r/r * 69459:    file two.dat
d/d 69460:      subdir1
r/r 69461:      RSTUVWXY

Links and Mount Points
ExtX provides both hard and soft links so that users can define multiple names for a file
or directory. A hard link is an additional name for a file or directory in the same file sys-
tem. After a hard link is created, you will not be able to tell if it is the original name or a
link. To make a hard link, the OS allocates a new directory entry and points it to the
original inode. The link count in the inode is incremented by one to account for the new
name. A file will not be deleted until all its hard links are deleted.
    Note that the ‘.’ and ‘..’ entries in each directory are hard links to the current and parent
directory. Therefore, the link count for a directory is equal to at least two plus the num-
ber of subdirectories it has.
    Soft links are also a second name for a file or directory, but they can span different file
systems. The OS creates a soft link using a symbolic link, which is a special type of file.
The full path of the destination file or directory is stored in either blocks allocated to the
file or in the inode if the path is less than 60 characters long. The next chapter shows
example data structures that contain symbolic links.
    We can see an example of hard and soft links in Figure 14.7. Part A shows a hard link
named hardlink.txt that points to the file1.txt file. Part B shows a soft link to the
same file, but this time there is another level of indirection. softlink.txt has its own
inode that contains the path of the file. Notice that in Part B both inodes have a link
count of one. In reality, the symbolic link would store the /file1.txt address in its block
pointers because the path is shorter than 60 characters.

    A)
                                                      B)
         file1.txt                  hardlink.txt             file1.txt                          softlink.txt

             inode: 1234 Links: 2                     inode: 1234 Links: 1                 inode: 2591 Links: 1

                        file1.dat                             file1.dat
                                                                                                  /file1.txt
                        contents                              contents

                       Block 450                             Block 450                           Block 967

Figure 14.7     An example of A) a hard link and B) a soft link to the ‘file1.txt’ file.

    In Unix, directories can be used for both storing files and volume mount points, as we
discussed in Chapter 4. Consider a directory dir1 that is in a file system named FS1. If
file system FS2 is mounted on the dir1 directory, when a user changes into that directory
and lists the contents, the files from FS2 are shown. Even if the dir1 directory has its own
files in FS1, they will not be shown when FS2 is mounted on it. We can see this in Figure
14.8, where part A shows the three pictures in dir1 and part B shows that dir1 now
contains the three files in the root directory of volume FS2.

                A)                                            B)

                FS1                                            FS1

                     /dir1/                                      /dir1/
                                        file1.jpg                                  file1.jpg
                                        file2.jpg                                  file2.jpg
                                        file3.jpg                                  file3.jpg

                                                               FS2

                                                                     /
                                                                                   fileXYZ1.dat
                                                                                   fileXYZ2.dat
                                                                                   fileXYZ3.dat

Figure 14.8     Example where a directory in FS1 contains three files, but when FS2 is mounted on the
                directory, they are not seen.

   For investigators, this means that you need to know where file systems were mounted.
If you are looking for a specific file, you might need to reference several file systems
before you find the file because different directories could have been on different vol-
umes. Many current post-mortem investigation tools do not show volumes at their
mount point, and therefore you will need to determine which volume should be there.
On the plus side, because the tools do not show volumes at their mount points, you can
see the directory contents of the mount points. One hiding technique is to create files in
a directory and then mount a volume on the directory so that a casual observer would
not notice them.

Hash Trees
When the file system is created, the user can choose to use a hash tree to organize the
files instead of the unsorted list that I just described. If a file system is using hash trees,
then a compatible feature flag will be set in the superblock. The hash trees still use direc-
tory entry data structures, but they are in a sorted order.
    The hash trees in ExtX are similar to the B-trees that were discussed in Chapter 11,
“NTFS Concepts,” so refer to that section for an overview of how trees are used in a
directory. The major difference between hash and B-trees is that hash trees sort the files
based on a hash of the file name and not based on the name itself. Note that there is also
experimental support for B-Trees in ExtX that are like the NTFS B-Trees, but we do not
discuss them in this chapter because they are not yet standard.
    If a directory is using a hash tree, it will have multiple blocks and each will be a node
in the tree. Each node contains the files whose hash value is in a given range. The first
block of the directory is the root node, and it contains the ‘.’ and ‘..’ directory entries. The
rest of the first block contains node descriptors, which contain a hash value and a block
address. The OS uses the node descriptors to determine to which block it should jump
for a given hash value.
    We can see this in Figure 14.9 where we have several files in two leaves. The first block
contains the header and node descriptors, and the second and third blocks contain the
file directory entries. An OS that did not know about hash trees would process the
entries in all the blocks without knowing that they were in a sorted order.
    There can be up to three layers of nodes in a hash index tree. The data structures for
the node descriptors and an actual directory are given in Chapter 15.

         Block 0
                    .      ..         Node Descriptors

         Block 1
                   a.txt   b.txt   q.txt   r.txt

         Block 2
                   c.txt   r.txt   m.txt n.txt     d.txt   w.txt

Figure 14.9   A directory with hash trees and two leaves.The tree uses directory entries so it can be
              processed as a normal directory.

When a new file name is created, Linux uses a first-available strategy. The OS starts at the
beginning of the directory and examines each directory entry. Using the name length, it
calculates how long the entry needs to be. It compares that with the actual record length.
If they are different, it assumes that either it is at the end of a block or that the record
length was increased to cover a deleted entry. In either case, the OS tries to add the name
in the unused area. If no unused areas exist that are large enough for the name, then the
name is appended to the list. New blocks are added as needed, and they are wiped before
use. Linux will not allow an entry to cross a block boundary. Other OSes could choose a
different strategy. If hash trees are being used, the file is added to the block that corre-
sponds to the file’s hash value.
    When a file is deleted, the record length of the previous entry is incremented so that it
points to the entry after the one being deleted. That is the only action that places the
entry in an unallocated status. Linux will clear the inode pointer in an Ext2 file system,
but not an Ext3 file system. Unused entries are not rearranged to compress the size
of a directory.

Analysis of the file name category of data involves listing the names in a directory so that
we can find a specific files or files that have a given pattern. The first step in this process
is to locate the root directory, which is easy in ExtX because it is always located in inode
2. Directories are similar to files, except that they have a special type set in their inode.
After locating the directory content, we process it as a sequence of directory entry data

structures. To examine only the allocated names, we process a directory entry structure,
jump ahead by its reported size, and process the next entry. This process repeats until the
end of the block.
   If we want to view unallocated file names as well, we ignore the reported size of the
entry and calculate how long the entry should be and advance to that point. For exam-
ple, if the last character of a name is in byte 34, we advance to byte 36. After we advance
to the boundary, we apply the directory entry data structure and perform sanity checks
to determine if the data could have been for a directory entry. If it is, it is processed, and
if not, we advance four more bytes and test that location. This process eventually brings
us to where the previous directory entry would have pointed us.
   Figure 14.10 shows an example where we have two unallocated directory entries in
between two allocated entries. There is unused space between each of the directory
entries, so simply advancing to the next 4-byte boundary after each entry would not find
the names.

                      .     ..    a.txt             b.txt          c.txt     d.txt

Figure 14.10   A list of directory entries where two unallocated names are in between two allocated
               names, and we must advance through the unused space to find the unallocated names.

   The allocation status of a directory entry structure is determined based on whether it
is pointed to by an allocated entry. The first two entries in each directory will always be
allocated because they are for the ‘.’ and ‘..’ entries. When we find a file in which we are
interested, we can look up its metadata using the inode address.
   In some cases, we might want to search the file system for blocks that were previously
used by a directory. To do so, we should examine the first 24 bytes of each block to deter-
mine if the ‘.’ and ‘..’ entries exist. If so, this block was the first block in a directory. Linux
always allocates directory entries on block boundaries, so a more general search would
examine the first bytes for any file name, not only ‘.’.
   It might be possible to infer about the order in which files were deleted by using the
pointer values. Figure 14.11 shows the six possible combinations of how three consecu-
tive files could be deleted. The top of the figure gives the starting state where there are
four allocated directory entries. The number below each block is the “address” of the
entry, which is there to make it easier to describe each scenario. Each shaded block is an
unallocated entry, and the number corresponds to the order in which it was deleted. For
example, in the (A) scenario entry 1 was deleted first, and the length of entry 0 was
increased to point entry 2. Entry 2 was then deleted, and the length of entry 0 was

increased to point to entry 3. Lastly, entry 3 was deleted, and the length of entry 0 was
increased to point to the entry after 3. The state shown (A) is unique among the other
combinations of how those files can be deleted.

                                               0    1       2      3

    A)                                    B)                                 C)

               1        2      3                    1      3      2                     2    1       3

         0     1         2      3              0    1       2      3              0     1     2      3

    D)                                    E)                                 F)

               2        3      1                    3      1      2                     3    2       1

         0     1         2      3              0    1       2      3              0     1     2      3

Figure 14.11       The six combinations of the relative order that three consecutive directory entries could
                   be unallocated. Only the 1-3-2 and 2-3-1 sequences have the same final state.

   If we look at the final states of the six scenarios, only (B) and (D) are the same. In
both of these scenarios, we can still determine that the middle file was the last to be
deleted. We will see an example of this analysis procedure in the following scenario
section.

Deleted file names are easy to locate in ExtX, and the Ext3 inode number is not cleared
by Linux, so you might also be able to obtain temporal information about when the file
name was deleted. In Linux, the directory entry structure will remain in the unallocated
state until a new file is created whose name is the same length or smaller. Therefore, a file
with a short name might not have its directory entry overwritten as quickly as a file
whose name is long. Other OSes could use different allocation methods or even compact

the directories to make them smaller. The fsck tool in Linux can repackage directories to
make them smaller and remove the unused space.
   When a deleted file name is found, care must be taken when analyzing it. If the file’s
inode has been reallocated, the metadata is no longer relevant to the deleted name. There
is no easy method for determining if an inode has been reallocated since the file name
was deleted. One method is to use the file type value in the directory entry and compare
it with the type in the inode. If the directory entry type is for a directory and the inode
has a regular file, it is likely that the inode has been reallocated. This is why the fls out-
put in TSK gives both the directory entry and inode types.
   It could be possible for data to be hidden in directory entry structures. The space
between the last directory entry and the end of the block is unused and could contain
data. This is especially true when the hash trees are used because the first block contains
a small amount of administrative data, and the rest is unused. This is a dangerous hiding
technique, though, because the OS could overwrite it when a new file name is created.

To show how we can use the low-level details of ExtX directory entries, two example sce-
narios are given in this section. The first identifies the original location of a file, and the
second identifies a possible order in which files were deleted.

Source of a Moved File
While investigating a Linux system that has been compromised, we come across a file
called snifferlog-1.dat that contains network packets. The other files in the directory
have names similar to log-001.dat and do not contain network data. The listing is
shown here:

# fls -f linux-ext3 ext3-8.dd 1840555
r/r 1840556:    log-001.dat
r/r 1840560:    log-002.dat
r/r 1840566:    log-003.dat
r/r 1840569:    log-004.dat
r/r 32579:      snifferlog-1.dat
r/r 1840579:    log-005.dat
r/r 1840585:    log-006.dat

   To find the executable that could have created this file, we search for the full path of
the file. Executable files sometimes contain the names of the files that they open, but our
search is unsuccessful. It is trivial for an executable to obfuscate the names of the files

that it opens. We are about to move on to another part of the system when we notice the
odd sequence of inode addresses in the listing.
   The parent directory and the log files all have inode addresses around 1,840,500, but
the snifferlog-1.dat file has an address of 32,579. We know from the allocation strat-
egy of Linux that files are typically allocated an inode in the same block group as the
parent directory. Therefore, snifferlog-1.dat was either originally allocated to a differ-
ent parent directory and moved to its current location, or it was created in the current
directory but the block group was full.
   We look at the fsstat output and determine that the log directory is in block group
113, which has 99% of its inodes and 48% of its blocks free. Therefore, it is unlikely that
it was full when the file was created unless there were a lot of files that were deleted
since then.

Group: 113:
  Inode Range: 1840545 - 1856832
  Block Range: 3702784 - 3735551
  Free Inodes: 16271 (99%)
  Free Blocks: 15728 (48%)

  We now investigate the sniffer log inode, which is 32,579, in more detail and deter-
mine that it belongs to block group 2.

Group: 2:
  Inode Range: 32577 - 48864
  Block Range: 65536 - 98303
  Free Inodes: 16268 (99%)
  Free Blocks: 0 (0%)

    One theory is that it was created in a directory in block group 2 and moved to the
directory in block group 113. Therefore, we will look for directories in block group 2
that could have been the parent directory for snifferlog-1.dat. We will do this with the
ils tool in TSK. ils lists details about inodes in a given range, and we will supply the
range of the block group and filter out all non-directory entries. The -m flag is given so
that the mode will be converted to a human readable format, and the -a flag is given to
list only allocated inode entries. We also use grep to filter out all entries that are not
directories (it is using the fifth column).

# ils -f linux-ext3 -m -a ext3-8.dd 32577-48864 | grep “|d”
<ext3-8.dd-alive-32577>|0|32577|16893|drwxrwxr-x|4|500|500|0|4096|
<ext3-8.dd-alive-32655>|0|32655|16893|drwxrwxr-x|2|500|500|0|4096|
<ext3-8.dd-alive-32660>|0|32660|16877|drwxr-xr-x|2|500|500|0|4096|

   The first column is a fake name for each entry where it is “dead” if the entry is unallo-
cated and “alive” if the entry is allocated. The third column is the inode address. This
output is normally processed using the mactime tool to make timelines, so it is not
user friendly.
   We view the three allocated directories using fls. The directory at inode 32577 is the
most promising.

# fls -f linux-ext3 ext3-8.dd 32577
r/r 32578:   only_live_twice.mp3
r/r 32582:   goldfinger.mp3
r/r 32580:   lic_to_kill.mp3
r/r 32581:   diamonds_forever.mp3

    This might look like an innocent directory of James Bond MP3 files, but notice that
the inode numbers and what we know about inode and directory entry allocation.
Inodes are allocated on a first-available basis in the block group. The inode address of
our sniffer log was 32,579, which could have been allocated in between only_live_
twice.mp3 and lic_to_kill.mp3. Also notice that goldfinger.mp3 has a larger inode than
the other files, and it is in the middle of the directory. Further, the name goldfinger.mp3
is 14 characters long, and the name snifferlog-1.dat is 16 characters long, which
means that they can use the same sized directory entry.
    When we examine each of these files, we notice that only_live_twice.mp3 is
an executable, and the other files are network sniffer logs in the same format as
snifferlog-1.dat. Also the network packets in only_live_twice.mp3 have timestamps
before the packets in snifferlog-1.dat, and the timestamps in lic_to_kill.mp3 are
after the snifferlog-1.dat times.
    Using this information, our theory is that snifferlog-1.dat file was created after the
only_live_twice.mp3 file, and then lic_to_kill.mp3 was created. Some time after the
diamonds_forever.mp3 file was created, the snifferlog-1.dat file was moved to the
directory in block group 113. After it was moved, the goldfinger.mp3 file was created,
and it overwrote the directory entry and took the next available inode. The M-time and
C-time of the inode 32577 directory are the same as those for the goldfinger.mp3 file,
which are both after the times for the snifferlog-1.dat file. We can see this relationship
in Figure 14.12 where the directory entry in group 113 points to the inode in block
group 2. We still do not know how the file was moved and if it always had that name or if
it had an MP3 name. Analyzing the executable may shed light on those answers.
    In this scenario, we have tied a file back to its original directory using its inode
address. If the file were moved within the same block group or to a different file system,
then this technique would not work. But it does illustrate how knowing the allocation
algorithms can help when these minor details are useful.

       Block Group 2

                                                                                 Inode 32,577
             Directory Contents
                                                                                 Inode 32,578
     only_live_twice.mp3        32,578
                                                                                 Inode 32,579
     goldfinger.mp3             32,582
                                                                                 Inode 32,580
     lic_to_kill.mp3                 32,580
                                                                                 Inode 32,581
     diamonds_forever.mp3            32,581
                                                                                 Inode 32,582
                                                                                 Inode 32,583

       Block Group 113

                                                                                Inode 1,840,556
             Directory Contents
                                                                                       ...
     log-001.dat          1,840,556
                                                                                Inode 1,840,560
     log-002.dat              1,840,560
                                                                                       ...
     log-003.dat              1,840,566
                                                                                Inode 1,840,566
     log-004.dat              1,840,569
                                                                                       ...
     snifferlog-1.dat         32,579
                                                                                Inode 1,840,569
     log-005.dat              1,840,579
                                                                                       ...
     log-006.dat              1,840,585
                                                                                Inode 1,840,579

Figure 14.12     Scenario where the snifferlog-1.dat file was moved from a directory in block group 2.

File Deletion Order
While investigating a Linux system, we find a directory named /usr/local/.oops/. This
is not typical in a Linux system, and we look at its contents. It contains eight deleted file
names, and all of the corresponding inodes have been reallocated to new files, so file
recovery will not be trivial. We are curious about how the files were deleted, though, and
we parse the directory entries to determine the values given in Table 14.3. The names are
listed in the order in which they exist in the directory.

Table 14.3     Values in unallocated directory entry structures for scenario.

Byte Location           Name                    Record Length          Needed Length

12                      ..                      1,012                  12

24                      config.dat              20                     20

44                      readme.txt              104                    20

                                                                                                  continues

Table 14.3   Values in unallocated directory entry structures for scenario (Continued).

Byte Location         Name                   Record Length          Needed Length

64                    allfiles.tar           20                     20

84                    random.dat             64                     20

104                   mytools.zip            44                     20

124                   delete-files.sh        24                     24

148                   sniffer                876                    16

164                   passwords.txt          860                    860

   We can make some general observations from this output. If the record length of an
unallocated directory entry is the actual size that it needs (based on the length of its
name), the next directory entry was deleted after it was. For example, config.dat was
deleted before readme.txt was deleted because if readme.txt was deleted before
config.dat, the length of the config.dat file would have been increased by 20 to cover
up readme.txt. Therefore, we know that config.dat was deleted before readme.txt,
allfiles.tar was deleted before random.dat, and delete-files.sh was deleted
before sniffer.
   We also can observe that mytools.zip was deleted after delete-files.sh but before
sniffer was deleted. We know this because the length of mytools.zip was increased to
44 to account for delete-files-sh being deleted. If sniffer had been deleted before
mytools.zip, the length of mytools.zip would have been increased to account for it. We
also can see that passwords.txt was deleted before sniffer was and that random.dat was
deleted after mytools.zip. We also see that readme.txt was deleted before sniffer
because the record length for readme.txt points to sniffer.
   If we spend some more time determining the relative order of these deletions, we con-
clude that the files may have been deleted in alphabetical order. We do not know the
order in which allfiles.tar, config.dat, and delete-files.sh were deleted, but we do
know they were before the other files and they are the first three files when the names are
sorted. Therefore, these files might have been deleted when they were shown in a win-
dow sorted by name or by a command, such as rm *. The rm tool deletes files, and my
tests show that the command deletes files in alphabetical order. With these results, it is
likely that the files were not individually deleted one by one and that maybe a script was
used or a file manager window. Note that the results are more difficult to interpret when
there were file creations in between the file deletions.

Ext3 has only one application-level feature, which is the file system journal. Ext2 does
not have the journal, and other application category features, such as quotas, are imple-
mented with normal user files.

Ext3 includes a file system journal, which was discussed in Chapter 8. A file system jour-
nal records updates to the file system so that the file system can be recovered more
quickly after a crash. This section describes the Ext3 journal and how to analyze it.

Overview
The Ext3 journal typically uses inode 8 although its location is specified in the
superblock and can exist anywhere. The journal is considered a compatible file system
feature, and the corresponding value in the superblock is set when it is used. The
superblock also has an incompatible feature for a journal device. When this is set, the file
system is using an external journal and not saving the data to a local file. The location of
the device is given in the superblock.
    The journal records what block updates will occur, and after the update it identifies
that the update is finished. There are two modes within which the journal can operate.
In one mode, only metadata updates are recorded in the journal, and in the other mode,
all updates, including data blocks, are recorded in the journal. The first version of the
journal used the latter approach, but the current version gives an option and by default
records only the metadata changes.
    Journaling in Ext3 is done at a block level, which means that if one bit of one inode is
updated, the entire file system block in which the inode is located will be saved to the
journal. This is in comparison to a record level approach that would save only the inode
data and not the full block. The first block in the journal is for its superblock and con-
tains general information. The other blocks are used for the journal entries, and the
journal wraps around to the start when it reaches the end. The size of a journal block
should be the same size as a file system block.
    Updates are done in transactions, and each transaction has a sequence number. Blocks
in the journal contain either transaction administrative data or file system update data.
Each transaction starts with a descriptor block that contains the transaction sequence
number and a list of what file system blocks are being updated. Following the descriptor
block are the updated blocks that were described in the descriptor. When the updates
have been written to disk, a commit block exists with the same sequence number. The

descriptor for a new transaction may exist after the commit block. We can see an exam-
ple of this in Figure 14.13.

                                                              File System
               Journal                                         Metadata
                Super                                            Blocks
                                                Descriptor                     Commit
                Block                         Sequence: 840                 Sequence: 840

                 Descriptor     File System      Commit
               Sequence: 839     Metadata     Sequence: 839
                                   Blocks

Figure 14.13    An Ext3 journal with two transactions.

   The superblock identifies where the first descriptor block is located and its sequence
number. If a descriptor block becomes full, a new one is allocated with the same
sequence number for the remaining entries. A file system block that was added to the
journal can be revoked so that the change is not applied during a recovery. This is done
using a revoke block, which contains a sequence number and a list of blocks that were
revoked. During recovery, any block that is listed in the revoke block and whose sequence
number is less than the sequence number of the revoke block, will not be restored.
   The data structures for the journal and a sample journal are given in Chapter 15.
The jls tool in TSK will list the contents of a journal. Here is the output from a file
system image:

# jls –f linux-ext3 /dev/hdb2
JBlk    Descriptrion
0:      Superblock (seq: 0)
1:      Allocated Descriptor Block (seq: 295)
2:      Allocated FS Block 4
3:      Allocated FS Block 2
4:      Allocated FS Block 14
5:      Allocated FS Block 5
6:      Allocated FS Block 163
7:      Allocated FS Block 3

8:      Allocated Commit Block (seq: 295)
9:      Unallocated FS Block Unknown
[REMOVED]

   This output shows us the superblock, descriptor, and commit blocks. Transaction 295
starts in journal block 1 and ends in block 8. We also see the file system blocks to which
each journal block corresponds. We can extract the journal blocks from the journal using
the jcat tool in TSK.

Analysis Techniques
We analyze a file system journal in order to obtain additional information about recent
events. To do this, we simply locate the log using the address given in the file system
superblock and process the journal superblock. This tells us where the first valid transac-
tion exists. We then process the descriptor block to determine which file system blocks
are being updated in this transaction.
   If we are looking for a specific block, we can examine all the descriptor blocks for the
one that describes the block in question. If we are looking for a specific keyword or
value, we can search the entire file for it and then backtrack to the group descriptor
where we can learn from what block it comes. We might be able to recover files if we can
find a block from an inode table that has the block pointers before an inode was deleted.
We also may be able to get time information from the journal if we can find a block with
an inode or other file system data structure that contains a temporal value.

Analysis Considerations
The journal can be useful for investigations that involve recent events. As time pro-
gresses, the log cycles and the data from an incident are overwritten. Linux starts the
journal from the start every time the file system is mounted.
   It can be difficult to intelligently analyze the unused journal blocks. To identify where
a given journal block belongs in the file system; its descriptor block must be located. In
some cases, you can go backwards until you find one, but sometimes the descriptor
might have been overwritten by a later transaction.
   By default, only metadata data is logged, so you cannot recover deleted file content.
The superblock and directory contents will be recorded, though, so you could theoreti-
cally monitor when files were added and deleted by using the superblock values, and you
can watch the file names in the directories. The amount of benefit from the journal will
greatly depend on how much system activity occurred between the incident and the
investigation.

In this scenario, we are investigating a Linux system that has been compromised. It was
imaged on the same day as the compromise, so there could be information in the journal
from the compromise. As part of the investigation, we find a directory with various
attack tools. We also find a deleted file named passwords.txt. This interests us, and we
want to recover the file but do not want to sift through the strings output of the block
group. Therefore, we turn to the journal.
   We know that the deleted file allocated inode 488,650, which is located in block group
30. The first inode in the block group is 488,641, the inode table starts in block 983,044,
and each block is 4,096 bytes. Therefore, our inode of interest is entry 10 of the group’s
inode table and is in the first block of the table.
   We run jls on the journal and look for an entry for file system block 983,044.

# jls –f linux-ext3 ext3-8.dd 8
[REMOVED]
2293:    Unallocated Descriptor Block (seq: 136723)
2294:    Unallocated FS Block 983041
2295:    Unallocated FS Block 1
2296:    Unallocated FS Block 0
2297:    Unallocated FS Block 983044
2298:    Unallocated FS Block 983568
2299:    Unallocated FS Block 983040
2300:    Unallocated Commit Block (seq: 136723)
[REMOVED]

   There are several references to block 983,044, and we analyze each of them by com-
paring what their differences are. The previous entries are for the creation of a file at
inode 488,650. We see the inode table being updated, as well as the superblock, group
descriptors, parent directory, and block bitmap. We extract the inode table from journal
block 2297 and use dd to skip ahead to the tenth inode in the table:

# jcat -f linux-ext3 ext3-8.dd 8 2297 | dd bs=128 skip=9 count=1 | xxd
0000000: a481 0000 041f 0000 8880 3741 3780 3741 ..... ....7A7.7A
0000016: 3780 3741 0000 0000 0000 0100 1000 0000 7.7A............
0000032: 0000 0000 0000 0000 1102 0f00 1202 0f00 ................
0000048: 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 ................
[REMOVED]

   This is the data that was once inode 488,650; its size is given in bytes 4 to 7, and it is
7,940 bytes (0x1f04). The two direct block pointers are given in bytes 40 to 43 and 44 to

47. We see that it allocated blocks 983,569 and 983,570. When we view the contents of
those blocks, we find a list of passwords for various systems that our attacker had
compromised.
   In this scenario, the journal allowed us to find a previous copy of an inode. The file
was recently created, and its inode was still in the journal. We are not 100% sure that the
inode in the journal is the last valid data for the file, but the contents matched the name.

Now that we have seen each individual component of a file and directory, we will put all
the information together with some examples. We will allocate and then delete the
/dir1/file1.dat file. The file size is 6,000 bytes, and the block size of the Ext3 file system
is 1,024 bytes.

The high-level process for creating the /dir1/file1.dat file is to locate the dir1 direc-
tory, create a directory entry, allocate an inode, and then allocate blocks for the file con-
tent. The exact ordering of allocating the different data structures may vary by OS, and
the order presented here may not reflect an actual system.

1. We read the superblock data structure, which is 1,024 bytes in size and is located
   1,024 bytes into the file system. From processing this, we learn that the block and
   fragment sizes are 1,024 bytes. Each block group has 8,192 blocks and 2,016 inodes.
   There are no reserved blocks before the start of the first block group.
2. We read the group descriptor table, which is located in blocks 2 and 3 of the file sys-
   tem. This tells us the layout of each block group.
3. We need to locate the dir1 directory in the root directory, so we process inode 2.
   Using the number of inodes per group, we determine that inode 2 is in block group
   0. We use the group descriptor table entry for group 0 and determine that the inode
   table starts in block 6.
4. We read the inode table from block 6 and process the second entry. The inode for
   inode 2 shows that the directory entry structures for the root directory are located in
   block 258.
5. We read the root directory contents from block 258 and process the contents as a list
   of directory entries. The first two entries are for ‘.’ and ‘..’. We advance ahead using the
   reported record length of each entry (we don’t care about deleted files) and find the

    entry whose name is dir1. It has an inode value of 5,033. The A-time of the root
    directory is updated to reflect the directory being opened.
6. We determine where inode 5,033 is located by dividing it by the number of inodes
    per group and determine that it is in block group 2. Using the group descriptor entry
    for group 2, we determine that its inode table starts in block 16,390.
7. We read the inode table from block 16,390 and process entry 1,001, which is the rela-
    tive location of inode 5,033. The inode contents show us that the contents of dir1 are
    located in block 18,431.
8. We read the dir1 contents from block 18,431 and process the contents as a list of
    directory entries. We are looking for unused space in the directory. The file1.dat
    name is eight characters long, so the directory entry requires 16 bytes. The name is
    added between two allocated names, and the M-and C-times of the directory are
    updated. The directory content changes are recorded in the journal.
9. We need to allocate an inode for the file, and it will be allocated in the same group as
    the parent, which is block group 2. We locate the inode bitmap for group 2 in block
    16,386 using the group descriptor. We use a first available search and identify that
    inode 5,110 is not allocated. Its corresponding bit in the bitmap is set to 1, the free
    inode count in the group descriptor table is decremented, and the free inode count
    in the superblock is decremented. The inode address is added to the file1.dat direc-
    tory entry. The bitmap, group descriptor, and superblock changes are recorded in
    the journal.
10. We fill in the contents of inode 5,110 by locating it in the group 2 inode table and ini-
    tializing the inode values. The time values are set to the current time, and the link
    value is set to 1 to correspond to the directory entry link. The inode table changes are
    recorded in the journal.
11. We need to allocate six blocks to store the file content, so we process the block
    bitmap, which is located in block 16,385. We use a first-available algorithm to search
    block group 2 for available blocks and find blocks 20,002 to 20,003 and 20,114, to
    20,117. The bit for each of these blocks is set and the addresses are added to the direct
    pointers in inode 5,110. The free block counts in the group descriptor, and the
    superblock is also updated. The modified and changed times in the inode are
    updated to reflect the changes. The inode, group descriptor, superblock and bitmap
    changes are recorded in the journal.
12. The file content of file1.dat is written to the allocated blocks.

  The final state of the system can be found in Figure 14.14.

                                Block Group 0
          Super
          Block                            Inode Table
                                                                                      Root Directory
                                                                                 Len      Name        Inode
                                 2             Block: 258
                                                                                 12       ..            2
          Block 1
                                                                     Journal     16       dir123      2,109
                                 8                                  Contents     12       dir1        5,033
                                           Blocks 6 - 257
          Group
         Descriptor                                                                       Block 258
           Table
     0
     1
     2                          Block Group 2
                                                  Inode Table                         'dir1' contents
         Blocks 2 - 3
                                                                                 Len      Name        Inode
                                  5,033           Block: 18,431                  12       ..            2
                                                                                 16       12.jpg      5,086
                                  5,110           Block: 20,002..                16       file1.dat   5,110
                                               Blocks 16,390 - 16,641            16       14.jpg      5,088
                                                                                         Block 18,431
                                      Block          Inode
                                     Bitmap          Bitmap                      file1.dat contents
                                     ...1...          ...1..

                                      Block           Block             Blocks 20,002-20,003, 20,114-20,117
                                     16,385          16,386

Figure 14.14      Final state after adding the ‘dir1/file1.dat’ file.

We will now delete the /dir1/file1.dat file. As mentioned in the previous section, the
order of unallocating the data structures might vary by OS, and the order presented here
may not be the same as an actual OS.

1. We read the superblock data structure, which is 1,024 bytes in size and is located
   1,024 bytes into the file system. From processing this, we learn that the block and

    fragment sizes are 1,024 bytes. Each block group has 8,192 blocks and 2,016 inodes.
    There are no reserved blocks before the start of the first block group.
2. We read the group descriptor table, which is located in blocks 2 and 3 of the file
    system. This tells us the layout of each block group.
3. We need to locate the dir1 directory in the root directory, so we process inode 2.
    Using the number of inodes per group, we determine that inode 2 is in block group
    0. We use the group descriptor table entry for group 0 and determine that the inode
    table starts in block 6.
4. We read the inode table from block 6 and process the second entry. The inode for
    inode 2 shows that the directory entry structures for the root directory are located in
    block 258.
5. We read the root directory contents from block 258 and process the contents as a list
    of directory entries. The first two entries are for ‘.’ and ‘..’. We advance ahead using the
    reported record length of each entry (we don’t care about deleted files) and find the
    entry whose name is dir1. It has an inode value of 5,033. The A-time of the root
    directory is updated to reflect the directory being opened.
6. We determine where inode 5,033 is located by dividing it by the number of inodes
    per group and determine that it is in block group 2. Using the group descriptor entry
    for group 2, we determine that its inode table starts in block 16,390.
7. We read the inode table for group 2, which is in block 16,390 and process entry 1,001,
    which is the relative location of inode 5,033. The inode contents show us that the
    contents of dir1 are located in block 18,431.
8. We read the dir1 contents from block 18,431 and process the contents as a list of
    directory entries. We are looking for an entry for the ‘file1.dat’ file. We find its entry
    and observe that it has allocated inode 5,110. The directory entry is unallocated by
    adding its record length to the record length field in the previous directory entry,
    which belongs to the 12.jpg file. The M-, A-, and C-times are updated as a result of
    this process. The changes are recorded in the journal.
9. We process the contents of inode 5,110 from the group 2 inode table and decrement
    the link count by one to account for the name being deleted. The link count becomes
    0, which means that the inode must be deallocated. To deallocate the inode, the cor-
    responding bit in the inode bitmap is set to 0, and we update the free inode counts in
    the group descriptor and superblock. The changes are recorded in the journal.
10. We also need to deallocate the six blocks that the file has allocated. For each block,
    the corresponding bit in the block bitmap is set to 0, and the block pointer in the
    inode is cleared. The file size is decremented each time a block is deallocated, and it
    eventually reaches 0. The M-time, C-time, and D-times are updated to reflect the
    inode changes. The free block counts are updated in the group descriptor and
    superblock. The changes are added to the journal.

  The final state of the file system can be seen in Figure 14.15. The bolded lines and val-
ues represent the changes to the file system because of the deletion.

                                Block Group 0
          Super
          Block                             Inode Table
                                                                                         Root Directory
                                                                                    Len      Name         Inode
                                  2             Block: 258
                                                                                    12       ..            2
          Block 1
                                                                      Journal       16       dir123       2,109
                                  8                                  Contents       12       dir1         5,033
                                            Blocks 6 - 257
          Group
         Descriptor                                                                          Block 258
           Table
     0
     1
     2                          Block Group 2
                                                   Inode Table                           'dir1' contents
         Blocks 2 - 3
                                                                                    Len      Name         Inode
                                  5,033            Block: 18,431                    12       ..             2
                                                                                    32       12.jpg       5,086
                                  5,110               Block: 0                      16       file1.dat    5,110
                                                Blocks 16,390 - 16,641              16       14.jpg       5,088
                                                                                            Block 18,431
                                       Block          Inode
                                      Bitmap          Bitmap                        file1.dat contents
                                      ...0...          ...0..

                                       Block           Block               Blocks 20,002-20,003, 20,114-20,117
                                      16,385          16,386

Figure 14.15      Final state after deleting the ‘/dir1/file1.dat’ file.

This section looks at ExtX deleted file recovery and file system consistency checks. Both
of these topics are outside the scope of a specific data category.

With standard Linux systems, recovering files from Ext3 is not easy, but it can be from
Ext2. With Ext2, the inode values are not wiped when the file is deleted, so the block
pointers will still exist. The time values also are updated when the file is deleted so you
will know when the deletion occurred. The link between the directory entry and the
inode is wiped, though, so you will have to recover files by searching the unallocated
inode entries. When viewing the contents of a deleted Ext2 file, keep in mind that indi-
rect block pointers could have been reallocated before the inode entry was, so the block
no longer contains block addresses.
   With Ext3, the pointer between the file name and inode still exists, but the block
pointers are wiped. To recover the data, you will need to use data carving techniques. You
can use the group information to your advantage when carving out a specific file because
you can restrict yourself to the blocks in that group. Most OSes will allocate blocks in the
same group as the inode, and therefore you can focus on a smaller area. The OS could
have allocated blocks elsewhere, though, and a full carving might need to occur.
   When carving data, keep in mind that the indirect block pointers may exist in the
middle of the data. Even in the ideal situation where consecutive blocks were allocated
for the deleted file, the thirteenth block will be the first indirect block pointer. You can
calculate when the next indirect block pointer will be based on the block size. For a
deleted file, they will be all zeros, and you should remove these from a carved file.
   Finally, with an Ext3 file system, you may want to look in the journal for an older
copy of the inode if the file was recently deleted. The journal may contain a copy of
the inode’s block when the inode had all its block pointers and a copy of the indirect
block pointers.

Consistency checks are used in an investigation to find invalid values in file system data
structures that could be used to hide data, and it looks at unused areas to identify if they
are being used to hide data. We will start in the file system category and examine the
superblock. Most of the 1,024 bytes in the superblock are not used and could be used to
hide data. The group descriptors are more efficient with their storage, and the backup
copies of the group descriptors and superblocks could be used to detect any changes that
were manually performed by the perpetrator.
   The number of bits in a block typically defines the size of block groups, and the block
bitmap will typically be fully used. On the other hand, the last bytes of the inode bitmap
might not be fully used because there are typically fewer inodes per group than there are
blocks per group, so the block allocated to the inode bitmap may not be fully used. The
final block group may have unused bits in the block bitmap.

                                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Every allocated block must have one and only one allocated inode entry pointing to it
unless it is one of the administrative blocks that stores the group descriptor table, inode
table, block bitmap, inode bitmap, or superblock.
    Most of the data in each inode are used, and not much data could be hidden in each,
although there could be unused bytes at the end of each inode table. All blocks that an
allocated inode entry has in its block pointers also must be allocated. Inodes for special
file types may not need to allocate blocks and therefore they should not have any allo-
cated to them. The first 10 inodes are reserved, but many are not used. These could be
used to hide data [grugq 2002]. The unused space in extended attributes also could be
used to hide data.
    With the exception of the reserved and orphan inodes, all allocated inode entries
should have a file name pointing to them. Orphan files should be listed in the
superblock. The number of names should be equal to the link count. If you acquired the
system while it was running, there could be orphan files for those that were open by run-
ning processes. All allocated file names must point to an allocated inode entry. The space
at the end of a directory could be used to hide data.

SUMMARY
Ext2 and Ext3 are two of the dominant Linux file systems and can be found in many
servers and some desktop systems. The file system uses simple data structures, but it is
made slightly more complex because everything is divided into block groups. File recov-
ery is very difficult with Ext3 because all block pointers are cleared when a file is deleted.
   Perhaps the most challenging problem with ExtX is how it evolves. FAT has had a few
evolutions, and NTFS has had changes with each major release of Windows, but there
are several “experimental” variations of ExtX that any user can install or enable. In this
chapter, I have outlined the technology as it currently exists. At any time, new features
can be added to ExtX, but that does not mean that every instance of ExtX will have all
these features. The kernel and system configuration of the suspect system should be
investigated to identify what features were enabled.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Card, Rémy, Theodore Ts’o, and Stephen Tweedie. “Design and Implementation of
the Second Extended Filesystem.” In Proceedings of the First Dutch International
Symposium on Linux, ed. Frank B. Brokken et al, Amsterdam, December 1994.
http://web.mit.edu/tytso/www/linux/ext2intro.html.

Carrier, Brian. “EXT3FS Keyword Search Test #1.” Digital Forensic Tool Testing,
November 2003. http://dftt.sourceforge.net.
Crane, Aaron. “Linux Ext2fs Undeletion mini-HOWTO.” The Linux Documentation
Project, February 1999. http://en.tldp.org/HOWTO/Ext2fs-Undeletion.html.
Dubeau, Louis-Dominique. “Analysis of the Ext2fs Structure.” The Operating System
Resource Center, 1994. http://www.nondot.org/sabre/os/files/FileSystems/ext2fs/.
Red Hat, Inc. Ext3 Users Mailing List, n.d. https://listman.redhat.com/mailman/
listinfo/ext3-users/.

Heavner, Scott D. Linux Disk Editor, n.d. http://lde.sourceforge.net/.
Garfinkel, Simson, Gene Spafford, and Alan Schwartz. Practical Unix and Internet
Security. 3rd ed. Sebastopol: O’Reilly, 2003.
Gleditsch, Arne Georg, and Per Kristian Gjermshus. Linux Source Code, n.d.
http://lxr.linux.no/source/.

grugq. “Defeating Forensic Analysis on Unix.” Phrack, Issue 15, July 28, 2002.
http://www.phrack.org/show.php?p=59&a=6.

Honeynet Project. “The Forensic Challenge.” January 15, 2001.
http://www.honeynet.org/challenge/index.html.

McKusick, Marshall, Keith Bostic, Michael Karels, and John Quarterman. The Design and
Implementation of the 4.4 BSD Operating System. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1996.
Phillips, Daniel. “A Directory Index for Ext2.” Proceedings of the Usenix Fifth Annual
Linux Showcase and Conference, 2001.
Poirier, Dave. “Second Extended File System: Internal Layout.” 2002.
http://www.nongnu.org/ext2-doc/.

Ts’o, Theodore. “E2fsprogs.” Sourceforge, n.d. http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net/.
Ts’o, Theodore, and Stephen Tweedie. “Planned Extensions to the Linux Ext2/Ext3
Filesystem.” Proceedings of the 2002 Usenix Technical Conference FREENIX Track, 2002.
Tweedie, Stephen. “EXT3, Journaling Filesystem.” Sourceforge, July 20, 2000.
http://olstrans.sourceforge.net/release/OLS2000-ext3/OLS2000-ext3.html.

