    UFS1 and UFS2
  Concepts and Analysis
                            16
The Unix File System (UFS) comes in several variations and can be found in many types
of UNIX systems, including FreeBSD, HP-UX, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Apple OS X, and Sun
Solaris. Many OSes have modified one or more data structures over the years to suit their
needs, but they all have the same concepts. Currently, the two major variations are UFS1
and UFS2. UFS2 supports larger disks and larger time stamps. I will use the term UFS to
refer to both file systems. An investigator might encounter a UFS file system when inves-
tigating a Unix system, typically a server. Ext2 and Ext3 are based on UFS, and because
they were already discussed in detail, this chapter will be briefer and assume that you
understand the concepts from Chapter 14, “Ext2 and Ext3 Concepts and Analysis.” This
chapter covers the concepts and analysis techniques of a UFS file system, and Chapter 17,
“UFS1 and UFS2 Data Structures,” covers the data structures. The next chapter can be
read in parallel with this chapter or in series.

INTRODUCTION
UFS is related to the Berkeley Fast File System (FFS) and was designed to be fast and reli-
able. Copies of important data structures are stored throughout the file system, and data
are localized so that the hard disk heads do not need to travel much when reading a file.
A UFS is organized into sections, called cylinder groups, and the size of each group is
based on the geometry of the hard disk. These are similar to the ExtX block groups.
   UFS has a superblock data structure in the beginning of the file system that contains
the basic layout information. The content of each file is saved to a block, which is a

group of consecutive sectors. Blocks also can be broken up into fragments, which are
used to store the final bytes of a file instead of allocating a full block. The metadata for
each file and directory is stored in an inode data structure. The names of files are stored
in directory entry structures, which are located in the blocks allocated to directories.
Directory entry structures are basic data structures that contain the name of the file and
a pointer to the file’s inode entry. The relationship between these data structures can be
seen in Figure 16.1. Each cylinder group contains its own inode table, bitmaps for the
allocation status of fragments, and copies of the superblock.

          Directory Entries
                                            Inodes                     Content Blocks
               file1.txt                                               and Fragments
                                           [Metadata]

               file10.txt                  [Metadata]

Figure 16.1   Relationship between UFS directory entries, inodes, and data blocks that are used to store
              file content.

   All variants of UFS have the basic concepts that I just described, and it should be
obvious that they are the same concepts that we saw for ExtX. The differences among the
UFS-based variants are in how each of the data structures is organized and what addi-
tional features are included. There are fewer experimental features in UFS than in ExtX
that affect the on-disk data.
   The UFS1 file system is the default file system of OpenBSD and Solaris. It used to be
the default file system of FreeBSD and NetBSD until FreeBSD 5.0 and NetBSD 2.0
included UFS2. UFS2 adds support for larger files and disks and other advanced features.
At the time of this writing, only FreeBSD and NetBSD support UFS2. Apple OS X and
Linux also support UFS1, but it is not their default file system. Solaris also has a version
of UFS to support large files and disks. Note that Sun has not published the data struc-
tures for its version of UFS, but tools developed using the essential data in the data struc-
tures published by FreeBSD work on a Solaris file system. The non-essential data may be
different, though.
   In the rest of this chapter, we will examine the five-category data model with respect
to the variants of UFS. Each section will discuss the basic properties of the category and
the differences in each variant. I will refer to FreeBSD, NetBSD, and OpenBSD as
BSD systems.

                                                                  FILE SYSTEM CATEGORY

FILE SYSTEM CATEGORY
The file system category of data includes the general layout and size information of the
file system. This section covers where the data are located in UFS and how they can
be analyzed.

OVERVIEW
UFS has three types of data structures that store the file system category of data: the
superblock, the cylinder group summary, and the group descriptor. The superblock is
located in the beginning of the file system and contains the basic size and configuration
information. The superblock references an area of the file system called the cylinder
group summary area, which gives a summary of the cylinder group usage. Each cylinder
group has a group descriptor data structure that provides details the group. We will now
examine each of these data structures in more detail.

Superblock
The UFS superblock contains basic information, such as the size of each fragment and
the number of fragments in each block. It is here that we will also learn how big each
cylinder group is and where the various data structures are inside each group. With these
values, we can determine the layout of the file system. The superblock also might contain
a volume label and the time that the file system was last mounted. The UFS superblock
plays the same role as the superblock in ExtX, but the layout and non-essential data
are different.
   The UFS superblock is located somewhere in the start of the file system. With remov-
able media, it could start in the first sector. A UFS1 superblock is typically located 8 KB
from the start of the file system, and a UFS2 superblock is typically located 64 KB from
the start. It is also possible for the UFS2 superblock to exist at 256 KB from the start of
the file system, but this is not the default. Backup copies of the superblock can be found
in each of the cylinder groups.
   UFS1 and UFS2 use slightly different data structures, but both are over 1 KB in size
and contain nearly 100 fields. The difference between the UFS1 and UFS2 superblocks is
that the UFS2 version includes 64-bit versions of the size and date fields, which were
added to the end of the data structure. The unused 32-bit fields are ignored and
not reused.
   General bookkeeping information is also stored in the superblock, such as the total
number of free inodes, fragments, and blocks. From the superblock, we can find the
location of the cylinder group summary area. This area contains a table with an entry for

each cylinder group and the entry documents the number of free blocks, fragments,
and inodes. As we will later see, this information also exists in the group descriptor of
each group.
   The superblock contains disk geometry information that was used to most efficiently
organize and optimize a file system. It also contains many variations of a single value so
that the OS does not have to compute the variation every time. For example, the size of a
block is given in both bytes and in fragments. Further, the bitwise mask and shift values
are also given so that a byte address can be converted to its block address and vice versa.
Theoretically, only one of these values needs to exist and the others can be calculated.
Many of the fields are non-essential, and in this section I will focus on the essential data
and the non-essential data that could contain evidence.
   The details of the data structures can be found in Chapter 17. Both UFS1 and UFS2
superblocks are given with an example file system image.

Cylinder Group Descriptor
As previously stated, the file system is organized into cylinder groups. All the groups,
except for maybe the last, are the same size, and each contains a group descriptor data
structure that describes the group. The first group starts at the beginning of the file sys-
tem, and the number of fragments in each group is given in the superblock. In addition
to the group descriptor, each group also contains an inode table and a backup copy of
the superblock.
   The UFS group descriptor is much larger than its ExtX counter part, although much
of it is non-essential data. The group descriptor is allocated a full block and has a combi-
nation of standard fields and a wide-open area that can be used for various tables. The
standard fields provide bookkeeping information and describe how the latter part of the
block is organized. Bookkeeping information exists to make the allocation of files more
efficient, such as the location of the last allocated block, fragment, and inode. Summary
information about the number of free blocks, fragments, and inodes is also given, but it
should be the same as the values in the cylinder group summary area. The group
descriptor also contains the time of the last write to the group.
   The latter part of the group descriptor contains bitmaps for the inodes, blocks, and
fragments in the group. It also contains tables that help find consecutive fragments and
blocks of a given size. The starting location of each of these data structures is given as a
byte offset that is relative to the start of the group descriptor, and the size of the data
structure must typically be calculated. Figure 16.2 shows how a group descriptor could
be laid out. The specific data structures and layout are given in the next chapter.

                                                                             FILE SYSTEM CATEGORY

                                    011110100101111111011011010011
                            10100

                                            110011010110011010110010
                            1001001111111010011111101000011101011

                                                      25      10       8

Figure 16.2   Layout of group descriptor with the standard fields and then bitmaps and other tables in a
              wide-open area.

   With ExtX, we saw that the second block of each group always had a table of group
descriptors. With UFS, the location of the group descriptor, inode table, and backup
superblock is specific to each file system, and the offsets are given in the superblock. For
example, the inode table could start 32 fragments from the start and the group descrip-
tor 16 fragments from the start. UFS1 adds an additional twist because the offsets are rel-
ative to a base location that changes for each cylinder group. For example, if the inode
table has an offset of 32 fragments, it could be 32 fragments from the start of group 0, 64
fragments from the start of group 1, and 96 fragments from the start of group 2. The
reason the data are staggered is to reduce the impact of physical damage to a platter in
older disks.
   Cylinder groups are so named because they were aligned on cylinder boundaries.
Older hard disks had the same number of sectors per track, which meant that the first
sector of every group was on the same platter. To reduce the effect of a hard disk error,
the administrative data are staggered so that not every copy of the superblock is on the
same platter. Newer hard disks do not have the same number of sectors in each cylinder,
so this is not an issue, and UFS2 no longer staggers the data.
   The “base” location for each group is calculated using two values from the superblock.
The superblock defines a cycle value c and a delta value d. The base increases by d for
every group and returns to the beginning after c groups. For example, the base might
increase by 32 fragments for every group and then start at an offset of 0 after 16 groups.
   Figure 16.3 shows an example of a UFS1 and a UFS2 file system. The UFS1 file system
has administrative data with a cycle of 3 and the UFS2 file system has the data at a con-
stant offset for each group. The fragments before and after the administrative data can be
used to store file content.

              UFS1

                          Group #1            Group #2     Group #3    Group #4         Group #5

              UFS2

                          Group #1            Group #2     Group #3    Group #4         Group #5

                          Contains inode table, fragment bitmap,
                          and backup of superblock

Figure 16.3    UFS1 with five groups and staggering administrative data and UFS2 with five groups and
               administrative data at a constant offset.

   Figure 16.4 shows an example layout of a group. Its base address is located several
blocks inside the group, and the backup superblock, group descriptor, and inode table all
follow in consecutive order. Inside the group descriptor are bitmaps and the standard
data structure fields. All other fragments are for file and directory content.

                                   Backup    Group
                                                               Inode         File Content
                            Base Superblock Descriptor         Table            Blocks
             Start of      Address
         Cylinder Group                                                           ...

                          Variable
                           length
                          based on
                           group

                                     Static   Inode Fragment
                                     Fields   Bitmap Bitmap

Figure 16.4    An example layout of a UFS1 cylinder group.The base address is a variable number of blocks
               from the start of the group, and the bitmaps are a static distance from the base.

Boot Code
If a UFS file system contains the OS kernel, it needs boot code. The boot code is located
in the first sector of the file system and can continue until the superblock or disk label

                                                                                             FILE SYSTEM CATEGORY

data structure. To fully understand the layout of UFS, it might be helpful to refer back to
Chapter 6, “Server-based Partitions.”
   BSD and Solaris systems have their own partitioning systems. An IA32 (i.e., x86/i386)
BSD system will have one DOS partition and one or more BSD partitions inside of it.
The BSD partition locations are defined by the disk label structure, which is located in
sector 1 of the DOS partition. The boot code is located in sector 0 and then in sectors 2
to 15. If the file system is UFS1, the superblock will be in sector 16, and if the file system
is UFS2, the superblock will be in sector 128. If the file system is UFS2, the boot code
might also occupy additional sectors.
   An i386 Solaris system is similar where it will have two DOS partitions. One is small
and contains only boot code. The other contains the file systems and has a Volume Table
of Contents (VTOC) data structure in sector 0. A disk for a Sparc Solaris system has a
VTOC in sector 0 of the disk and the boot code in sectors 1 to 15. Newer Sparc Solaris
systems might use an EFI partition table instead of a VTOC.
   File systems that do not contain boot code will not use the sectors before the
superblock. Figure 16.5(A) shows an example IA32 FreeBSD disk and Figure 16.5(B)
shows an example Sparc Solaris disk.

                     A)

                              disklabel        Superblock
                                                                                   Superblock
                                       Boot
                           Boot       Code 2
                          Code 1                                            unused

                                                             ...                                    ...
         DOS Partition
           Table                            BSD Partition 1                          BSD Partition 2

              IA32
              Disk
                             FAT-type                              FreeBSD-type                   NTFS-type
                            DOS Partition                          DOS Partition                 DOS Partition

                     B)
                                                                                   Superblock
                            Boot
                VTOC        Code     Superblock
                                                                            unused

          Sparc
          Solaris                                      ...                                             ...
           Disk
                                      Solaris Partition 1                               Solaris Partition 2

Figure 16.5    Examples of A) an IA32 system with three DOS partitions and two BSD partitions inside
               the FreeBSD partition and B) a Sparc Solaris disk with two Solaris partitions in it.

Example Image
To close this section, I will run the fsstat tool from The Sleuth Kit (TSK) on the UFS1
image. We will be using this example image later in this chapter, and it is used for the
manual analysis in the next chapter. The fsstat output is much larger that what is
shown here because it details every cylinder group, but the relevant parts are shown.

# fsstat –f openbsd openbsd.dd
FILE SYSTEM INFORMATION
——————————————————————
File System Type: UFS 1
Last Written: Tue Aug 3 09:14:52 2004
Last Mount Point: /mnt

METADATA INFORMATION
——————————————————————
Inode Range: 0 - 3839
Root Directory: 2
Num of Avail Inodes: 3813
Num of Directories: 4

CONTENT INFORMATION
——————————————————————
Fragment Range: 0 - 9999
Block Size: 8192
Fragment Size: 1024
Num of Avail Full Blocks: 1022
Num of Avail Fragments: 16

CYLINDER GROUP INFORMATION
——————————————————————
Number of Cylinder Groups: 2
Inodes per group: 1920
Fragments per group: 8064

Group 0:
  Last Written: Tue Aug 3 09:14:33 2004
  Inode Range: 0 - 1919
  Fragment Range: 0 - 8063
    Boot Block: 0 - 7
    Super Block: 8 - 15
    Super Block: 16 - 23
    Group Desc: 24 - 31
    Inode Table: 32 - 271
    Data Fragments: 272 - 8063

                                                                   FILE SYSTEM CATEGORY

  Global Summary (from the superblock summary area):
    Num of Dirs: 2
    Num of Avail Blocks: 815
    Num of Avail Inodes: 1912
    Num of Avail Frags: 11
  Local Summary (from the group descriptor):
    Num of Dirs: 2
    Num of Avail Blocks: 815
    Num of Avail Inodes: 1912
    Num of Avail Frags: 11
    Last Block Allocated: 392
    Last Fragment Allocated: 272
    Last Inode Allocated: 7
[REMOVED]

    This output shows us the general information, such as block size, fragment size, and
number of inodes. We also get a breakdown of each cylinder group with respect to what
fragments are in each group and which resources were last allocated. This output merges
the data from the superblock, the cylinder group summary area, and the group descrip-
tors. For example, if we are given a block address, we can determine to which group it
belongs. We also can identify where the inode table and group descriptor for each group
are located. This is important for UFS1 where they are located at different offsets for
each group.
    Notice that there are two superblocks in the first group. The first one is because there
is always a superblock in sector 16 (which is block 8 in this file system). The second one
is because every cylinder group has a backup copy located at an offset of 16 fragments.

ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
Analysis of the file system category involves locating and processing the general file sys-
tem information so that additional analysis techniques can be applied. With a UFS file
system, the first step is to locate the superblock at one of the standard locations. Using
the data in the superblock, we can find the locations of each cylinder group and data
block. Backup copies of the superblock can be found in each cylinder group.
   To locate the group descriptor for a specific group, we need to use the offset location
given in the superblock and add it to the group’s base address. The base address for a
UFS2 group is the start of the group, but it staggers for a UFS1 cylinder group. The start-
ing location can be calculated using the delta and cycle values in the superblock. We will
use the group descriptor when determining the allocation status of the group’s resources.

   The last relevant data structure is located in the cylinder group summary area. Its
address is given in the superblock, and it contains a table of usage information for each
cylinder group. We can use this to get basic information about a group.

ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONS
The file system category of data will not typically include much evidence of an incident.
With UFS, there is a lot of non-essential data in this category, and detecting hidden data
is further complicated because the essential and non-essential data are intertwined.
There also could be unused space at the end of the block allocated to a superblock, cylin-
der group summary area, or group descriptor. Compare the size of the file system with
the size of the volume to find volume slack.
    There is a lot of bookkeeping information in the superblock, group descriptors, and
cylinder group summary area. If an incident occurred very recently, you might be able to
draw conclusions about where files were deleted from and which file was last allocated.
Having multiple copies of this data also allows them to be compared if tampering is sus-
pected. Backup copies of the superblock can be found in each cylinder group. You can
search for the backup copies using the data structure’s signature value.

CONTENT CATEGORY
The content category includes the file and directory content data. This section describes
where UFS stores file and directory content and how to analyze it.

OVERVIEW
UFS uses fragments and blocks to store file and directory content. A fragment is a group
of consecutive sectors, and a block is a group of consecutive fragments. Every fragment
has an address, starting with 0. A block is addressed using the address of the first frag-
ment in the block. The first block and fragment start with the first sector of the file
system. The minimum size of a UFS block is 4,096 bytes, and the maximum number
of fragments per block is eight. An example of the block and fragment relationship is
shown in Figure 16.6 where block 64, which contains fragments 64 to 71, is fully allo-
cated to a file, and fragments 74 and 75 in block 72 are allocated to a file. The other frag-
ments in block 72 can be allocated to other files.

                                                                                            CONTENT CATEGORY

                                Block 64                                   Block 72

          63    64    65   66   67   68    69   70    71   72    73   74   75   76     77     78    79   80

Figure 16.6    Two UFS blocks with 8 fragments in each. One block is allocated, and two fragments of the
               other are allocated to a file.

    The motivation for having two types of data units is to allow files to allocate large
amounts of consecutive data while not wasting space in the last block. Investigators
frequently utilize the large amounts of wasted slack space at the end of a file, but UFS
tries to minimize the amount of wasted space.
    With UFS, if a file can fill an entire block, it will be allocated a full block. When the
final data are being written, only enough fragments for the data are allocated. When the
file grows in size and can fill an entire block, it will be moved to one if needed.
    Consider an example file system with 8,192 byte blocks and 1,024 byte fragments. A
file that is 20,000 bytes in size will need 2 blocks and 4 fragments. This can be seen in
Figure 16.7 where the two blocks start in fragments 584 and 592. This can store 16,384
bytes of the file, and the remaining 3,616 bytes are stored in fragments 610 to 613. The
first two fragments in this block are used by another file.

                                                16,384                                4,096
                                                 bytes                                bytes

                     576         584            592             600         608               616

Figure 16.7    A 20,000-byte file is stored in two 8,192-byte blocks and four 1,024 byte fragments.

   The allocation status of a block or fragment is determined using one of two bitmaps.
One has a bit for each fragment, and the other has a bit for each block, and they should
contain nearly the same information, but the block bitmap allows the system to more
quickly find consecutive blocks when allocating a large file. The UFS bitmaps are oppo-
site of normal bitmaps because they are “free” bitmaps. Therefore, when the bit is 1, the
block or fragment is available. If the bit is a 0, the block or fragment is being used.
   The bitmaps are stored inside of a cylinder group’s group descriptor data structure,
which we previously examined. Therefore, before we determine the allocation status of a
block, we will need to determine in which group it is located. This is easy because all we
need to do is divide the fragment address by the number of fragments per cylinder group.

   To determine the bit in the bitmap for a specific block, we calculate the starting block
address of the group and subtract that value from our block address. Refer to Chapter 14
for an example of this. The UFS block and fragment bitmaps are discussed in more detail
in Chapter 17.
   The dstat tool in TSK shows us the allocation status of a UFS fragment and gives us
the cylinder group that it is a part of. An example from our UFS1 image is shown here:

# dstat -f openbsd openbsd.dd 288
Fragment: 288
Allocated
Group: 0

ALLOCATION ALGORITHMS
The designers of UFS have spent a lot of time researching allocation strategies and have
focused on making block allocation efficient. Similar work has likely occurred with the
commercial file systems, but the work has not been published, and my basic testing
might not have shown the full extent of their algorithms. In this section, I will give
an overview of the documented BSD allocation strategies but would recommend
the Design and Implementation of the 4.4 BSD Operating System or Design and
Implementation of the FreeBSD Operating System books for anyone who wants more
details. While there is a documented allocation strategy, there is no requirement that
an OS must follow it. They are free to allocate in any method they want.
   The first consideration when allocating a block or fragment is the cylinder group. If
the OS is allocating blocks for a new file and there are available blocks in the cylinder
group of the inode, blocks from that cylinder group are used. If it is an existing file,
restrictions might be placed on how many blocks any file can have in a single group, so a
new group might need to be selected. For example, many of the OSes will restrict how
many blocks a file or directory can allocate in a single group. The restriction is typically
placed at 25% or 33% of the total number of blocks. When that value is reached, a new
group is selected. Solaris has a similar strategy where it allocates the first 12 blocks (i.e.,
the direct blocks in the inode) for a file in one cylinder group and then allocates the
remaining blocks in other groups.
   After the cylinder group has been selected, the OS will allocate blocks based on how
many data are being written. If the size of the file is unknown or if it slowly increases,
blocks will be added one by one using a next-available strategy. This has historically
involved taking the rotational delay of the disk into consideration to find the optimal
location for the next block, but now the next consecutive block is used. If the size is

                                                                       CONTENT CATEGORY

known, the data are broken up into chunks, which are typically the size of 16 blocks.
Blocks are allocated for each of these chunks using a first-available strategy. Therefore, if
you have an 8,192-byte block size, each chunk will be 128 KB. This value can be config-
ured in the file system and is set in the superblock.
   For the final data in the file, fragments will be allocated instead of a full block. The OS
will look for consecutive fragments that have enough space for the data. The consecutive
fragments cannot cross a block boundary, and the bookkeeping information in the file
system provides a list of where fragments of a given length can be found. A first-available
strategy is used when allocating the final fragments.
   When a file is extended and it already has fragments, the OS first tries to extend the
existing fragments. If this is not possible, a new set of fragments or a full block is allo-
cated and the data are moved. If the file has 12 full blocks, fragments are generally no
longer used. Full blocks are allocated when the file is extended.
   The superblock defines how many blocks should remain free at any given time. The
free blocks are reserved so that a system administrator can login and clean up the file
system, but an OS might choose to not enforce the limit.
   The BSD and Solaris systems that I tested will all wipe the unused sectors in a frag-
ment. Therefore, there will not be any data from a deleted file in the slack space of an
allocated fragment.

ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
We analyze data in the content category by locating a block or fragment, viewing the
contents, and identifying its allocation status. To locate the data, we need its fragment or
block address. The sizes of a block and fragment are given in the superblock, and we
simply advance from the start of the file system until we reach the specific address. The
block address corresponds to the address of the first fragment in the block.
   To determine the allocation status of any fragment, we must first determine the cylin-
der group in which it is located. This is done by dividing the block address by the num-
ber of fragments in a group. The group descriptor for the group is located using the
offset value from the superblock and adding it to the base address for the group. The
group descriptor will contain the fragment bitmap.
   To extract all unallocated fragments in the file system, we cycle through each group
and examine each fragment bitmap. Any fragment that is not allocated is extracted for
analysis. Fragments and blocks that are used to store superblocks, inode tables, group
descriptors, and the cylinder group summary area are considered allocated even though
they are not allocated to a file.

ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONS
The design and allocation strategies of UFS provide some benefit and challenges for
investigators. On the plus side, blocks should be localized to their inode, which could
make file recovery easier, and if deleted data are in a group that has little activity, it could
exist for longer than deleted data in other groups. Also on the plus side is that clusters of
consecutive blocks are allocated when possible so that fragmentation is reduced, which
could help carving tools.
   One of the down sides of UFS is the final fragment. It is common for the final data in
a file to exist in some other part of the cylinder group because it needed only one frag-
ment. This can make carving more difficult. On the other hand, the fragments might
allow more data to be recovered than with ExtX, which wiped all bytes in a block. UFS
will wipe only the fragments allocated, so parts of a block will still exist after some of it
has been reallocated.
   Very large files that need to be recovered, such as a large e-mail file, could be difficult
because they might have taken up more than 25% of the cylinder group and the remain-
der moved to another group. Further, Solaris uses a new cylinder group after allocating
the first 12 blocks of the file, which prevents carving tools from working. Of course, the
OS that created the file system might not have been following every rule of UFS and did
not use these allocation principles.

METADATA CATEGORY
The metadata category of data contains the descriptive data for a file or directory. This
section describes where UFS stores the data and how we can analyze them.

OVERVIEW
Like ExtX, UFS uses inode data structures to store file and directory metadata. UFS2 also
has extended attributes to store additional descriptive data about a file. We will examine
each of these data structures separately.

Inodes
Inodes in UFS have the same basic concept as we saw with ExtX. Each cylinder group has
an inode table, whose relative location is given in the superblock. With UFS1, all inodes
are initialized when the file system is created. UFS2 has dynamic inodes where they are
initialized when they are needed, and the space in the inode table can be used for file
content if all other blocks in the file system have been used. Each file and directory uses

                                                                         METADATA CATEGORY

one inode, and it contains the address of the blocks that a file has allocated, the file size,
and temporal information.
   UFS inodes have 12 direct block pointers, one indirect block pointer, one double
indirect block pointer, and one triple indirect block pointer. The address in each block
pointer is for a full block, except for the final pointer, which could be for one or more
fragments. The file size is used to determine how many fragments are being used. The
block pointers are 32-bit values in UFS1 and 64-bit values in UFS2.
   UFS supports sparse files, which were discussed in Chapter 8, “File System Analysis.”
If a file has not defined the contents of part of a file or if the block is all zeros, the OS will
probably not allocate a block. Instead, it will place a 0 in the block pointer and output a
block of zeros when that part of the file is read.
   The same file types and permissions are used with UFS as we saw with ExtX. An inode
has a last modified, last accessed, and last changed time values, but it does not have a
deleted time value. Although UFS2 added a create time value to the inode. The times are
saved as the number of seconds since January 1, 1970 12:00 GMT, and the number of
nanoseconds also is given for finer resolution. The time values in UFS1 are 32 bits and
64 bits in UFS2.
   Each inode is given an address, starting with 0. Note that this is different from ExtX,
which started with inode 1. Inodes 0 and 1 are reserved, but not used for anything. Inode
1 used to be used for bad blocks. Inode 2 is reserved for the root directory. The allocation
status of any inode is determined using the inode bitmap, which is located in the group
descriptor. To determine which group an inode is in, its address is divided by the number
of inodes per group, which can be found in the superblock. The UFS1 and UFS2 inode
data structures are described with file system images in the next chapter.

Extended Attributes
Extended attributes were added to UFS2, and they provide an additional location to
store descriptive data about a file or directory. Extended attributes are a name value pair,
and there are currently two “types”: user name space and system name space. Any user
that can read the file’s contents can read the file’s user name space attributes. Although
only privileged users can read the file’s system name space attributes.
   The UFS2 inode has three fields for the extended attributes. One is a size value, and
the other two are block addresses where the attributes are stored. The blocks are filled
with variable length data structures that contain a header and the attribute value. A user
can set the attributes with the setextattr command, and applications can set them with
special system calls. The extended attribute data structure is shown in Chapter 17.

Example Image
Here is the output from running istat on our example file system image. This inode is
manually processed in Chapter 17 and is included here as a reference about what
data exist.

# istat -f openbsd -z UTC openbsd.dd 3
inode: 3
Allocated
Group: 0
uid / gid: 0 / 0
mode: -rw-r—r—
size: 1274880
num of links: 1

Inode Times:
Accessed:       Tue Aug   3 14:12:56 2004
File Modified: Tue Aug    3 14:13:14 2004
Inode Modified: Tue Aug   3 14:13:14 2004

Direct Blocks:
288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295
296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303
304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311
[REMOVED]
1568 1569 1570 1571 1572 1573 1574 1575
1576 1577 1578 1579 1580
Indirect Blocks:
384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391

   We can see that this file is 1,247,880 bytes, so it needs more than 12 of the 8KB blocks.
The bottom of the istat output lists each fragment that the file has allocated. Recall that
only the block address is given in the inode, but istat will give the addresses of all frag-
ments in the block. The last line of the ‘Direct Blocks’ section shows that only five of the
eight fragments in block 1576 are being used. Therefore, fragments 1581 to 1583 could be
used by another file. Also notice that block 384 is being used as an indirect block pointer.

ALLOCATION ALGORITHMS
The documented allocation method of UFS inodes is the same that we saw for ExtX. An
OS can choose any algorithm, but the typical policy is to allocate an inode for a directory
in a new cylinder group that has a less than average number of directories and a greater

                                                                       METADATA CATEGORY

than average number of available blocks. The inode for a file is allocated in the same
cylinder group as the parent directory, if space exists. When looking for a free inode in a
cylinder group, a first-available strategy is used.
    When the inode is allocated, its contents are cleared and the M-time, A-time, C-time,
and Create-time (for UFS2) are set to the current time. The link count is set to 1 for files
and 2 for directories to account for the ‘.’ name inside of the directory.
    When a file is deleted, BSD systems and Solaris will clear the block pointers inside the
inode, clear the size, and clear the mode. Therefore, the full size, content location, and
type of file will not be known. The contents of the indirect block pointers are not
cleared, though, so searching for a block of indirect block pointers could help during
recovery. A special tool would likely be needed to find a block full of 32-bit or 64-bit
addresses. Note that the differences between the deletion routines with this and what we
saw with Linux and ExtX is that Linux did not clear the mode field, but it did clear the
contents of the Ext3 indirect block pointers.
    The time updating for OpenBSD 3, FreeBSD 5, and Sun Solaris 9 systems are the same
as reported in ExtX for Fedora Core 2. Namely, when a file is created, all times are set to
the current time. The M- and C-times of the parent directory are also updated. When a
file is moved, the new file has an updated C-time, but the M- and A-times remain the
same. When a file is copied, the A-time on the source file is updated, and the destination
file has all new M-, A-, and C-times. When a file is deleted, its M- and C-times
are updated.

ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
When we analyze the metadata category of data, we are looking for descriptive data
about a file so that we can sort it and obtain more information. To do this, we need to
be able to locate the inodes, determine their allocation status, and process the extended
attributes that might exist.
   To locate a specific inode, we need to first identify its group, and we can do that by
dividing the inode address by the number of inodes per group. Next, we need to locate
the inode table by using the starting fragment of the group and the inode table offset,
which is given in the superblock. With UFS1 we also will need to calculate what the stag-
gering offset for the group is. Lastly, we locate the specific inode in the table by subtract-
ing the inode address from the address of the first inode in the group.
   Processing an inode is fairly straightforward. The mode field and time values are
encoded and must be processed before sense can be made of them. To locate the content,
the addresses given in the 12 direct block pointers are used. If the file is larger, the indi-
rect blocks must be read and their contents processed as a list of block addresses. Any
pointer with a value of 0 is a sparse block and corresponds to a block of all zeros. For the

final block pointer, consider the total size of the file and process only that amount. The
final block could be a fragment, and the next fragment might be used by another file.
    To determine the allocation status of an inode, we use the inode bitmap for the group,
which is located in the group descriptor. The group descriptor is located using the start-
ing address of the group and offset values from the superblock. If the inode’s bit is set to
1, it is allocated.
    It is sometimes useful to examine all the unallocated inode entries because they might
contain temporal or other information from deleted files. We can do this by searching
the bitmaps for inodes whose bits are 0 and processing inodes that are non-zero. Inodes
that are all zeros are typically ones that have not been used and are still in an
initialized state.
    The extended attributes also might have evidence or hidden data and should be exam-
ined. We do this by reading the blocks that are listed in the inode and processing each
entry. The user can assign the name and value pairs.

ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONS
Most of the analysis considerations of ExtX metadata apply to UFS. Deleted files have
the block pointers, size, and mode cleared from the inode, but UFS preserves the state
of the indirect block pointers. Therefore, recovery could try to locate an indirect block
pointer and reconstruct the file. The M- and C-time in an unallocated inode entry might
reflect the time that the corresponding file was deleted. The allocation strategies can be
used when carving data by focusing attention on only a specific group instead of the
entire file system.
    As we saw with ExtX, the touch command can be used to modify the M- and A-times
of any file. Therefore, it is best to have a second source of temporal data to help deter-
mine the reliability of the time values. The C-time of the file is updated when the touch
command is used. The time values are stored in UTC, so your analysis tool will need to
convert that to the time zone where the computer was actually located so that the dis-
played time values are correct.
    The BSD systems that I tested wrote 0s for the unused bytes in the final fragment of a
file, also called slack space. Therefore, the only place to find data from deleted files is in
the unallocated fragments. Fortunately, only the minimum number of fragments are
allocated and wiped. Therefore, a block still might contain deleted data in the fragments
that have not been reallocated. Slack space might contain hidden data, though.
    The extended attributes of a UFS2 file system could be used to hide small amounts of
data. They are limited to two blocks in size, but test if your analysis tools will show you
this content and if they include the content in a keyword search.

                                                                         FILE NAME CATEGORY

  The dynamic UFS2 inode tables also allow another area for data hiding. The OS does
not initialize a block of inode entries in the inode table until it is needed. Therefore, data
could be placed in the unused areas without being noticed until the OS reclaims the area
and erases the data.

FILE NAME CATEGORY
The file name category of data includes the data that assigns human readable names to
inodes and other metadata. This section describes where UFS stores the data and how
we can analyze them.

OVERVIEW
UFS1 and UFS2 use the same file name data structure that ExtX does, so this section is
only a review of the key ideas that were already described in the “File Name Category”
section of Chapter 14. The directory entry data structure stores the file’s name, inode
address, and type value. The length of the structure is based on the name length, which
has a maximum file length of 255 characters. The name is stored in ASCII and is null ter-
minated, although an ExtX name is not null terminated.
   The directory entry structures are located in the blocks allocated to a directory.
Directories are like normal files except that their type is set to directory in the mode
field. The first two entries in a directory should be for the ‘.’ and ‘..’ directories. Each entry
has a length value that points to the next entry, and the length of the final entry points to
the end of the block. When a file is deleted, the length of the previous entry is increased
so that it points to the entry after the deleted entry. Refer to Chapter 14 for diagrams of
this. The root directory is always located in inode 2. Chapter 17 contains the directory
entry data structure and an example from a file system image. Here is the output of run-
ning fls on our example file system image that is processed in the next chapter.

# fls -f openbsd –a openbsd.dd 1921
d/d 1921:       .
d/d 2:          ..
r/r 1932:       file1.txt
r/r 1933:       file8.txt
r/r 1934:       file7.txt
r/- * 1935:     file6.txt
[REMOVED]

    The entry with a “*” next to it is a deleted file. The first column contains the file type as
reported in the directory entry and then in the inode. We can see that UFS clears the file
type value in the inode because the deleted file name does not have a type in its inode
column.
    UFS supports both hard and soft links so that multiple names can be used for a single
file or directory. Hard links are a second name for a file or directory in the same file sys-
tem. When a hard link is created, a new directory entry is allocated, and it points to the
inode of the original file. The link count in the inode is incremented to account for the
new name. Soft links are created using symbolic links. A symbolic link stores the path of
the destination file in either a fragment or in the 60 bytes usually used for block pointers.
UFS2 has 64-bit pointers instead of 32-bit pointers, so it has 120 bytes in which to store
the path. Chapter 14 has figures of hard and soft links.
    Note that directories in Unix are used as both a place to store file names and as
mounting points for other file systems. Refer to Chapter 14 for examples where you
might not find a name you are looking for in a directory because there was another
volume mounted there. Although not enabled by default, many BSD systems support a
union mount, where the files in the directory that are being used as a mounting point will
still be visible. The OS merges the files from the mount directory and the root directory
of the volume so that they appear as one.

ALLOCATION ALGORITHMS
With BSD and Solaris systems, directory entries are allocated on a first available strategy.
The OS scans each of the directory entries and compares the reported entry length with
the length that is actually needed based on the file name length. If the reported length is
larger and the new file can fit inside that space, it is placed there. The directory blocks are
wiped with zeros when they are allocated. Directory entry structures will not cross a
block boundary.
   When a file is deleted, the reported length of the previous entry is increased to point
to the entry after the deleted file. BSD systems do not wipe the type or inode fields,
although Solaris does. This means that you can get temporal data about the file name
from a BSD system, but its direct block pointers will likely have been wiped. Other OSes
could choose other techniques and wipe the name.

ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
Analysis of the file name category involves listing the files and subdirectories in a given
directory and looking for some pattern and specific name. To do this, we generally need

                                                                        FILE NAME CATEGORY

to first locate the root directory. The root directory is always located at inode 2, so we
can locate its content using the same techniques that we saw in the section titled,
“Metadata Category.” After the contents of a directory have been located, we need to
process them as a list of directory entries.
   When processing the directory contents, the next allocated entry can be found by
using the pointer in the current entry. To find deleted entries, the space in between the
end of the file name of the one allocated entry and the start of the next allocated entry is
examined. If any data there meets the format of a directory entry, it was probably there
from a deleted file. When we locate a file or directory that we are interested in, we can get
more details about it by identifying its corresponding inode address and processing it.
Many tools do this automatically and list the time information with the name informa-
tion. Refer to Chapter 14 for a figure and scenario on how the sequence of file deletions
might be determined.
   When a directory is deleted, the link between its inode and blocks will likely be
deleted. To search for the contents of a deleted directory, we can look for the . and ..
entries. Directory entries do not cross block segments, and therefore each block should
start with a new entry.

ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONS
The design of the directory entry and the implementation in most systems allows deleted
file names to be easily located, and the inode value is not cleared in BSD systems so the
file metadata can also be found. Solaris wipes this value, so no additional data can be
found. If a deleted directory entry is found and its inode value exists, it can be difficult to
determine if the inode contents correspond to the file name or if the inode was reallo-
cated and the contents correspond to a different file. A basic test for this is to determine
if the inode is currently allocated. If it is, the inode could have been reallocated or the file
could have been moved within the same file system and you are looking at the original
location. Many OSes clear the mode field in a UFS inode, so the file type cannot be
compared with the type in the directory entry.
    It could be possible for data to be hidden in directory entry structures. The space
between the last directory entry and the end of the block is unused and could contain
data. However, this is a dangerous hiding technique because the OS could overwrite it
when a new file name is created.

THE BIG PICTURE
To conclude the discussion on UFS, we will step through an example where we allocate
and then delete a /dir1/file1.dat file, which is 25,000 bytes in size, from a UFS2
file system.

FILE ALLOCATION EXAMPLE
The high-level process for creating the /dir1/file1.dat file is to locate the dir1 direc-
tory, create a directory entry, allocate an inode, and then allocate blocks for the file con-
tent. The exact ordering of allocating the different data structures might vary by OS, and
the order presented here might not reflect an actual system. There are several data struc-
tures that keep lists of available fragment sizes and clusters that are ignored for simplicity
in this example.

1. We read the superblock data structure, which is 2 KB in size and is located 64 KB into
   the file system. From processing this, we learn that the block size is 16KB and frag-
   ment size is 2KB. Each cylinder group has 32,776 fragments and 8,256 inodes. We
   also learn that the group descriptor is located 40 fragments, and the inode table is
   located 56 fragments into each cylinder group.
2. We need to locate the dir1 directory in the root directory, so we process inode 2.
   Using the number of inodes per group, we determine that inode 2 is in cylinder
   group 0. Therefore, the inode table for inode 2 will start in block 56.
3. We read the inode table from block 56 and process the third entry (the first entry is
   inode 0). The data in inode 2 shows that the directory entry structures for the root
   directory are located in block 1,096.
4. We read the root directory contents from block 1096 and process the contents as a list
   of directory entries. We advance ahead by using the reported record length of each
   entry (we don’t care about deleted files) and find the entry named dir1. It has an
   inode value of 16,549. The A-time of the root directory is updated.
5. We determine where inode 16,549 is located by dividing it by the number of inodes
   per group and determine that it is in cylinder group 2. Group 2 starts in block 65,552,
   so its inode table starts in block 65,608. (If we were using a UFS1 file system, we
   would also need to calculate the base address for the group.)
6. We read the inode table from block 65,608 and process entry 37, which is the relative
   location of inode 16,549. The inode contents show us that the contents of dir1 are
   located in block 66,816.

                                                                          THE BIG PICTURE

7. We read the dir1 contents from block 66,816 and process the contents as a list of
    directory entries. We are looking for unused space in the directory. The file1.dat
    name is eight characters long and therefore the directory entry will require 16 bytes.
    We find space in between two allocated names, and the M- and C-times of the direc-
    tory are updated. The space we took had been used by a deleted file.
8. We need to allocate an inode for the file, and it will be allocated in the same cylinder
    group as the parent directory, which is group 2. To locate the inode bitmap, we must
    first locate the group descriptor, which is 48 fragments from the start of the group.
    The group descriptor turns out to be in block 65,600, and it shows us that the inode
    bitmap is located 168 bytes into the group descriptor. The group descriptor also tells
    us that the last allocated inode entry was 16,650. We check the status of inode 16,651
    and find it to be unallocated. We set its bit in the bitmap, update the last allocated
    inode value in the group descriptor, and decrement the number of free inodes value
    in the group descriptor and cylinder group summary area. The inode address is
    added to the file1.dat directory entry.
9. We locate inode 139 in the inode table, which is the relative location of inode 16,651,
    and initialize its values. The time values are set to the current time and the link value
    is set to 1. We also set the UID, GID, and mode fields.
10. The size of the file is 25,000 bytes, so we need to allocate one block and five frag-
    ments. We first need to process the group descriptor to find the offset of the fragment
    bitmap, which is located at byte offset 1,200. The group descriptor identifies block
    67,896 as the last block allocated. We examine block 67,904 in the free fragment
    bitmap and determine that it is not allocated. The bit for this block is set to 0 to show
    that it is no longer free, and the count of available blocks is decremented. The last
    allocated pointer is also updated. The five available fragments are found using the
    bitmap (or one of the bookkeeping lists), and they are located in 74,242 to 74,246.
    Their bits are set to 0, and the proper bookkeeping values are updated. The address of
    the block and the starting fragment are added to the inode.
11. The file content of file1.dat is written to the allocated block and fragments.

  The final state of the system can be found in Figure 16.8.

                                Cylinder Group 0
                                         Inode Table
                                                                             Root Directory
          Super
          Block                                                        Len      Name          Inode
                                                                       12       ..             2
                                  2       Block: 1,096
                                                                       16       dir123        2,109
                                                                       12       dir1         16,549
                                       Blocks 56 - 1,087
          Block 4
                                                                               Block 1,096

    Cylinder Group 2
               Group                          Inode Table                   'dir1' contents
              Descriptor                                               Len      Name          Inode
                                16,549        Block: 66,816            12       ..              2
                                                                       16       12.jpg       16,580
      Fragment
                    ..0...      16,651    Block: 67,904, 74,242        16       file1.dat    16,651
       Bitmap
                                         Blocks 65,608 - 66,639        16       14.jpg       16,583
       Inode
                    ...1...                                                    Block 66,816
       Bitmap
                    Block
                   65,600                                             ‘file1.dat’ contents
                                              Block: 67,904

                                                Fragments:
                                              74,242 - 74,246

Figure 16.8     Final state after adding the ‘dir1/file1.dat’ file.

FILE DELETION EXAMPLE
We will now delete the /dir1/file1.dat file using BSD-type methods. As mentioned in
the previous section, the order of unallocating the data structures might vary by OS and
the order presented here might not be the same as an actual OS.

1. We read the superblock data structure, which is 2 KB in size and is located 64 KB into
   the file system. From processing this, we learn that the block size is 16 KB and frag-
   ment size is 2 KB. Each cylinder group has 32,776 fragments and 8,256 inodes. We

                                                                          THE BIG PICTURE

   also learn that the group descriptor is located 40 fragments, and the inode table is
   located 56 fragments into each cylinder group.
2. We need to locate the dir1 directory in the root directory, so we process inode 2.
   Using the number of inodes per group, we determine that inode 2 is in cylinder
   group 0. Therefore, the inode table for inode 2 will start in block 56.
3. We read the inode table from block 56 and process the third entry (the first entry is
   inode 0). The data in inode 2 shows that the directory entry structures for the root
   directory are located in block 1,096.
4. We read the root directory contents from block 1,096 and process the contents as a
   list of directory entries. We advance ahead using the reported record length of each
   entry (we don’t care about deleted files) and find the entry whose name is dir1. It has
   an inode value of 16,549. The A-time for the root directory is updated.
5. We determine where inode 16,549 is located by dividing it by the number of inodes
   per group and determine that it is in cylinder group 2. Group 2 starts in block 65,552,
   so its inode table starts in block 65,608.
6. We read the inode table from block 65,608 and process entry 37, which is the relative
   location of inode 16,549. The inode contents show us that the contents of dir1 are
   located in block 66,816.
7. We read the dir1 contents from block 66,816 and process the contents as a list of
   directory entries. We are looking the entry for the file1.dat file. We find its entry
   and observe that it has allocated inode entry 16,651. The directory entry is unallo-
   cated by adding its record length to the record length field in the previous directory
   entry, which belongs to the 12.jpg file. If the system were a Solaris system, the inode
   pointer would also be cleared. The M-time, A-time, and C-time are updated for dir1.
8. We process the contents of inode 16,651 from the group 2 inode table and decrement
   the link count by 1 to account for the name being deleted. The link count becomes 0,
   which means that the inode must be deallocated. To deallocate the inode, the corre-
   sponding bit in the inode bitmap is set to 0, and we update the free inode counts in
   the group descriptor and cylinder group summary area. The mode value in the inode
   is cleared.
9. We also need to deallocate the one block and five fragments that the file has allocated.
   For each block and fragment, the corresponding bit in the block and fragment
   bitmaps are set to 1, and the block pointer in the inode is cleared. The file size is
   decremented each time a block is deallocated, and it eventually reaches 0. The M-
   time and C-time are updated to reflect the inode changes. The free block and frag-
   ment counts are updated in the group descriptor and cylinder group summary area.

   The final state of the file system can be seen in Figure 16.9. The bold lines and values
represent the changes to the file system because of the deletion.

                                Cylinder Group 0
                                         Inode Table
                                                                                Root Directory
          Super
          Block                                                           Len      Name          Inode
                                                                          12       ..              2
                                  2       Block: 1,096
                                                                          16       dir123        2,109
                                                                          12       dir1         16,549
                                       Blocks 56 - 1,087
          Block 4
                                                                                  Block 1,096

    Cylinder Group 2
               Group                           Inode Table                     'dir1' contents
              Descriptor                                                  Len      Name          Inode
                                16,549        Block: 66,816               12       ..              2
                                                                          32       12.jpg       16,580
      Fragment
                    ..1...      16,651            Block: 0                16       file1.dat    16,651
       Bitmap
                                         Blocks 65,608 - 66,639           16       14.jpg       16,583
       Inode
                    ...0...                                                       Block 66,816
       Bitmap
                    Block
                   65,600                                                ‘file1.dat’ contents
                                               Block: 67,904

                                                 Fragments:
                                               74,242 - 74,246

Figure 16.9     Final state after deleting the ‘/dir1/file1.dat’ file.

OTHER TOPICS
We will now discuss two analysis topics that apply to multiple data categories. In this
section we discuss file recovery and file system consistency checks.

FILE RECOVERY
Recovery of UFS files that were deleted by one of the standard OSes is not an easy task.
The difficulty of recovery is similar to what we saw with ExtX, but it is even worse with
Solaris because the link between the directory entry and the inode is wiped. The direct

                                                                               OTHER TOPICS

block pointers are wiped with BSD systems, so recovery will depend on application-level
carving techniques. It is highly likely that the final data will be in a set of fragments and,
therefore, might not be in the next consecutive block, even if the rest of the file was in
consecutive blocks.
   Many of the BSD systems allocate files in chunks of 64KB or 128KB consecutive
blocks. This could be beneficial because there might be more data in consecutive blocks
instead of randomly arranged from a first-available strategy. On the other hand, this is
not as beneficial as a best-fit strategy that might place the entire file in consecutive
blocks. Further, because some systems will limit the number of blocks that a file can
allocate in any single group, large files will be fragmented even if the file could have been
saved in consecutive blocks. Solaris changes cylinder groups after allocating the first 12
blocks, so carving those files will be very difficult. The contents of an indirect block
pointer are not wiped in BSD or Solaris systems, so that might provide insight about
recovery if it can be found.

CONSISTENCY CHECK
Consistency checks are used in an investigation to find invalid values in the file system
data structures and to find data that the suspect might have hidden. We will start in the
file system category and examine the superblock. Most of the 2,048 bytes in the
superblock are not used and could be used to hide data. It is difficult to determine which
values are and are not used by a given OS because many are redundant and not as neces-
sary with modern systems. These redundant values could be used for sanity checks,
though, if tampering is suspected. In addition, there are unused sectors before the
superblock that could be used for boot code and disk labels but are unused for non-root
file systems. The superblock will be allocated a full block, so the unused fragments in the
block also could be used to hide data.
    The group descriptors also could be used for data hiding. The start of the data struc-
ture has structure, but the rest of it is wide open, and one could take advantage of this. A
check for this is to compare where the bitmap structures start and how much space they
actually need.
    Every allocated inode entry should be examined and verified that the blocks and frag-
ments that it points to are allocated. Care must be taken when considering the number
of fragments that are needed for the final fragment run. All allocated blocks must either
be used for cylinder group administrative data structures or pointed to by an inode. The
end of the inode table also could have unused bytes.
    Every allocated directory entry should point to an allocated inode entry. Inodes 0, 1,
and 2 will be allocated but will not have file names pointing to them because they are

reserved. The space at the end of a directory could contain hidden data, but this is more
difficult for an attacker to control because the OS could overwrite it.

SUMMARY
The UFS can be found in many server environments. It has a long history and has been
designed for speed and efficiency, which also means that some parts of it are confusing.
There are many structures that I did not discuss in this chapter that exist to help with the
allocation of blocks and fragments. There are also many values in the superblock that
can be calculated from other known values. This makes the superblock and similar file
system category data structures larger than what we have previously seen.
    The most difficult part of analyzing a UFS file system from one of the standard OSes
is any type of deleted file recovery. The block pointers are wiped, and Solaris even wipes
the pointer between the name and the inode. Therefore, application-level recovery tech-
niques are needed, but the carving could be hampered by the block allocation routines,
which try to prevent any one file from dominating a cylinder group. Although the struc-
ture and deletion methods of a UFS file system are much different from a FAT or NTFS
file system, the same basic analysis techniques can be applied.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
FreeBSD Source Code. 2004. http://fxr.watson.org/fxr/source/.
Garfinkel, Simson, Gene Spafford, and Alan Schwartz. Practical Unix and Internet
Security. 3rd ed. Sebastopol: O’Reilly, 2003.
Mauro, Jim, and Richard McDougall. Solaris Internals: Core Kernel Architecture. Upper
Saddle River: Sun Microsystems Press, 2001.
McKusick, Marshall K. “Enhancements to the Fast File System to Support Multi-Terabyte
Storage Systems.” Proceedings of USENIX BSDCON ‘03 Conference, September 2003.
McKusick, Marshall, Keith Bostic, Michael Karels, and John Quarterman. The Design and
Implementation of the 4.4 BSD Operating System. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1996.
McKusick, Marshall K., William N. Joy, Samuel J. Leffler, and Robert S. Fabry. “A Fast File
System for Unix.” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 2(3): 181-197, August 1984.

                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY

McKusick, Marshall, and George Neville-Neil. The Design and Implementation of the
FreeBSD Operating System. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
OpenBSD Source Code. 2004. http://fxr.watson.org/fxr/source/?v=OPENBSD.
Smith, Keith A. and Margo Seltzer. “A Comparison of FFS Disk Allocation Algorithms.”
Proceedings of the 1996 Usenix Annual Technical Conference, 1996.

This page intentionally left blank
