Programming Embedded Systems
       with C and GNU Development Tools
                 Other resources from O’Reilly
Related titles   Building Embedded Linux            Home Hacking Projects for
                    Systems                            Geeks
                 C in a Nutshell                    Linux in a Nutshell
                 Designing Embedded                 RFID Essentials
                    Hardware                        Practical C Programming

  oreilly.com    oreilly.com is more than a complete catalog of O’Reilly books.
                 You’ll also find links to news, events, articles, weblogs, sample
                 chapters, and code examples.

                 oreillynet.com is the essential portal for developers interested in
                 open and emerging technologies, including new platforms, pro-
                 gramming languages, and operating systems.

 Conferences     O’Reilly brings diverse innovators together to nurture the ideas
                 that spark revolutionary industries. We specialize in document-
                 ing the latest tools and systems, translating the innovator’s
                 knowledge into useful skills for those in the trenches. Visit
                 conferences.oreilly.com for our upcoming events.

                 Safari Bookshelf (safari.oreilly.com) is the premier online refer-
                 ence library for programmers and IT professionals. Conduct
                 searches across more than 1,000 books. Subscribers can zero in
                 on answers to time-critical questions in a matter of seconds.
                 Read the books on your Bookshelf from cover to cover or sim-
                 ply flip to the page you need. Try it today for free.
                                                        SECOND EDITION

Programming Embedded Systems
     with C and GNU Development Tools

                      Michael Barr and Anthony Massa

    Beijing • Cambridge • Farnham • Köln • Paris • Sebastopol • Taipei • Tokyo
Programming Embedded Systems with C and GNU Development Tools, Second Edition
by Michael Barr and Anthony Massa

Copyright © 2007, 1999 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.

Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.

O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions
are also available for most titles (safari.oreilly.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: (800) 998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.

Editor: Andy Oram                                    Indexer: Ellen Troutman Zaig
Production Editor: Lydia Onofrei                     Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Copyeditor: Lydia Onofrei                            Interior Designer: David Futato
Proofreader: Mary Brady                              Illustrators: Robert Romano and Jessamyn Read

Printing History:
   January 1999:        First Edition.
   October 2006:        Second Edition.

Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc. Programming Embedded Systems with C and GNU Development Tools, the image
of a tick, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Many of the designations used
by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the
designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.

While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and authors
assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the
information contained herein.

           This book uses RepKover™, a durable and flexible lay-flat binding.

ISBN-10: 0-596-00983-6
ISBN-13: 978-0-596-00983-0
[M]                                                                                             [12/07]
          For my son, Vikram.
              —Michael Barr

       This book is dedicated to
my wonderful daughters, Katie and Ashley,
    and my beautiful wife, Deanna.
 You mean everything to me. I love you.
            —Anthony Massa
