Chapter
CHAPTER 5 5

Downloading and Debugging                                                              5

I can remember the exact instant when I realized that
a large part of my life from then on was going to be
spent in finding mistakes in my own programs.
—Maurice Wilkes, Head of the Computer Laboratory of
   the University of Cambridge, 1959
Once you have an executable binary image stored as a file on the host computer, you
will need a way to download that image to the embedded system and execute it. The
executable binary image is usually loaded into a memory device on the target board
and executed from there. And if you have the right tools at your disposal, it will be
possible to set breakpoints in the program or to observe its execution in less intru-
sive ways. This chapter describes various techniques for downloading, executing,
and debugging embedded software in general, as well as focuses on the techniques
available on our development environment.

Downloading the Blinking LED Program
With most embedded systems, there are several means to get an image onto the tar-
get and run the program, some more challenging than others. In this section, we
investigate the methods available for downloading the Blinking LED program onto
the Arcom board, as well as some other methods that may be useful for other
projects.
The software development cycle for a PC and an embedded system include many of
the same stages. Figure 5-1 is a general diagram of the embedded software develop-
ment cycle.
As shown in Figure 5-1, the software development cycle begins with design and the
first implementation of the code. After that, there are usually iterations of the build,
download and debug, and bug-fixing stages. Because a lot of time is spent in these
three stages, it helps to eliminate any kinks in this process so that the majority of
time can be spent on debugging and testing the software. (This diagram does not

                                   Design

                               Implement Code

                                 Build Code      Fix Bugs

                                Download and
                                   Debug

Figure 5-1. Software development cycle

take into account the handling of feature creep inevitably inflicted by the marketing
department.)
Because this is a very basic diagram, other stages that may be necessary are profiling
and optimization. Profiling allows a developer to determine various metrics about a
program, such as where the processor is spending most of its time. Optimization is
the process by which the developer tries to eliminate bottlenecks in software using
various techniques, such as implementing time-critical code in assembly language.
Very often, optimization techniques are compiler-, processor-, or system-specific.
Another task at this stage is integration. Once the development cycle is complete,
system-level testing is typically done. And after a product ships, the software enters
its maintenance phase for the duration of the product’s life cycle, when the code
must be supported and sustained. The debugging techniques shown in this chapter
apply to the maintenance stage as well.
Because code must be repeatedly tested on the target hardware, a quick and straight-
forward method for loading software onto the target is ideal. Let’s take a look at the
techniques and tools we can use for this task.

Debug Monitors
A debug monitor, also called a ROM monitor, is a small program that resides in non-
volatile memory on the target hardware that facilitates various operations needed
during development. One of the tasks that a debug monitor handles is basic hard-
ware initialization. A debug monitor allows you to download and run software in
RAM to debug the program.
Most debug monitors include many other useful features to assist in the develop-
ment cycle. For example, most debug monitors incorporate some kind of command-
line interface (CLI) where commands can be issued to the debug monitor for

                                                     Downloading the Blinking LED Program |   71
execution on the target hardware—e.g., via serial port. These commands include
downloading software, running the program, peeking (reading) and poking (writing)
memory and processor registers, comparing or displaying blocks of memory, and set-
ting initialization configurations for the hardware.
In some systems, a debug monitor is incorporated in the production units in the field
as well. This can be used to update the firmware to add new features or fix bugs after
the unit is deployed.
Some processors include a program similar to a debug monitor in on-chip memory.
For example, the TMS320C5000 series DSPs from Texax Instruments include a pro-
gram called a bootloader. This bootloader is used to transfer software from an exter-
nal source (off-chip) to internal memory (on-chip), allowing code to reside in slower
memory for storage and be transferred into faster memory prior to execution. The
bootloader determines where to load code based upon the boot mode setting, which
is determined by sampling particular DSP I/O pins during power up.

                  Be aware that the execution speeds of RAM and ROM typically are
                  very different. Code running from RAM typically executes much faster
                  than code running from ROM, which could cause the software to
                  behave differently. Certain types of bugs, such as timing errors, may
                  only reveal themselves when run from just one type of memory.

RedBoot
The Arcom board includes a debug monitor called RedBoot, which is described in
the sidebar “Debug Monitors” in Chapter 4. RedBoot resides in the bootloader flash
on the Arcom board and uses the board’s serial port COM1 for its command-line
interface. The VIPER Technical Manual and VIPER-I/O Technical Manual describe
how to connect the various modules to the Arcom board.
Once you have the Arcom board connected properly, you need to connect the Arcom
board’s COM1 port to a serial port on your computer using the cable included in the
development kit.
To communicate with RedBoot’s CLI, you need to run a terminal program (mini-
com in Linux or HyperTerminal in Windows will do just fine) on your computer. Set
the serial port settings as follows:
 • Baud rate: 115200
 • Data bits: 8
 • Parity: None
 • Stop bits: 1
 • Flow control: None
Now you are ready to power on the Arcom board.

              Redboot executes a script after it runs to automatically boot embed-
              ded Linux (if present on your version of the Arcom board). In order to
              prevent the script from running, hit the keys Ctrl and C together when
              RedBoot outputs its initialization message.

If all connections are properly made, an initialization message is output from the
Arcom board’s COM1 port once power is applied, along with the RedBoot prompt,
which looks like this:
    Ethernet eth0: MAC address 00:80:12:1c:89:b6
    No IP info for device!

    RedBoot(tm) bootstrap and debug environment [ROM]
    Non-certified release, version W468 V3I7 - built 10:11:20, Mar 15 2006

    Platform: VIPER (XScale PXA255)
    Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 Red Hat, Inc.

    RAM: 0x00000000-0x04000000, [0x00400000-0x03fd1000] available
    FLASH: base 0x60000000, size 0x02000000, 256 blocks of 0x00020000 bytes each.
    == Executing boot script in 1.000 seconds - enter ^C to abort
    ^C
    RedBoot>

Because we have not entered an Internet Protocol (IP) address for the Arcom board,
RedBoot outputs the message: No IP info for device! This message can be ignored
for now. Another thing to notice is that we have stopped the boot script from run-
ning (and loading Linux) by entering Ctrl-C (shown in the preceding code as ^C)
when RedBoot is started.
The RedBoot initialization message contains information regarding the build and
version of the RedBoot image. The available memory is also listed before the prompt,
including the RAM and flash memory address ranges.
You can enter help at the prompt to get a list of the supported commands. A descrip-
tion of the RedBoot commands can be found online at http://ecos.sourceware.org.

Downloading with RedBoot
Now that RedBoot is up and running, we are ready to download and run the Blink-
ing LED program. RedBoot is able to load and run ELF files. Therefore, we use the
blink.exe file built in Chapter 4 as the program image to run on the Arcom board.
To initiate the download, enter the following load command at the RedBoot prompt:
    RedBoot> load –m xmodem

This tells RedBoot to load an image using the xmodem protocol as the method. After
you press the Enter key, RedBoot begins to output the character C while waiting for
the file to be sent over.

                                                       Downloading the Blinking LED Program |   73
To begin the file transfer using Windows HyperTerminal, select Transfer ➝ Send
File… from the menu (use a similar command if you have a different terminal pro-
gram). This brings up the Send File dialog box; select Xmodem for the protocol.
Browse to the location of the blink.exe program and select it. Then click Send. A
transfer statistics dialog box will be displayed showing the status of the file transfer.
Once the transfer has successfully completed, RedBoot outputs a message similar to
the following:
      Entry point: 0x00400110, address range: 0x00000024-0x0040014c
      xyzModem - CRC mode, 24(SOH)/0(STX)/0(CAN) packets, 2 retries

This shows the entry point of the program—in this case, 0x00400110. If you refer to
the map file generated by the linker during the build process, blink.map, the entry
point address should look familiar, as shown in this portion of the map:
      Name                Origin             Length

      .text               0x004000b0         0x9c     blink.o
                          0x00400110                      main

The map file shows that the routine main resides at 0x00400110, which is the entry
point for execution of the Blinking LED program. The value 0x9C is the total length
of the object file blink.o.

Running programs with RedBoot
Now we can run the program. Enter the following command at the RedBoot prompt:
      RedBoot> go

After you press Enter, RedBoot hands control of the Arcom board over to the Blink-
ing LED program. If everything is successful, you should now see the green LED
blinking on the add-on board.
You have just successfully completed your first pass through the embedded software
development cycle.

                                 RedBoot Networking Support
     You may notice that the Arcom board contains an Ethernet port. RedBoot includes a
     networking stack to allow communications over this port. For example, you can open
     up a Telnet session and communicate with RedBoot over the Ethernet port. RedBoot
     also supports downloading software using the Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP).
     We leave the investigation of these advanced RedBoot features as an exercise for you.

When in ROM…
Another way to download embedded software is to load the binary image into a
ROM device and physically insert that chip into a socket on the target board. Obvi-
ously, the contents of a truly read-only memory device could not be overwritten.
However, as you’ll see in Chapter 6, embedded systems commonly employ special
read-only memory devices that can be programmed (or reprogrammed) with the help
of a special piece of equipment called a device programmer or burner. A device pro-
grammer is a computer system that has one or more IC sockets on the top—of vary-
ing shapes and sizes—and is capable of programming memory devices of all sorts.
In an ideal development scenario, the device programmer would be connected to the
same network as the host computer. That way, files that contain executable binary
images could be easily transferred to it for ROM programming. After the binary
image has been transferred to the device programmer, the memory chip is placed
into a socket of the appropriate size and shape, and the device type is selected from
an on-screen menu. The actual device programming process can take anywhere from
a few seconds to several minutes, depending on the size of the binary image, the type
of memory device you are using, and the quality and speed of your device programmer.
After you program the ROM, it is ready to be inserted into its socket on the board.
Of course, this shouldn’t be done while the embedded system is still powered on.
The power should be turned off and then reapplied only after the chip has been care-
fully inserted.

              Care should be taken when removing and inserting any part that is
              socketed. Pins can become bent with surprising ease, and a bent or
              broken pin can cause all sorts of problems that are difficult to debug.

As soon as power is applied, a processor will begin to fetch and execute the code that
is stored inside the ROM. However, be aware that each type of processor has its own
rules about the location of its first instruction. For example, when the ARM proces-
sor is reset, it begins by fetching and executing whatever is stored at physical address
0x00000000. This is called the reset address, and the instructions located there are
collectively known as the reset code. In the case of the Arcom development board,
the reset code is part of the RedBoot debug monitor.
If your program doesn’t appear to be working, something could be wrong with your
reset code. You must always ensure that the binary image you’ve loaded into the
ROM satisfies the target processor’s reset rules. During product development, we
often find it useful to turn on one of the board’s LEDs just after the reset code has
been completed. That way, we know at a glance that any new code either does or
doesn’t satisfy the processor’s most basic requirements.

                                                       Downloading the Blinking LED Program |   75
Managing ROM with RedBoot
The Arcom board includes a type of memory called flash, which is in-circuit pro-
grammable. Even when socketed for easy removal, flash memory does not have to be
removed from the board to be reprogrammed. The RedBoot debug monitor includes
software that can perform the device programming function.
RedBoot also contains several commands to manage a flash filesystem, called the
Flash Image System (FIS). The FIS allows you to specify regions in flash, similar to a
filesystem on a hard disk drive. Using the FIS, you can create, write, and erase loca-
tions of flash based on “filenames” you select.

                  Be extremely careful not to corrupt the existing images or configura-
                  tion data residing in flash on the Arcom board. If this happens, you
                  could render the board unusable.

To see what is contained in the FIS, enter the following command:
     RedBoot> fis list

which will output a listing similar to this one:
     Name                  FLASH addr    Mem addr     Length       Entry point
     FIS directory         0x00000000    0x00000000   0x0001F000   0x00000000
     RedBoot config        0x0001F000    0x00000000   0x00001000   0x00000000
     filesystem            0x00020000    0x00000000   0x01FE0000   0x00000000

This list command shows the images currently available in the RedBoot FIS. There
are a few other FIS commands supported by RedBoot. For details on the other FIS-
related commands and options, refer to the RedBoot User’s Guide online at http://
ecos.sourceware.org.
You have some decisions to make when deciding how and where to download a pro-
gram to the hardware. The biggest disadvantage of using flash memory for down-
loads is that there is no easy way to debug software that is executing out of flash
memory or ROM. When single-stepping or executing to a breakpoint, the debugger
replaces the subsequent instruction with a software interrupt, which is used to halt
the processor’s execution. Thus, a debugger doesn’t work in any form of read-only
memory, such as flash. Of course, you can still examine the state of the LEDs and
other externally visible hardware, but this will never provide as much information
and feedback as a debugger. So, flash might be fine once you know that your soft-
ware works and you’re ready to deploy the system, but it’s not very helpful during
software development.
Some processors can work around the issue of executing out of flash or ROM. In
some cases, the processor includes a TRACE instruction that executes a single
instruction and then automatically vectors to an interrupt. On other processors, a
breakpoint register gets you back to the debug monitor.

Remote Debuggers
If available, a remote debugger can be used to download, execute, and debug embed-
ded software over a serial port or network connection between the host and target
(also called cross-platform debugging). The program running on the host of a remote
debugger has a user interface that looks just like any other debugger that you might
have used. The main debugger screen is usually either a command-line interface or
graphical user interface (GUI). GUI debuggers typically contain several smaller win-
dows to simultaneously show the active part of the source code, current register con-
tents, and other relevant information about the executing program.
Note that in the case of embedded systems, the debugger and the software being
debugged are executing on two different computer systems. Remote debugger soft-
ware runs on the host computer and provides the user interface just described. But
there is also a backend component that runs on the target processor and communi-
cates with the host debugger frontend over a communications link. The debugger
backend provides low-level control of the target processor. Figure 5-2 shows how
these two components work together.

                main() {
                 int a=98,b;

               ->b=a-32;
                  b=b+5/9.0;                                     Embedded System
                }                          Communications Link

                                                                     Target
                     Host

Figure 5-2. Components of a remote debug session

The debug monitor resides in ROM—having been placed there either by you or at
the factory—and is automatically started whenever the target processor is reset. It
monitors the communications link to the host computer and responds to requests
from the remote debugger host software. Of course, these requests and the moni-
tor’s responses must conform to some predefined communications protocol and are
typically of a very low-level nature. Examples of requests the host software can make
are “read register x,” “modify register y,” “read n bytes of memory starting at address
z,” and “modify the data at address a.” The remote debugger combines sequences of
these low-level commands to accomplish complex debugging tasks such as down-
loading a program, single-stepping, and setting breakpoints.

                  It is helpful to build the program being tested to include symbolic
                  debug information, which we did with the –g option during the com-
                  pilation step of the build procedure in Chapter 4. The –g option
                  causes the compiler to place additional information in the object file
                  for use by the debugger. This debug information allows the debugger
                  to relate between the executable program and the source code.

One such debugger is the GNU debugger (gdb). Like the other GNU tools, it was
originally designed for use as a native debugger and was later given the ability to per-
form remote debugging. The gdb debug monitor that runs on the target hardware is
called a gdb stub. Additional information about gdb can be found online at http://
sources.redhat.com/gdb.
The GNU software tools include gdb. The version installed is CLI-based, so there are
a few commands to learn in order to run the debugger properly. There are several
GUIs available for gdb, such as Insight (http://sources.redhat.com/insight) and DataDis-
play Debugger (http://www.gnu.org/software/ddd).
RedBoot contains a gdb-compatible debug monitor. Therefore, once a host attempts
to communicate with the target using the gdb protocol, RedBoot turns control of the
target over to the gdb stub for the debug session.
As described earlier, the host and target use a predefined protocol. For gdb, this pro-
tocol is the ASCII-based Remote Serial Protocol. To learn more about the gdb
Remote Serial Protocol, go to http://sources.redhat.com/gdb. Another good resource
for information about gdb is Debugging with GDB: The GNU Source-Level Debugger,
by Richard Stallman, Roland Pesch, and Stan Shebs (Free Software Foundation).*
Remote debuggers are one of the most commonly used downloading and testing
tools during development of embedded software. This is mainly because of their low
cost. Embedded software developers already have the requisite host computer. In
addition, the price of a remote debugger does not add significantly to the cost of a
suite of cross-development tools (compiler, linker, locator, etc.).
However, there are some disadvantages to using a debug monitor, including the
inability to debug startup code. Another disadvantage is that code must execute from
RAM. Furthermore, when using a debug monitor, a communication channel must
exist to interface the target to the host computer.

Debugging on the Arcom Board
gdb is able to operate over serial or TCP/IP network ports. RedBoot also supports gdb
debug sessions over either of these ports. For the example that follows, we use the
serial port. We then cover some of the basic gdb commands that are in the example.

* This document is included in electronic form on the Arcom VIPER-Lite Development Kit CD-ROM.

              In order to demonstrate some additional debug capabilities, we have
              added a global variable, gChapter, to the Blinking LED program.

To prepare for the debugging examples, cycle power on the Arcom board and halt
the RedBoot boot script by pressing Ctrl-C. Once the RedBoot initialization message
is output, you’re ready to start.
Invoke gdb, passing the name of the program to debug as an argument, by using the
following command:
    # arm-elf-gdb blink.exe

gdb outputs a message similar to this one:
    GNU gdb 6.3
    Copyright 2004 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    GDB is free software, covered by the GNU General Public License, and you are
    welcome to change it and/or distribute copies of it under certain conditions.
    Type "show copying" to see the conditions.
    There is absolutely no warranty for GDB. Type "show warranty" for details.
    This GDB was configured as "--host=i686-pc-cygwin --target=arm-elf"...

              If you use the wrong executable that does not contain debugging infor-
              mation with gdb, the following message is output:
                   (no debugging symbols found)

There should also be a (gdb) prompt waiting for input. Next, issue the command to
have gdb connect to the Arcom board. The following command assumes that the
computer’s serial port that is connected to the target board is COM1 (if a different
PC serial port is used, modify the command accordingly):
    (gdb) target remote /dev/ttyS0

                              GDB Connection Problems
  Because the same computer serial port is being used for gdb and RedBoot communica-
  tions, make sure another program (such as the terminal program you used to down-
  load the code) has not opened the port. If another program has control over the
  computer’s serial port, gdb will not be able to connect to the target Arcom board. You
  should also verify that the host computer is connected to the correct serial port on the
  Arcom board.

After gdb successfully connects to the target, a response similar to this one will follow:
     Remote debugging using /dev/ttyS0

The host computer running the gdb command-line interface is now connected to the
gdb stub residing on the target hardware within RedBoot.
Next download the blink.exe program onto the target with the command:
     (gdb) load blink.exe

When program loading completes successfully, a message similar to this one is out-
put from gdb:
     Loading section data, size 0x4 lma 0x400000
     Loading section text, size 0x148 lma 0x400004
     Start address 0x400110, load size 332
     Transfer rate: 2656 bits in <1 sec, 166 bytes/write.

Now you are ready to start debugging!
Let’s start by setting a breakpoint in the code. A breakpoint is an address or condi-
tion where the debugger will halt execution of the program. The debugger sets a
breakpoint by replacing a given instruction with a software interrupt (that gets sent
back to the debugger). Removing a breakpoint removes the software interrupt and
restores the preplaced instruction.
Use the following command to set a breakpoint that is hit when the routine
ledToggle is called:
     (gdb) b ledToggle

                  gdb commands are not case-sensitive (though symbols are) and can be
                  abbreviated to the shortest unique string. For example, you can set a
                  breakpoint with any of these commands:
                        (gdb) breakpoint ledToggle
                        (gdb) break ledToggle
                        (gdb) br ledToggle
                        (gdb) b ledToggle
                  Each command accomplishes the same goal—i.e., setting a break-
                  point at the routine ledToggle. The RedBoot CLI commands operate
                  similarly.
After successfully setting the breakpoint, gdb responds with information about the
breakpoint as follows:
     Breakpoint 1 at 0x400070: file led.c, line 66.

The response shows the breakpoint number (1 in this case), the address of the break-
point (0x400070), the file where the function is located (led.c), and the line number
in that file where the breakpoint is set (66).

If you need to check which breakpoints are set within a program for a gdb session,
you can use the command:
    (gdb) info b

The response from gdb is something like this:
    Num Type            Disp Enb Address    What
    1   breakpoint      keep y   0x00400070 in ledToggle at led.c:66

Next, run the program by entering the continue command:
    (gdb) c

Once gdb hits the breakpoint, it will halt execution and output the source code line
that is to be executed next:
    Breakpoint 1, ledToggle ( ) at led.c:66
    66          if (GPIO_0_LEVEL_REG & LED_GREEN)

The first line of output shows the breakpoint that was hit, along with the descrip-
tion. The second line shows the line number in the file, 66 in this case, with the
source code for that line. The green LED should be lit now because that is its initial
state in the program.
To have gdb show the source code where the current program is stopped, use the
list command:
    (gdb) l

This will dump, by default, 10 source code lines. To dump the next 10 source code
lines, simply enter the list command again.

               To repeat the last command in a gdb session, simply press Enter.

A useful feature of the remote debugger is that it can check symbol values. The com-
mand to show the value of the gChapter variable is:
    (gdb) print /x gChapter

The /x option formats the output for hexadecimal. The response from gdb is:
    $1 = 0x5

The $1 is a special history number that gdb assigns, and gdb allows reference back to
this value at a later time. The current value of gChapter is 5.
The print command can also be used to change the value of a symbol. In the follow-
ing command, the variable gChapter is changed to 12:
    (gdb) p/x gChapter=12

The response from gdb is:
      $2 = 0xc

This shows that the new value of gChapter is 0xC (12 decimal).

          Debug Tip: Using the Memory Map for Symbol Value Lookup
     Debug symbols associate variable and function names with their addresses, as well as
     include type information about the symbol. This allows you to reference a particular
     variable by using its symbol name.
     There may be a time when you are unable to use these symbols for one reason or
     another; for example, perhaps you need to debug code released by another party and
     there is no debug information contained in that program file.
     When symbol information is not available, hope is not lost for obtaining additional
     information using a debugger. The map file can be used to manually look up the sym-
     bol addresses. For example, the blink.map file shows the address of the variable
     gChapter as 0x00400000 with a length of 4 bytes:
            .data            0x00400000          0x4 blink.o
                             0x00400000                  gChapter
     Given the address of a symbol, you can use gdb to find out the current value of that
     symbol by using the command:
          (gdb) x/d 0x400000
     The command x stands for “examine.” It can be followed immediately by an option
     specifying the format in which to display the data (here, /d for decimal) and then the
     address of memory to read (here 0x400000). In this case, gdb responds with the follow-
     ing output:
          0x400000 <gChapter>:         12
     This shows the current value of gChapter as 12 (this value was set in the previous
     command). This allows you to peek and poke variables without having the symbol
     information.

Another very useful feature of a remote debugger is the ability to step through lines
of source code, an action commonly called single-stepping. There are several differ-
ent types of single-step commands, such as stepping a single machine instruction and
stepping a single source code line. The following command, next, steps a single
source code line:
      (gdb) n

               When debugging, it is also important to realize that using compiler
               optimization can affect the behavior of the code in the debug session.
               Most compilers have an option for enabling optimization. For exam-
               ple, with gcc, the –O option invokes optimization. This option has var-
               ious levels, which are indicated by a number (0, 1, 2, or 3) that follows
               the option switch—for example, –O2. The optimization switch –Os
               optimizes for size. By default, no optimization is selected. Details
               about the specific optimizations for each level can be found in the gcc
               documentation located online at http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs.
               The reason compiler optimization needs to be considered when
               debugging is because the compiler can reorder code and remove entire
               sections of code and/or variables without telling you. It is for this rea-
               son that most debugging is done with optimization turned off. Keep
               this in mind when single-stepping source code.

The source code line to be executed next is output by gdb as shown here:
    69               GPIO_0_SET_REG = LED_GREEN;

gdb provides two commands for stepping one line at a time: step and next. The dif-
ference between them is that when you reach the start of a function call, step enters
the function and runs the first statement within the function, whereas next runs the
whole function.
Now run the program again with the continue command:
    (gdb) c

You might notice that the LED is now off.
Execution will halt once again when gdb encounters the breakpoint at ledToggle.
gdb allows you to check which functions have executed by using the backtrace or bt
command. The backtrace command shows how your program got to where it cur-
rently is. Enter the backtrace command as follows:
    (gdb) bt

The gdb output looks something like this:
    #0   ledToggle ( ) at led.c:66
    #1   0x00400140 in main ( ) at blink.c:75

The response from gdb shows the most recently executed function (indicated by #0),
followed by the function that called it (indicated by #1), and so on. The preceding
response shows that the routine main called the routine ledToggle.
With gdb you can also view the processor’s register values:
    (gdb) info registers

To print the value of a specific register, use the command:
     (gdb) p/x $pc

This command outputs the current value of the program counter register in hexadec-
imal format.
You should now have a good understanding of how to use gdb. We’ve examined the
most important commands, but it may be helpful to play around with some others at
this point.
In order to remove the breakpoint set earlier, use the delete command:
     (gdb) d

Then confirm the removal of all breakpoints. You can now continue running the pro-
gram and watch the LED blink.
To halt execution, press Ctrl-C. However, the program may not respond to this com-
mand. If this is the case, gdb will ask if you want to stop debugging the program.
One disadvantage of a command-line interface debugger is that commands need to
be learned. However, once you get the hang of it, you’ll find it’s quite easy to maneu-
ver around.
Additional gdb commands can be found by using the gdb help command. Assistance
with a specific command can be obtained by entering help followed by the com-
mand name (e.g., help breakpoint). There is also a gdb quick-reference guide avail-
able at several sites online.

Emulators
An in-circuit emulator (ICE) provides a lot more functionality than a remote debug-
ger. In addition to providing the features available with a remote debugger, an ICE
allows you to debug startup code and programs running from ROM, set breakpoints
for code running from ROM, and even run tests that require more RAM than the sys-
tem contains.
An ICE typically takes the place of—or emulates—the processor on your target
board. (Some emulators come with an adapter that clips over the processor on the
target.) The ICE is itself an embedded system, with its own copy of the target proces-
sor, RAM, ROM, and embedded software. In-circuit emulators are usually pretty
expensive. But they are powerful tools, and in a tight spot, nothing else will help you
get the debug job done better.
Like a debug monitor, an emulator uses a remote debugger for its host interface. In
some cases, it is even possible to use the same debugger frontend for both. But
because the emulator has its own copy of the target processor, it is possible to moni-
tor and control the state of the processor in real time. This allows the emulator to

support such powerful debug features as hardware breakpoints and real-time trac-
ing. Additional information about in-circuit emulators can be found in the Novem-
ber 2001 Embedded Systems Programming article “Introduction to In-Circuit
Emulators,” which can be found online at http://www.embedded.com.
With a debug monitor, you can set breakpoints in your program. However, these
software breakpoints are restricted to instruction fetches—the equivalent of the com-
mand “stop execution if this instruction is about to be fetched.” Emulators, by con-
trast, also support hardware breakpoints. Hardware breakpoints allow you to stop
execution in response to a wider variety of events—not only instruction fetches, but
also interrupts and reads and writes of memory. For example, you might set a hard-
ware breakpoint on the event “address bus = 0x2034FF00 and data bus =
0x20310000.”
Another useful feature of an in-circuit emulator is real-time tracing. Typically, an
emulator incorporates a large block of special-purpose RAM that is dedicated to stor-
ing information about each processor cycle executed. This feature allows you to see
in exactly what order things happened, so it can help you answer questions such as,
“Did the timer interrupt occur before or after the variable bar became 12?” In addi-
tion, real-time trace features are often able to either restrict the information stored or
post-process the data prior to viewing it, to cut down on the amount of memory
wasted.
Another type of debug tool similar to an ICE is a background debug mode (BDM), or
JTAG (pronounced “jay-tag”) debugger. JTAG debuggers are typically less expensive
than in-circuit emulators but offer much of the same functionality. These tools rely
on a debug interface (the JTAG interface) and on-chip test circuitry found in mod-
ern processors. Additional information about JTAG emulators can be found in the
February 2003 Embedded Systems Programming article “Introduction to On-Chip
Debug,” located online at http://www.embedded.com.
The article “How to choose an in-circuit emulator” in the July 2002 issue of Embed-
ded Systems Programming is useful for learning how to select an ICE.
Another type of device that emulates a read-only memory device is a ROM emulator.
Like an ICE, it is an embedded system that connects to the target and communicates
with the host. However, with this device, the target connection is via a ROM socket.
To the embedded processor, it looks like any other read-only memory device. But to
the remote debugger, it looks like a debug monitor.
ROM emulators have some advantages over debug monitors. First, no one has to
port the debug monitor code to your particular target hardware. Second, the ROM
emulator supplies its own serial or network connection to the host, so it is not neces-
sary to use the target’s own, usually limited, resources. And finally, the ROM emula-
tor is a true replacement for the original ROM, so none of the target’s memory is
used up by the debug monitor code.

                                                                           Emulators   |   85
Some disadvantages of using a ROM emulator are that it does not provide general
debugging capabilities (i.e., reading processor register values) and is useless in sys-
tems that lack external memory.

Other Useful Tools
This section is an introduction to other tools that many software developers find useful.

Simulators
A simulator is a completely host-based program that simulates (hence the catchy
name) the functionality and instruction set of the target processor. The user inter-
face is usually the same as or similar to that of the remote debugger. In fact, it might
be possible to use one debugger host for the simulator target as well, as shown in
Figure 5-3. Although simulators have many disadvantages, they are quite valuable in
the earlier stages of a project when there is not yet any actual hardware for the pro-
grammers to experiment with. If you cannot get your hands on a development board,
a simulator is the best tool for getting a jump-start on the software development.

                                                                       Embedded System

                 main() {
                  int a=98,b;

               ->b=a-32;
                  b=b+5/9.0;                                           Embedded System
                }                                         In-Circuit
                                                          Emulator

                       Host

                                                                            Simulator
                                                                       (Running on the Host)

Figure 5-3. A common debugger frontend

By far, the biggest disadvantage of a simulator is that it simulates only the processor.
Embedded systems frequently contain one or more important peripherals. Interac-
tion with these devices can sometimes be imitated with simulator scripts or other
workarounds, but such workarounds are often more trouble to create than the simu-
lation is worth. So you probably won’t do too much with the simulator once the
actual embedded hardware is available.

             Debug Tip: Hardware Verification Using a Simulator
   If you ever encounter a situation in which you—after having read the databook—think
   the target processor is behaving differently from how it should, try running the same
   software in a simulator. If your program works fine there, you’ll know it’s a problem
   related to your hardware. But if the simulator exhibits the same weirdness as the actual
   chip, you’ll know you’ve been misinterpreting the processor documentation all along.

Hardware Tools
As mentioned before, one of the key aspects that differentiates the embedded devel-
oper from the typical software developer is “closeness” to the hardware. Several tools
are available to assist you with finding out what is going on with the hardware. A
basic understanding of how to use these tools is essential to developing good debug-
ging skills, particularly since these same tools are very useful for low-level software
debugging.
Once you have access to your target hardware—and especially during hardware
debug—logic analyzers and oscilloscopes can be indispensable debug tools. A logic
analyzer and an oscilloscope are most useful for debugging the interactions between
the processor and other chips on the board. Because they can view only signals that
lie outside the processor, however, these tools cannot control the flow of execution
of software. This lack of software execution control makes them significantly less
useful by themselves, but coupled with a software debug tool such as a remote
debugger or an emulator, they can be extremely valuable.
A logic analyzer is a piece of laboratory equipment designed specifically for trouble-
shooting digital hardware. It can have dozens or even hundreds of inputs, each capa-
ble of detecting only one thing: whether the electrical signal it is attached to is
currently at logic level 1 or 0. Any subset of the inputs that you select can be dis-
played against a timeline as illustrated in Figure 5-4. Most logic analyzers will also let
you begin capturing data, or trigger, on a particular pattern. For example, you might
make this request: “Display the values of input signals 1 through 10, but don’t start
recording what happens until inputs 2 and 5 are both zero at the same time.”
An oscilloscope is another piece of laboratory equipment for hardware debugging.
But this one is used to examine any electrical signal—analog or digital—on any piece
of hardware. Oscilloscopes are sometimes useful for quickly observing the voltage or
signal waveform on a particular pin, or, in the absence of a logic analyzer, for some-
thing slightly more complex. However, the number of inputs is much smaller (there
are usually two to four), and advanced triggering logic is not often available.

                                                                        Other Useful Tools |   87
                  Input 1
                  Input 2
                  Input 3
                  Input 5
                  Input 9
                  Input 4

                                                                                    time

Figure 5-4. A typical logic analyzer display

                                Debug Tip: External Triggering
     Occasionally, it is desirable to coordinate your observation of some set of electrical sig-
     nals on the target with the embedded software that is running there. For example, you
     might want to observe the bus interaction between the processor and one of the
     peripherals attached to it. A handy trick is to add an output statement to the software
     just prior to the start of the interaction you’re interested in. This output statement
     should cause a unique logic pattern to appear on one or more processor pins. For
     example, you might cause a spare I/O pin to change from a zero to a one. A logic ana-
     lyzer can then be set up to trigger on the occurrence of that event and to capture every-
     thing that follows.

                   When using an oscilloscope, be sure to connect the probe’s ground
                   lead to your target hardware’s ground. Failing to do so will give you an
                   incorrect picture of what is happening.

One of the most primitive debug techniques available is the use of an LED as an indi-
cator of success or failure. The basic idea is to slowly walk the LED enable code
through the larger program. In other words, first begin with the LED enable code at
the reset address. If the LED turns on, you can edit the program—moving the LED
enable code to just after the next execution milestone—and then rebuild and test.
Because this technique gives you very little information about the state of the proces-
sor, it is most appropriate for very simple, linearly executed programs such as the
startup code. But if you don’t have access to a remote debugger or any of the other
debug tools, this type of debugging might be your only choice.
If an LED is not present on your hardware platform, you can still use this debug
technique with an I/O signal and an oscilloscope. In this case, set the I/O signal to a
specific level once you reach a particular execution milestone. Using the oscillo-
scope, you can then probe that I/O pin to determine whether the code has set it

appropriately. If so, you know that the code executed successfully up to that point,
and you can now move the I/O signal code to the next milestone.
The method of using an I/O signal and an oscilloscope can also be used as a basic
performance measurement tool. An I/O pin can be used to measure how long a pro-
gram is spending in a given routine, or how long it takes to execute a particular frag-
ment of code. This can show potential bottlenecks in the program.
For example, to precisely measure the length of time spent in the delay_ms routine
(when passed in a parameter of 1), we could set an I/O pin high when we enter the
routine and then set the same I/O pin low before exiting. We could then attach an
oscilloscope lead to this I/O pin to measure the amount of time that the I/O pin is
high, which is the time spent in the delay_ms routine. The oscilloscope screen should
look similar to the image in Figure 5-5.

                                                  T

                                3.3 V

                         CH 1    0V

                                                                CH 1 2.00 V
                                                                     500 us

                                          In delay_ms routine

Figure 5-5. Using I/O signals for debug and performance measurements

As shown in Figure 5-5, channel 1 (CH 1) is the probe that captured the signal. The
dotted horizontal lines indicate voltage increments—in this case, 2 volts per divi-
sion; the dotted vertical lines indicate time increments—in this case, 500 microsec-
onds per division. The “T” at the top of the screen, along with the arrow, indicate
when the oscilloscope triggered on the falling edge of the I/O pin. The I/O signal
goes from (approximately) 0 to 3.3 volts.
Incidentally, this test shows that the actual delay_ms routine that is supposed to delay
for 1 millisecond is a little off, because the time from setting the I/O pin high to set-
ting the I/O pin low is a bit longer than two divisions.
If I/O pins are available and several inputs are supported by the oscilloscope, you
can use multiple I/O signals simulataneously in order to get a snapshot of the entire

                                                                              Other Useful Tools |   89
system. In more complex systems, you can move the I/O set calls around in the vari-
ous routines and measure how each routine is performing.

                                             Finding Pin 1
     Before (carefully) probing around the circuit board, let’s learn how to identify particu-
     lar pins on an IC. Figure 5-6 shows several common methods used to identify pin 1 on
     an IC. As shown in this figure, a square pad is often used for pin 1, whereas the other
     pads are typically circles. This is typically the case when the IC is in a dual inline pack-
     age (DIP). Another indicator of pin 1 is a silkscreened circle next to pin 1.
     IC manufacturers also indicate pin 1 by putting either a circular indentation next to it
     or an arc indentation on the top of the IC, in which case pin 1 is located to the left of
     this indentation. On some smaller chips, the pin 1 side is chamfered (a grove is cut).
     The other pin numbers almost always increase as you move counterclockwise from pin
     1 around the chip.
     A combination of these may be used in some cases. You might want to take a look at
     the Arcom board to get a better idea of what some of these pin-1 indicators look like.

                                                 Silkscreen
                                                              Indentations
                                 Pad

                                                      1                      5
                                                      2                      6
                                                      3                      7
                                                      4                      8

Figure 5-6. Identifying pin 1 on an IC

Lint
A lint program is a tool for statically checking source code for portability problems
and common coding syntax errors, such as ignored return values and type inconsis-
tencies. A compiler provides some of this error checking, but a lint program verifies
these areas of a program much more carefully and therefore aids in the development
of more robust software.
Setting up lint is similar to setting up a compiler, where different options are passed
into the program to control the type of output produced. In fact, you can augment
your build procedure to include a lint check that sends its output to a file for you to
review at a later time.

A good introduction to using lint is the article “Introduction to Lint” from the
archives of Embedded Systems Programming. This article can be found online at http://
www.embedded.com. For additional information, pick up Checking C Programs with
Lint, by Ian F. Darwin (O’Reilly).
Several commercial and open source lint programs are available. One such program
is called Splint. Additional information about Splint as well as the latest release of it
can be found online at http://www.splint.org.

Version Control
Management of source code is an important part of any development project. This is
especially true when multiple developers are working on the same source code at the
same time.
Version control software allows for storage of source code in a repository that can be
updated as the project progresses through the different development stages. Various
version control programs offer several features such as logging, file comparisons, and
tagging releases, as well as tracking bug fixes and code updates for new features. Ver-
sion control software can also assist in finding bugs that were introducted after
changes were made to a stable code release.
Version control software can be useful not just for source code but for all files associ-
ated with a specific project or product, including programs, the tools used to build
the software, and documentation. There are several open source version control pro-
grams available. Here are a few:
Concurrent Versions System (CVS) (http://ximbiot.com/cvs/cvshome)
   A system that allows many people to work on large sets of files simultaneously
   and can even combine changes from different people to a single file. Essential
   CVS, by Jennifer Vesperman (O’Reilly) covers CVS. There are also several graph-
   ical host applications for CVS, such as the Windows-based program WinCVS
   (http://www.wincvs.org).
Subversion (http://subversion.tigris.org)
    A follow-on to CVS that solves some of CVS’s problems for large projects and is
    gaining adherents. Version Control with Subversion, by Ben Collins-Sussman,
    Brian W. Fitzpatrick, and C. Michael Pilato (O’Reilly) covers Subversion version
    control software.*
Revision Control System (RCS) (http://www.gnu.org/software/rcs)
    A free software (GNU project) version of a traditional Unix source control pro-
    gram adequate for small projects.

* The Subversion book is also available online at http://svnbook.red-bean.com.

                                                                                 Other Useful Tools |   91
Dig into the Hardware
Most of the debugging tools described in this chapter will be used at one point or
another in every embedded project. Oscilloscopes and logic analyzers are most often
used to debug hardware problems; simulators to test software before the hardware is
available; and debug monitors and emulators during the integration and software
debug. Lint and version control software are typically used throughout the entire
project. To be most effective, you should understand what each tool is for and when
and where to apply it for the greatest impact.
On many occasions, software engineers don’t want anything to do with the hard-
ware, but this attitude lessens the software engineer’s usefulness. Most projects are
successful because the team members have a variety of skills and can assist in areas
other than the discipline in which they are trained. Don’t look at a hardware prob-
lem as something that can be solved only by a hardware engineer. Look at it as some-
thing that you can learn from and help solve.
Don’t be afraid to get in there—alone or with the hardware engineer—and find out
what is going on. If you don’t understand the issue, sit in the lab with the hardware
engineer for a while to get a better idea of what the problem is. You might even be
able to write a piece of code that exacerbates the problem and, as a result, uncovers
its cause.

