Chapter
CHAPTER 14 14

Optimization Techniques                                                                14

Things should be made as simple as possible, but not
any simpler.
—Albert Einstein
This chapter offers some tips to optimize code to reduce resource utilization. These
techniques can be roughly divided into strategies for reducing memory usage,
increasing code efficiency, and lowering power requirements. The need for low-cost
versions of our products drives hardware designers to provide just barely enough
memory and processing power to get the job done.
Most of the optimizations performed on code involve a tradeoff between execution
speed and code size. Your program can be made either faster or smaller, but not both.
In fact, an improvement in one of these areas can have a negative impact on the other.
It is up to the programmer to decide which of these improvements is most important.
Given that single piece of information, the compiler’s optimization phase can make
the appropriate choice whenever a speed versus size tradeoff is encountered.
The first step in optimization is to determine which problems you have. You might
have size issues, speed issues, or both. If you have one type of issue, you can have the
compiler help you out with the optimization. If you have both size and speed issues,
we recommend letting the compiler do what it can to reduce the size of your pro-
gram. Then you can find the time-critical code or bottlenecks (where the program is
spending most of its time) and manually optimize that code for speed. (In battery-
powered devices, every unnecessary processor cycle results in reduced runtime;
therefore, the thing to do is optimize for speed across the entire application.)
Execution speed is usually important only within certain of those few portions of the
code that have short deadlines and those most frequently executed. There are many
things you can do to improve the efficiency of those sections by hand. However,
code size is a difficult thing to influence manually, and the compiler is in a much bet-
ter position to make this change across all of your software modules.

Increasing Code Efficiency
By the time your program is working, you might already know, or have a pretty good
idea, which functions and modules are the most critical for overall code efficiency.
ISRs, high-priority tasks, calculations with real-time deadlines, and functions that are
either compute-intensive or frequently called are all likely candidates.
A tool called a profiler, included with some software development suites, can be used
to narrow your focus to those routines in which the program spends most (or too
much) of its time. A profiler collects and reports execution statistics for a program.
These execution statistics include the number of calls to and the total time spent in
each routine.
Once you’ve identified the routines that require greater code efficiency, you can use
the following techniques to reduce their execution time. Note that the techniques
described here are very compiler-dependent. In most cases, there aren’t general rules
that can be applied in all situations. The best way to determine if a technique will
provide improvement is to look at the compiler’s assembly output.
Inline functions
     In C99, the keyword inline can be added to any function declaration. This key-
     word asks the compiler to replace all calls to the indicated function with copies
     of the code that is inside. This eliminates the runtime overhead associated with
     the function call and is most effective when the function is used frequently but
     contains only a few lines of code.
    Inline functions provide a perfect example of how execution speed and code size
    are sometimes inversely linked. The repetitive addition of the inline code will
    increase the size of your program in direct proportion to the number of times the
    function is called. And, obviously, the larger the function, the more significant
    the size increase will be. However, you will lose the overhead of setting up the
    stack frame if parameters are passed into the function. The resulting program
    runs faster but requires more code memory.
Table lookups
    A switch statement is one common programming technique that should be used
    with care. Each test and jump that makes up the machine language implementa-
    tion uses up valuable processor time simply deciding what work should be done
    next. To speed things up, try to put the individual cases in order by their relative
    frequency of occurrence. In other words, put the most likely cases first and the
    least likely cases last. This will reduce the average execution time, though it will
    not improve at all upon the worst-case time.
    If there is a lot of work to be done within each case, it might be more efficient to
    replace the entire switch statement with a table of pointers to functions. For
    example, the following block of code is a candidate for this improvement:
        enum NodeType {NODE_A, NODE_B, NODE_C};

        switch (getNodeType( ))

                                                             Increasing Code Efficiency |   249
           {
                case NODE_A:
                    .
                    .
                case NODE_B:
                    .
                    .
                case NODE_C:
                    .
                    .
           }
      To speed things up, replace this switch statement with the following alternative.
      The first part of this is the setup: the creation of an array of function pointers.
      The second part is a one-line replacement for the switch statement that executes
      more efficiently.
           int processNodeA(void);
           int processNodeB(void);
           int processNodeC(void);

           /* Establishment of a table of pointers to functions. */
           int (* nodeFunctions[])( ) = {processNodeA, processNodeB, processNodeC};

           .
           .

           /* The entire switch statement is replaced by the next line. */
           status = nodeFunctions[getNodeType()]( );
Hand-coded assembly
   Some software modules are best written in assembly language. This gives the
   programmer an opportunity to make them as efficient as possible. Though most
   C compilers produce much better machine code than the average programmer, a
   skilled and experienced assembly programmer might do better work than the
   compiler for a given function.
      For example, on one of our past projects, a digital filtering algorithm was imple-
      mented in C and targeted to a TI TMS320C30 DSP. The compiler was unable to
      take advantage of a special instruction that performed exactly the mathematical
      operations needed. By manually replacing one for loop of the C program with
      inline assembly instructions that did the same thing, overall computation time
      decreased by more than a factor of 10.
Register variables
    The keyword register can be used when declaring local variables. This asks the
    compiler to place the variable into a general-purpose register rather than on the
    stack. Used judiciously, this technique provides hints to the compiler about the
    most frequently accessed variables and will somewhat enhance the performance
    of the function. The more frequently the function is called, the more likely it is
    that such a change will improve the code’s performance. But some compilers
    ignore the register keyword.

Global variables
    It is sometimes more efficient to use a global variable than to pass a parameter to
    a function. This eliminates the need to push the parameter onto the stack before
    the function call and pop it back off once the function is completed. In fact, the
    most efficient implementation of any subroutine would have no parameters at
    all. However, the decision to use a global variable can also have some negative
    effects on the program. The software engineering community generally discour-
    ages the use of global variables in an effort to promote the goals of modularity
    and reentrancy, which are also important considerations.
Polling
     ISRs are often used to improve a program’s responsiveness. However, there are
     some rare cases in which the overhead associated with the interrupts actually
     causes inefficiency. These are cases in which the average time between inter-
     rupts is of the same order of magnitude as the interrupt latency. In such cases, it
     might be better to use polling to communicate with the hardware device. But
     this too can lead to a less modular software design.
Fixed-point arithmetic
    Unless your target platform features a floating-point processor, you’ll pay a very
    large penalty for manipulating float data in your program. The compiler-supplied
    floating-point library contains a set of software subroutines that emulate the
    floating-point instructions. Many of these functions take a long time to execute
    relative to their integer counterparts and also might not be reentrant.
    If you are using floating-point for only a few calculations, it might be better to
    implement the calculations themselves using fixed-point arithmetic. For exam-
    ple, two fractional bits representing a value of 0.00, 0.25, 0.50, or 0.75 are easily
    stored in any integer by merely multiplying the real value by 4 (e.g., << 2). Addi-
    tion and subtraction can be accomplished via the integer instruction set, as long
    as both values have the same imaginary binary point. Multiplication and divi-
    sion can be accomplished similarly, if the other number is a whole integer.
    It is theoretically possible to perform any floating-point calculation with fixed-
    point arithmetic. (After all, that’s how the floating-point software library does it,
    right?) Your biggest advantage is that you probably don’t need to implement the
    entire IEEE 754 standard just to perform one or two calculations. If you do need
    that kind of complete functionality, stick with the compiler’s floating-point
    library and look for other ways to speed up your program.
Variable size
    It is typically best to use the processor’s native register width for variables when-
    ever possible (whether it is 8, 16, or 32 bits). This allows the compiler to pro-
    duce code that takes advantage of the fast registers built into the processor’s
    machine opcodes. Obviously, you need to ensure that the variable size accom-
    modates the number range that the variable represents. For example, if you need
    a count that goes from 0 to 512, you can’t use an 8-bit variable.

                                                              Increasing Code Efficiency |   251
      A variable size tailored to the processor can also speed up processing by limiting
      the number of external memory accesses. If a processor has a 16-bit data bus and
      it needs to access a 32-bit variable in external RAM, two data fetches must be
      performed for the processor to get the variable.
      C99 defines integer types int_fastN_t and uint_fastN_t (where N represents the
      integer length) in stdint.h. These types are meant to be used when you need at
      least “X bits” (e.g., X = 16) to store your data but don’t care if the field is larger
      than X in width, to make access as fast as possible. These “fast” integer types are
      thus no good for use with peripheral registers, which always have a fixed width
      that cannot be larger or smaller than X.
Loop unrolling
   In some cases, repetitive loop code can be optimized by performing loop unroll-
   ing. In loop unrolling, the loop overhead at the start and end of a loop is elimi-
   nated. Here’s an example of a for loop:
           for (idx = 0; idx < 5; idx++)
           {
               value[idx] = incomingData[idx];
           }
      Here’s the unrolled version without the loop overhead:
           value[0] = incomingData[0];
           value[1] = incomingData[1];
           value[2] = incomingData[2];
           value[3] = incomingData[3];
           value[4] = incomingData[4];
      Some compilers offer loop unrolling as an optimization; in other cases, it might
      be better for the developer to code it. It is helpful to check the assembly output
      from the compiler to see whether efficiency has actually been improved.
      The amount of rolling that you—or the compiler—choose to do must balance the
      gain in speed versus the increased size of the code. Loop unrolling increases code
      size—another situation where you must trade code size for speed. Also, loop
      unrolling can be used only when the number of iterations through the loop are
      fixed. One example of an optimized implementation of loop unrolling is the cod-
      ing technique known as Duff’s device (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duff’s_device).

Decreasing Code Size
As stated earlier, when it comes to reducing code size, your best bet is to let the com-
piler do the work for you. However, if the resulting program is still too large for your
available ROM, there are several programming techniques you can use to further
reduce the size of your program.

Once you’ve got the automatic optimizations working, take a look at these tips for
further reducing the size of your code by hand:
Avoid standard library routines
    One of the best things you can do to reduce the size of your program is to avoid
    using large standard library routines. Many of the largest routines are costly in
    terms of size because they try to handle all possible cases. For example, the
    strupr function might be small, but a call to it might drag other functions such
    as strlower, strcmp, strcpy, and others into your program whether they are used
    or not.
    It might be possible to implement a subset of the functionality yourself with sig-
    nificantly less code. For example, the standard C library’s sprintf routine is
    notoriously large. Much of this bulk is located within the floating-point manipu-
    lation routines on which it depends. But if you don’t need to format and display
    floating-point values (%a, %e, %f, or %g), you could write your own integer-only
    version of sprintf and save several kilobytes of code space. In fact, a few imple-
    mentations of the standard C library (Cygnus’s newlib comes to mind) include
    just such a function, called siprintf.
Use goto statements
    As with global variables, good software engineering practice dictates against the
    use of this technique. But in a pinch, goto statements can be used to remove
    complicated control structures or to share a block of oft-repeated code.
    For example, many programmers use the goto statement to bail out of a routine
    in case of error. In this way, the programmer can group together any things that
    must be done before exiting the routine, as shown here:
        int functionWork(void)
        {
            /* Do some work here. */
            ...

            /* If there was an error doing the work, exit. */
            goto CLEANUP;

            /* Do some more work here. */
            ...

            /* If there was an error doing the work, exit. */
            goto CLEANUP;

            ...

            /* Otherwise, everything succeeded. */
            return SUCCESS;

                                                                Decreasing Code Size |   253
           CLEANUP:
               /* Clean up code here. */

                return FAILURE;
           }

In addition to these techniques for reducing code size, several of the ones described
in the prior section could be helpful, specifically table lookups, hand-coded assem-
bly, register variables, and global variables. Of these techniques, the use of hand-
coded assembly usually yields the largest decrease in code size.

Problems with Optimizing Compilers
The GNU C compiler has several optimization command-line options, all of which
are variants of –O. Specifying –O3 turns on all available gcc optimizations, regard-
less of their effects on the speed-versus-size tradeoff. The command-line option –Os
also optimizes the code for size. For a detailed explanation of the different gcc opti-
mization levels, refer to the gcc online manual at http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs.
Murphy’s Law dictates that the first time you enable the compiler’s optimization fea-
ture, your previously working program will suddenly fail. Perhaps the most notori-
ous of the automatic optimizations is “dead code elimination.” This optimization
eliminates code that the compiler believes to be either redundant or irrelevant. For
example, adding zero to a variable requires no runtime calculation whatsoever. But
you might still want the compiler to generate those “irrelevant” instructions if they
perform some function that the compiler doesn’t know about.
For example, given the following block of code, most optimizing compilers would
remove the first statement because the value of *pControl is not used before it is
overwritten (on the third line):
          *pControl = DISABLE;
          *pData    = 'a';
          *pControl = ENABLE;

But what if pControl and pData are actually pointers to memory-mapped device regis-
ters? In that case, the peripheral device would not receive the DISABLE command
before the byte of data was written. This could potentially wreak havoc on all future
interactions between the processor and this peripheral. To protect yourself from such
problems, you must declare all pointers to memory-mapped registers and global vari-
ables that are shared between tasks (or a task and an ISR) with the keyword
volatile. And if you miss just one of them, Murphy’s Law will come back to haunt
you in the final days of your project—guaranteed.

                   Never make the mistake of assuming that the optimized program will
                   behave the same way as the unoptimized one. You must completely
                   retest your software at each new optimization level to be sure its
                   behavior hasn’t changed.

To make matters worse, debugging an optimized program is challenging, to say the
least. With the compiler’s optimization enabled, the correlation between a line of
source code and the set of processor instructions that implements that line is much
weaker. Those particular instructions might have moved or been split up, or two
similar code blocks might now share a common implementation. In fact, some lines
of the high-level language program might have been removed from the program alto-
gether (as they were in the previous example)! As a result, you might be unable to set
a breakpoint on a particular line of the program or examine the value of a variable of
interest.

Reducing Memory Usage
In some cases, RAM rather than ROM is the limiting factor for your application. In
these cases, you’ll want to reduce your dependence on global data, the stack, and the
heap. These are all optimizations better made by the programmer than by the compiler.
Because ROM is usually cheaper than RAM (on a per-byte basis), one acceptable
strategy for reducing the amount of global data might be to move constant data into
ROM. This can be done automatically by the compiler if you declare all of your con-
stant data with the keyword const. Most C compilers place all of the constant global
data they encounter into a special data segment that is recognizable to the locator as
ROM-able. This technique is most valuable if there are lots of strings or table-oriented
data that will not change at runtime.
If some of the data is fixed once the program is running but not necessarily constant,
the constant data segment could be placed in a hybrid memory device such as flash
or EEPROM. This memory device could then be updated over a network or by a
technician assigned to make the change. An example of such data is the sales tax rate
for each locale in which your product will be deployed. If a tax rate changes, the
memory device can be updated, but additional RAM can be saved in the meantime.
Stack size reductions can also lower your program’s RAM requirement. One way to
figure out approximately how much stack you need is to fill the entire memory area
reserved for the stack with a special data pattern, such as 0xAAAA. Then, after the
software has been running for a while—under both normal and stressful condi-
tions—use a debugger to examine the modified stack. The part of the stack memory
area that still contains your special data pattern has never been overwritten, so you
can reduce the size of the stack area by that amount.*
Be especially conscious of stack space if you are using a real-time operating system.
Preemptive operating systems create a separate stack for each task. These stacks are

* Of course, you probably want to leave a little extra space on the stack, in case your testing didn’t last long
  enough or did not accurately reflect all possible runtime scenarios. Never forget that a stack overflow is a
  potentially fatal event for your software and should be avoided at all costs.

                                                                               Reducing Memory Usage |      255
used for function calls and ISRs that occur within the context of a task. You can
determine the amount of memory required for each task stack in the manner previ-
ously described. You might also try to reduce the number of tasks or switch to an
operating system that has a distinct “interrupt stack” for execution of all ISRs. The
latter method can significantly reduce the stack size requirement of each task.
The size of the heap is limited to the amount of RAM left over after all of the global
data and stack space has been allocated. If the heap is too small, your program will
not be able to allocate dynamic memory when it is needed, so always be sure to com-
pare the result of malloc with NULL before dereferencing the memory you tried to allo-
cate. If you’ve tried all of these suggestions and your program is still requiring too
much memory, you might have no choice but to eliminate the heap altogether. This
isn’t entirely bad in the case of embedded systems, which frequently allocate all
memory needed by the system at initialization time.
Note that many embedded programmers avoid the use of malloc, and thus the need
for a heap, altogether. But the key benefit of dynamic memory allocation is that you
don’t need to spend RAM to keep variables around that are only used briefly in the
program. This is a way to reduce total memory utilization.

Power-Saving Techniques
A major concern in battery-powered embedded systems design is power consump-
tion. In this section, we take a brief look at areas where embedded software can assist
in conserving the system’s vital energy source.
Power consumption is a major concern for portable or battery-operated devices.
Power issues, such as how long the device needs to run and whether the batteries can
be recharged, need to be thought out ahead of time. In some systems, replacing a
battery in a device can be a big expense. This means the system must be conscious of
the amount of power it uses and take appropriate steps to conserve battery life.
There are several methods to conserve power in an embedded system, including
clock control, power-sensitive processors, low-voltage ICs, and circuit shutdown.
Some of these techniques must be addressed by the hardware designer in his selec-
tion of the different system ICs. There may be lower-power versions of certain
peripherals. Some power-saving techniques are under software control.
It might seem ideal to select the fastest and most powerful processor available for a
particular embedded system. However, one of the tasks of the hardware designer is
to use just enough processing power to enable the device to get its job done. This
helps reduce the power consumed by the device. The processor selected plays a key
role in determining the amount of power an embedded system will consume. In
addition, some processors can automatically shut down different execution units
when they are not in use.

Processor Modes
One software technique offered by many embedded processors to conserve power is
different operating modes. These modes allow the software to scale processor power
consumption to match the moment-by-moment needs of the application. For exam-
ple, the Arcom board’s PXA255 processor has four operating modes:
Turbo mode
   The processing core runs at the peak frequency. Minimizing external memory
   accesses would be worthwhile in this mode, because the processor would have
   to wait for the external memory.
Run mode
   The processor core runs at its normal frequency. This is the normal or default
   operating mode.
Idle mode
     The processor core is not clocked, but the other peripheral components operate
     as normal.
Sleep mode
    This is the lowest power state for the processor.
Understanding the details of these modes and how to get into and out of them is key.
For example, the PXA255 can conserve power by entering and exiting idle mode
multiple times in a second, because the processor is quickly reactivated in the prior
state. However, in sleep mode, the processor state is not maintained and may require
a complete system reboot when exiting this mode.
Operating the processor in different modes can save quite a bit of power. The power
consumption for the PXA255 processor (running at 200 MHz) in normal run mode is
typically 178 mW. While in idle mode, the PXA255 typically consumes 63 mW.
There are several issues to consider when planning the power management software
design. First, you must ensure that each task is able to get enough cycles to perform
its assigned work. If a system doubles battery life by entering idle modes often but is
thus unable to perform its work, the product fails to meet its design goals.
You also need to determine when the system is not doing anything and how to wake
up the processor when it needs to operate, and you need to know what events will
wake up the system. For example, in an embedded system that sends some data
across a network every few minutes, it makes sense to be able to shut down the
device to conserve power until it is time to send the data. The device must still be
able to wake up in case an error condition arises. Therefore, you must understand
how a peripheral circuit wakes up the processor when the processor needs to oper-
ate (including how long it takes the circuit to wake up and whether any reinitializa-
tion needs to be done).

                                                             Power-Saving Techniques |   257
The optimization techniques presented earlier in this chapter can be used to con-
serve power as well. By reducing the amount of execution time for the main tasks in
a system, you allow the system to spend more time in its low-power state.
Even though the processor is in idle mode, various peripherals still operate and can
be programmed to wake up the processor. Typically, interrupts can be used to wake
up the processor to perform some task. This is why power management must be con-
sidered when designing the software. For example, some behaviors can be achieved
by polling. But when the events are less frequent and power management is an issue,
it makes sense to use interrupts rather than polling because this allows the processor
to sleep for the maximum amount of time before waking up to handle an event.
When you choose to use polling, the processor must constantly perform the polling
operation, which typically happens at a set interval. This wastes power when the
polling operation executes and no events have occurred.
You can also take advantage of peripherals that operate while the processor is in idle
mode. For example, if you are transferring data from an external peripheral into
RAM and need to process the data once a certain amount of data is received, you can
use the DMA controller. This way, instead of the processor handling each byte
received, it sleeps while the data is transferred. You can configure the DMA control-
ler to interrupt the processor once this data has been received.

Clock Frequency
Another power-saving technique that can be controlled by software is to vary proces-
sor clock speeds. Some processors accept a fixed-input clock frequency but feature
the ability to reduce internal clock speeds by programming clock configuration regis-
ters. Software can reduce the clock speed to save power during the execution of non-
critical tasks and increase the clock speed when processing demands are high.
The PXA255 datasheet shows the power consumption while the processor core oper-
ates at different frequencies. Table 14-1 shows a comparison for three different PXA255
core clock frequencies and the associated power consumption at each frequency.

Table 14-1. PXA255 power consumption comparison

 Processor core clock speed (MHz)      Power consumption (mW)
 400                                   411
 300                                   283
 200                                   178

As the software designer, you need to understand what happens during the fre-
quency change sequence—what to do if an interrupt occurs during the frequency
change and what needs to be reconfigured (such as DRAM refresh cycles) for the
new frequency.

You will need comprehensive knowledge of all software operation in the system if
you decide to alter the processor frequency on the fly. For example, it can be tricky
to know when to lower the clock speed when a multitasking RTOS is used.
In other cases, particular peripherals can be completely disabled when they are not in
use. For example, if a particular peripheral module is not used in the PXA255 proces-
sor, the clock to that unit can be disabled using the Clock Enable Register (CKEN).

External Memory Access
There are several things that can be done to reduce external memory accesses. If a
cache is available, you can enable it to avoid having the processor fetch data or
instructions from external memory. A cache is very high-speed, on-chip memory that
supplies the most recently used instructions and/or data to the processor with no or
few wait states.
Similarly, internal processor memory can be used, if available. In some cases, the
internal memory can be used for both data and code. It might not be feasible to
incorporate all the system software in internal memory. If there is not enough mem-
ory available for the entire system software, you must determine what data and code
should be included. It’s best to include the stack and frequently used variables or
functions for limiting external memory accesses. In an embedded system where
power consumption is the top priority, it might make sense to switch to a processor
with more on-chip memory in order to reduce off-chip accesses.
Optimization techniques can help here as well. For power optimization, instead of
focusing solely on speed or code size, you need to focus on analyzing code to deter-
mine how to reduce external bus transactions.
These are just a few considerations to keep in mind when working on power manage-
ment software. Future products may include technology with self-renewing sources of
energy. There are ways to harvest energy for circuits that are self-powered using
sources such as vibration, light, and thermal sources. These techniques are discussed
in the June 2005 Embedded Systems Design article “Energy-Harvesting Chips: The
Quest for Everlasting Life,” which can be found online at http://www.embedded.com.

Limiting the Impact of C++
One of the issues we faced upon deciding to write this book was whether or not to
include C++ in the discussion and examples. For almost all of the projects we have
worked on throughout our respective careers, the embedded software was written in
C and assembly language. In addition, there has been much debate within the
embedded software community about the appropriateness of C++. It is widely
believed that C++ programs produce larger executables that run more slowly than
programs written entirely in C. However, C++ has many benefits for programmers.

                                                           Limiting the Impact of C++ |   259
We believe that many readers will face the choice of using C++ in their embedded
programming. This section covers some of the C++ features that are useful for
embedded system software and warns you about some of the more expensive fea-
tures in the language.

                                             Embedded C++
      You might be wondering why the creators of the C++ language included so many fea-
      tures that are expensive in terms of execution time and code size. You are not alone;
      people around the world have wondered the same thing—especially the users of C++
      for embedded programming. Many of these expensive features are recent additions
      that are neither strictly necessary nor part of the original C++ specification. These fea-
      tures have been added one by one as part of the ongoing “standardization” process.
      In 1996, a group of Japanese processor vendors joined together to define a subset of
      the C++ language and libraries that is better suited for embedded software develop-
      ment. They call their industry standard Embedded C++ (EC++). EC++ generated a
      great deal of initial interest and excitement within the embedded community.
      A proper subset of the draft C++ standard, EC++ omits pretty much anything that can
      be left out without limiting the expressiveness of the underlying language. This
      includes not only expensive features such as multiple inheritance, virtual base classes,
      runtime type identification, and exception handling, but also some of the newest addi-
      tions such as templates, namespaces, and new-style casts. What’s left is a simpler ver-
      sion of C++ that is still object-oriented and a superset of C, but has significantly less
      runtime overhead and smaller runtime libraries.
      A number of commercial C++ compilers support the EC++ standard as an option. Sev-
      eral others allow you to manually disable individual language features, thus enabling
      you to emulate EC++ (or create your very own flavor of the C++ language).

Of course, not every feature of C++ is expensive. In fact, the earliest C++ compilers
used a technology called C-front to turn C++ programs into C, which was then fed
into a standard C compiler. That this is even possible demonstrates that many of the
syntactical differences between the languages have little or no runtime cost.* For
example, the definition of a class is completely benign. The list of public and pri-
vate member data and functions is not much different from a struct and a list of
function prototypes. However, the C++ compiler is able to use the public and
private keywords to determine which method calls and data accesses are allowed
and prohibited. Because this determination is made at compile time, there is no pen-
alty paid at runtime. Thus, the use of classes alone affects neither the code size nor
efficiency of your programs.

* Moreover, we want to make clear that there is no penalty for compiling an orginal C program with a C++
  compiler.

Default parameter values are also penalty-free. The compiler simply inserts code to
pass the default value whenever the function is called without an argument in that
position. Similarly, function name overloading involves only a compile-time code
modification. Functions with the same names but different parameters are each
assigned unique names during the compilation process. The compiler alters the func-
tion name each time it appears in your program, and the linker matches them up
appropriately.
Operator overloading is another feature that might be used in embedded systems.
Whenever the compiler sees such an operator, it simply replaces it with the appropri-
ate function call. So in the C++ code listing that follows, the last two lines are equiv-
alent, and the performance penalty is easily understood:
    Complex   a, b, c;

    c = operator+(a, b);           // The traditional way: Function Call
    c = a + b;                     // The C++ way: Operator Overloading

Constructors and destructors have a slight penalty. These special methods are guar-
anteed to be called each time an object of the type is created or goes out of scope,
respectively. However, this small amount of overhead is a reasonable price to pay for
fewer bugs. Constructors eliminate an entire class of C programming errors having to
do with uninitialized data structures. This feature has also proved useful for hiding
the awkward initialization sequences associated with some classes.
Virtual functions also have a reasonable cost/benefit ratio. Without going into too
much detail about what virtual functions are, let’s just say that polymorphism would
be impossible without them. And without polymorphism, C++ would not be a true
object-oriented language. The only significant cost of virtual functions is one addi-
tional memory lookup before a virtual function can be called. Ordinary function and
method calls are not affected.
The features of C++ that are typically too expensive for embedded systems are tem-
plates, exceptions, and runtime type identification. All three of these negatively
impact code size, and exceptions and runtime type identification also increase execu-
tion time. Before deciding whether to use these features, you might want to do some
experiments to see how they will affect the size and speed of your own application.

                                                             Limiting the Impact of C++ |   261
