Preface

                  This preface introduces the ARM Architecture Reference Manual, ARMv8, for ARMv8-A architecture profile. It
                  contains the following sections:
                  •     About this manual on page xvi.
                  •     Using this manual on page xviii.
                  •     Conventions on page xxiv.
                  •     Additional reading on page xxvi.
                  •     Feedback on page xxvii.

                          Note
                  This document describes only the ARMv8-A architecture profile. For the behaviors required by the ARMv7-A and
                  ARMv7-R architecture profiles, see the ARM® Architecture Reference Manual, ARMv7-A and ARMv7-R edition.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          xv
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
Preface
About this manual

About this manual
                    This manual describes the ARM® architecture v8, ARMv8. The architecture describes the operation of an
                    ARMv8-A Processing element (PE), and this manual includes descriptions of:

                    •     The two Execution states, AArch64 and AArch32.

                    •     The instruction sets:
                          —      In AArch32 state, the A32 and T32 instruction sets, that are compatible with earlier versions of the
                                 ARM architecture.
                          —      In AArch64 state, the A64 instruction set.

                    •     The states that determine how a PE operates, including the current Exception level and Security state, and in
                          AArch32 state the PE mode.

                    •     The Exception model.

                    •     The interprocessing model, that supports transitioning between AArch64 state and AArch32 state.

                    •     The memory model, that defines memory ordering and memory management. This manual covers a single
                          architecture profile, ARMv8-A, that defines a Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA).

                    •     The programmers’ model, and its interfaces to System registers that control most PE and memory system
                          features, and provide status information.

                    •     The Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions, that provide high-performance:
                          —    Single-precision, half-precision, and double-precision floating-point operations.
                          —    Conversions between double-precision, single-precision, and half-precision floating-point values.
                          —    Integer, single-precision floating-point, half-precision floating-point, and in A64, double-precision
                               vector operations in all instruction sets.
                          —    Single-precision, half-precision, and double-precision floating-point vector operations in the A64
                               instruction set.

                    •     The security model, that provides two security states to support secure applications.

                    •     The virtualization model, that support the virtualization of Non-secure operation.

                    •     The Debug architecture, that provides software access to debug features.

                    This manual gives the assembler syntax for the instructions it describes, meaning that it describes instructions in
                    textual form. However, this manual is not a tutorial for ARM assembler language, nor does it describe ARM
                    assembler language, except at a very basic level. To make effective use of ARM assembler language, read the
                    documentation supplied with the assembler being used.

                    This manual is organized into parts:

                    Part A          Provides an introduction to the ARMv8-A architecture, and an overview of the AArch64 and
                                    AArch32 Execution states.

                    Part B          Describes the application level view of the AArch64 Execution state, meaning the view from EL0.
                                    It describes the application level view of the programmers’ model and the memory model.

                    Part C          Describes the A64 instruction set, that is available in the AArch64 Execution state. The descriptions
                                    for each instruction also include the precise effects of each instruction when executed at EL0,
                                    described as unprivileged execution, including any restrictions on its use, and how the effects of the
                                    instruction differ at higher Exception levels. This information is of primary importance to authors
                                    and users of compilers, assemblers, and other programs that generate ARM machine code.

                    Part D          Describes the system level view of the AArch64 Execution state. It includes details of the System
                                    registers, most of which are not accessible from EL0, and the system level view of the programmers’
                                    model and the memory model. This part includes the description of self-hosted debug.

xvi                            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                                                Preface
                                                                                                                      About this manual

                  Part E          Describes the application level view of the AArch32 Execution state, meaning the view from the
                                  EL0. It describes the application level view of the programmers’ model and the memory model.

                                           Note
                                  In AArch32 state, execution at EL0 is execution in User mode.

                  Part F          Describes the T32 and A32 instruction sets, that are available in the AArch32 Execution state. These
                                  instruction sets are backwards-compatible with earlier versions of the ARM architecture. This part
                                  describes the precise effects of each instruction when executed in User mode, described as
                                  unprivileged execution or execution at EL0, including any restrictions on its use, and how the effects
                                  of the instruction differ at higher Exception levels. This information is of primary importance to
                                  authors and users of compilers, assemblers, and other programs that generate ARM machine code.

                                           Note
                                  User mode is the only mode where software execution is unprivileged.

                  Part G          Describes the system level view of the AArch32 Execution state, that is generally compatible with
                                  earlier versions of the ARM architecture. This part includes details of the System registers, most of
                                  which are not accessible from EL0, and the instruction interface to those registers. It also describes
                                  the system level view of the programmers’ model and the memory model.

                  Part H          Describes the Debug architecture for external debug. This provides configuration, breakpoint and
                                  watchpoint support, and a Debug Communications Channel (DCC) to a debug host.

                  Part I          Describes additional features of the architecture that are not closely coupled to a processing element
                                  (PE), and therefore are accessed through memory-mapped interfaces. Some of these features are
                                  OPTIONAL.

                  Part J          Provides pseudocode that describes various features of the ARMv8 architecture.

                  Part K, Appendixes
                                  Provide additional information. Some appendixes give information that is not part of the ARMv8
                                  architectural requirements. The cover page of each appendix indicates its status.

                  Glossary        Defines terms used in this document that have a specialized meaning.

                                           Note
                                  Terms that are generally well understood in the microelectronics industry are not included in the
                                  Glossary.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               xvii
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Preface
Using this manual

Using this manual
                    The information in this manual is organized into parts, as described in this section.

Part A, Introduction and Architecture Overview
                    Part A gives an overview of the ARMv8-A architecture profile, including its relationship to the other ARM PE
                    architectures. It introduces the terminology used to describe the architecture, and gives an overview of the
                    Executions states, AArch64 and AArch32. It contains the following chapter:

                    Chapter A1 Introduction to the ARMv8 Architecture
                                    Read this for an introduction to the ARMv8 architecture.

Part B, The AArch64 Application Level Architecture
                    Part B describes the AArch64 state application level view of the architecture. It contains the following chapters:

                    Chapter B1 The AArch64 Application Level Programmers’ Model
                                    Read this for an application level description of the programmers’ model for software executing in
                                    AArch64 state. It describes execution at EL0 when EL0 is using AArch64 state.

                    Chapter B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                    Read this for an application level description of the memory model for software executing in
                                    AArch64 state. It describes the memory model for execution in EL0 when EL0 is using AArch64
                                    state. It includes information about ARM memory types, attributes, and memory access controls.

Part C, The A64 Instruction Set
                    Part C describes the A64 instruction set, that is used in AArch64 state. It contains the following chapters:

                    Chapter C1 The A64 Instruction Set
                                    Read this for a description of the A64 instruction set and common instruction operation details.

                    Chapter C2 About the A64 Instruction Descriptions
                                    Read this to understand the format of the A64 instruction descriptions.

                    Chapter C3 A64 Instruction Set Overview
                                    Read this for an overview of the individual A64 instructions, that are divided into five functional
                                    groups.

                    Chapter C4 A64 Instruction Set Encoding
                                    Read this for a description of the A64 instruction set encoding.

                    Chapter C5 The A64 System Instruction Class
                                    Read this for a description of the AArch64 system instructions and register descriptions, and the
                                    system instruction class encoding space.

                    Chapter C6 A64 Base Instruction Descriptions
                                    Read this for information on key aspects of the A64 base instructions and for descriptions of the
                                    individual instructions, which are listed in alphabetical order.

                    Chapter C7 A64 Advanced SIMD and Floating-point Instruction Descriptions
                                    Read this for information on key aspects of the A64 Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions
                                    and for descriptions of the individual instructions, which are listed in alphabetical order.

xviii                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                                               Preface
                                                                                                                     Using this manual

Part D, The AArch64 System Level Architecture
                  Part D describes the AArch64 state system level view of the architecture. It contains the following chapters:

                  Chapter D1 The AArch64 System Level Programmers’ Model
                                  Read this for a description of the AArch64 state system level view of the programmers’ model.

                  Chapter D2 AArch64 Self-hosted Debug
                                  Read this for an introduction to, and a description of, self-hosted debug in AArch64 state.

                  Chapter D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                  Read this for a description of the AArch64 state system level view of the general features of the
                                  memory system.

                  Chapter D4 The AArch64 Virtual Memory System Architecture
                                  Read this for a system level view of the AArch64 Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA),
                                  the memory system architecture of an ARMv8 implementation that is executing in AArch64 state.

                  Chapter D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                  Read this for a description of an implementation of the ARM Performance Monitors, that are an
                                  optional non-invasive debug component.

                  Chapter D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                  Read this for a description of an implementation of the Statistical Profiling Extension, that is an
                                  optional AArch64 state non-invasive debug component.

                  Chapter D7 Statistical Profiling Extension Sample Record Specification
                                  Read this for a description the sample records generated by the Statistical Profiling Extension.

                  Chapter D8 The Generic Timer in AArch64 state
                                  Read this for a description of the AArch64 view of an implementation of the ARM Generic Timer.

                  Chapter D9 AArch64 System Register Encoding
                                  Read this for a description of the description of the encoding of the AArch64 System registers, and
                                  the other uses of the AArch64 System registers encoding space.

                  Chapter D10 AArch64 System Register Descriptions
                                  Read this for an introduction to, and description of, each of the AArch64 System registers.

Part E, The AArch32 Application Level Architecture
                  Part E describes the AArch32 state application level view of the architecture. It contains the following chapters:

                  Chapter E1 The AArch32 Application Level Programmers’ Model
                                  Read this for an application level description of the programmers’ model for software executing in
                                  AArch32 state. It describes execution at EL0 when EL0 is using AArch32 state.

                  Chapter E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                  Read this for an application level description of the memory model for software executing in
                                  AArch32 state. It describes the memory model for execution in EL0 when EL0 is using AArch32
                                  state. It includes information about ARM memory types, attributes, and memory access controls.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  xix
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Preface
Using this manual

Part F, The AArch32 Instruction Sets
                    Part F describes the T32 and A32 instruction sets, that are used in AArch32 state. It contains the following chapters:

                    Chapter F1 The AArch32 Instruction Sets Overview
                                    Read this for an overview of the T32 and A32 instruction sets.

                    Chapter F2 About the T32 and A32 Instruction Descriptions
                                    Read this to understand the format of the T32 and A32 instruction descriptions.

                    Chapter F3 T32 Instruction Set Encoding
                                    Read this for a description of the T32 instruction set encoding. This includes the T32 encoding of
                                    the Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions.

                    Chapter F4 A32 Instruction Set Encoding
                                    Read this for a description of the A32 instruction set encoding. This includes the A32 encoding of
                                    the Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions.

                    Chapter F5 T32 and A32 Base Instruction Set Instruction Descriptions
                                    Read this for a description of each of the T32 and A32 base instructions.

                    Chapter F6 T32 and A32 Advanced SIMD and Floating-point Instruction Descriptions
                                    Read this for a description of each of the T32 and A32 Advanced SIMD and floating-point
                                    instructions.

Part G, The AArch32 System Level Architecture
                    Part G describes the AArch32 state system level view of the architecture. It contains the following chapters:

                    Chapter G1 The AArch32 System Level Programmers’ Model
                                    Read this for a description of the AArch32 state system level view of the programmers’ model for
                                    execution in an Exception level that is using AArch32.

                    Chapter G2 AArch32 Self-hosted Debug
                                    Read this for an introduction to, and a description of, self-hosted debug in AArch64 state.

                    Chapter G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                    Read this for a system level view of the general features of the memory system.

                    Chapter G4 The AArch32 Virtual Memory System Architecture
                                    Read this for a description of the AArch32 Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA).

                    Chapter G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
                                    Read this for a description of the AArch32 view of an implementation of the ARM Generic Timer.

                    Chapter G6 AArch32 System Register Encoding
                                    Read this for a description of the description of the encoding of the AArch32 System registers,
                                    including the System instructions that are part of the the AArch32 System registers encoding space.

                    Chapter G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                    Read this for a description of each of the AArch32 System registers.

xx                             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                                                Preface
                                                                                                                      Using this manual

Part H, External Debug
                  Part H describes the architecture for external debug. It contains the following chapters:

                  Chapter H1 About External Debug
                                  Read this for an introduction to external debug, and a definition of the scope of this part of the
                                  manual.

                  Chapter H2 Debug State
                                  Read this for a description of debug state, which the PE might enter as the result of a Halting debug
                                  event.

                  Chapter H3 Halting Debug Events
                                  Read this for a description of the external debug events referred to as Halting debug events.

                  Chapter H4 The Debug Communication Channel and Instruction Transfer Register
                                  Read this for a description of the communication between a debugger and the PE debug logic using
                                  the Debug Communications Channel and the Instruction Transfer register.

                  Chapter H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                  Read this for a description of the embedded cross-trigger interface.

                  Chapter H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
                                  Read this for a description of reset and powerdown support in the Debug architecture.

                  Chapter H7 The PC Sample-based Profiling Extension
                                  Read this for a description of the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension that is an OPTIONAL
                                  extension to an ARMv8 implementation.

                  Chapter H8 About the External Debug Registers
                                  Read this for some additional information about the external debug registers.

                  Chapter H9 External Debug Register Descriptions
                                  Read this for a description of each external debug register.

Part I, Memory-mapped Components of the ARMv8 Architecture
                  Part I describes the memory-mapped components in the architecture. It contains the following chapters:

                  Chapter I1 Requirements for Memory-mapped Components
                                  Read this for descriptions of some general requirements for memory-mapped components within a
                                  system that complies with the ARMv8 Architecture.

                  Chapter I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
                                  Read this for a definition of a system level implementation of the Generic Timer.

                  Chapter I3 Recommended External Interface to the Performance Monitors
                                  Read this for a description of the recommended memory-mapped and external debug interfaces to
                                  the Performance Monitors.

                  Chapter I4 External System Control Register Descriptions
                                  Read this for a description of each memory-mapped system control register.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 xxi
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Preface
Using this manual

Part J, Architectural Pseudocode
                    Part J contains pseudocode that describes various features of the ARM architecture. It contains the following
                    chapter:

                    Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode
                                   Read this for the pseudocode definitions that describe various features of the ARMv8 architecture,
                                   for operation in AArch64 state and in AArch32 state.

Part K, Appendixes
                    This manual contains the following appendixes:

                    Appendix K1 Architectural Constraints on UNPREDICTABLE behaviors
                                   Read this for a description of the architecturally-required constraints on UNPREDICTABLE behaviors
                                   in the ARMv8 architecture, including AArch32 behaviors that were UNPREDICTABLE in previous
                                   versions of the architecture.

                    Appendix K2 Recommended External Debug Interface
                                   Read this for a description of the recommended external debug interface.

                                            Note
                                   This description is not part of the ARM architecture specification. It is included here as
                                   supplementary information, for the convenience of developers and users who might require this
                                   information.

                    Appendix K3 Recommendations for Performance Monitors Event Numbers for IMPLEMENTATION
                    DEFINED Events
                                   Read this for a description of ARM recommendations for the use of the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                   event numbers.

                                            Note
                                   This description is not part of the ARM architecture specification. It is included here as
                                   supplementary information, for the convenience of developers and users who might require this
                                   information.

                    Appendix K4 Recommendations for reporting memory attributes on an interconnect
                                   Read this for the ARM recommendations about how the architectural memory attributes are
                                   reported on an interconnect.

                    Appendix K5 Additional Information for Implementations of the Generic Timer
                                   Read this for additional information about implementations of the ARM Generic Timer. This
                                   information does not form part of the architectural definition of the Generic Timer.

                    Appendix K6 Legacy Instruction Syntax for AArch32 Instruction Sets
                                   Read this for information about the pre-UAL syntax of the AArch32 instruction sets, which can still
                                   be valid for the A32 instruction set.

                    Appendix K7 Address translation examples
                                   Read this for examples of translation table lookups using the translation regimes described in
                                   Chapter D4 The AArch64 Virtual Memory System Architecture and Chapter G4 The AArch32 Virtual
                                   Memory System Architecture.

xxii                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                                             Preface
                                                                                                                   Using this manual

                  Appendix K8 Example OS Save and Restore Sequences
                                 Read this for software examples that perform the OS Save and Restore sequences for an ARMv8
                                 debug implementation.

                                          Note
                                  Chapter H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support describes the OS Save and Restore mechanism.

                  Appendix K9 Recommended Upload and Download Processes for External Debug
                                 Read this for information about implementing and using the ARM architecture.

                                          Note
                                 This description is not part of the ARM architecture specification. It is included here as
                                 supplementary information, for the convenience of developers and users who might require this
                                 information.

                  Appendix K10 Software Usage Examples
                                 Read this for software examples that help understanding of some aspects of the Arm architecture.

                                          Note
                                 This description is not part of the ARM architecture specification. It is included here as
                                 supplementary information, for the convenience of developers and users who might require this
                                 information.

                  Appendix K11 Barrier Litmus Tests
                                 Read this for examples of the use of barrier instructions provided by the ARMv8 architecture.

                                          Note
                                 This description is not part of the ARM architecture specification. It is included here as
                                 supplementary information, for the convenience of developers and users who might require this
                                 information.

                  Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                 Read this for definitions of the AArch32 pseudocode.

                  Appendix K13 Registers Index
                                 Read this for an alphabetic and functional index of AArch32 and AArch64 registers, and
                                 memory-mapped registers.

Glossary
                  Defines terms used in this document that have a specialized meaning.

                          Note
                  Terms that are generally well understood in the microelectronics industry are not included in the Glossary.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            xxiii
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
Preface
Conventions

Conventions
               The following sections describe conventions that this book can use:
               •     Typographic conventions.
               •     Signals on page xxv.
               •     Numbers on page xxv.
               •     Pseudocode descriptions on page xxv.
               •     Assembler syntax descriptions on page xxv.

Typographic conventions
               The typographical conventions are:

               italic           Introduces special terminology, and denotes citations.

               bold             Denotes signal names, and is used for terms in descriptive lists, where appropriate.

               monospace        Used for assembler syntax descriptions, pseudocode, and source code examples.
                                Also used in the main text for instruction mnemonics and for references to other items appearing in
                                assembler syntax descriptions, pseudocode, and source code examples.

               SMALL CAPITALS

                                Used in body text for a few terms that have specific technical meanings, and are defined in the
                                Glossary.

               Colored text     Indicates a link. This can be:
                                •      A URL, for example http://infocenter.arm.com.
                                •      A cross-reference, that includes the page number of the referenced information if it is not on
                                       the current page, for example, Assembler syntax descriptions on page xxv.
                                •      A link, to a chapter or appendix, or to a glossary entry, or to the section of the document that
                                       defines the colored term, for example Simple sequential execution or SCTLR.

               { and }          Braces, { and }, have two distinct uses:
                                Optional items
                                           In syntax descriptions braces enclose optional items. In the following example they
                                           indicate that the <shift> parameter is optional:
                                                  ADD <Wd|WSP>, <Wn|WSP>, #<imm>{, <shift>}
                                            Similarly they can be used in generalized field descriptions, for example
                                            TCR_ELx.{I}PS refers to a field in the TCR_ELx registers that is called either IPS or
                                            PS.
                                Sets of items
                                            Braces can be used to enclose sets. For example, HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} refers to a set
                                            of two register fields, HCR_EL2.E2H and HCR_EL2.TGE

               Notes            Notes are formatted as:

                                         Note
                                This is a Note.

                                In this Manual, Notes are used only to provide additional information, usually to help understanding
                                of the text. While a Note may repeat architectural information given elsewhere in the Manual, a
                                Note never provides any part of the definition of the architecture.

xxiv                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                   Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                                            Preface
                                                                                                                         Conventions

Signals
                  In general this specification does not define hardware signals, but it does include some signal examples and
                  recommendations. The signal conventions are:

                  Signal level           The level of an asserted signal depends on whether the signal is active-HIGH or
                                         active-LOW. Asserted means:
                                         •      HIGH for active-HIGH signals.
                                         •      LOW for active-LOW signals.

                  Lower-case n           At the start or end of a signal name denotes an active-LOW signal.

Numbers
                  Numbers are normally written in decimal. Binary numbers are preceded by 0b, and hexadecimal numbers by 0x. In
                  both cases, the prefix and the associated value are written in a monospace font, for example 0xFFFF0000. To improve
                  readability, long numbers can be written with an underscore separator between every four characters, for example
                  0xFFFF_0000_0000_0000. Ignore any underscores when interpreting the value of a number.

Pseudocode descriptions
                  This manual uses a form of pseudocode to provide precise descriptions of the specified functionality. This
                  pseudocode is written in monospace font, and is described in Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition.

Assembler syntax descriptions
                  This manual contains numerous syntax descriptions for assembler instructions and for components of assembler
                  instructions. These are shown in a monospace font, and use the conventions described in Structure of the A64
                  assembler language on page C1-143, Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition, and Pseudocode operators and
                  keywords on page K12-5648.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             xxv
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
Preface
Additional reading

Additional reading
                     This section lists relevant publications from ARM and third parties.

                     See the Infocenter, http://infocenter.arm.com, for access to ARM documentation.

ARM publications
                     •     ARM® AMBA® 4 ATB Protocol Specification, ATBv1.0 and ATBv1.1, (ARM IHI 0032B).

                     •     ARM® Architecture Reference Manual, ARMv7-A and ARMv7-R edition (ARM DDI 0406).

                     •     ARM® Architecture Reference Manual Supplement, ARMv8, for the ARMv8-R AArch32 architecture profile
                           (ARM DDI 0568).

                     •     ARM® Debug Interface Architecture Specification, ADIv6.0 (ARM IHI 0074).

                     •     ARM® Debug Interface Architecture Specification, ADIv5.0 to ADIv5.2 (ARM IHI 0031).

                     •     ARM® Embedded Trace Macrocell Architecture Specification, ETMv4 (ARM IHI 0064).

                     •     ARM® Generic Interrupt Controller Architecture Specification, GIC architecture version 3.0 and version 4.0
                           (ARM IHI 0069).

                     •     ARM® CoreSight™ SoC Technical Reference Manual (ARM DDI 0480).

                     •     ARM® CoreSight™ Architecture Specification (ARM IHI 0029).

                     •     ARM® Procedure Call Standard for the ARM 64-bit Architecture (ARM IHI 0055).

                     •     ARM® Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Specification, ARMv8, for the ARMv8-A architecture
                           profile (ARM DDI 0587).

                     •     ARM® Architecture Reference Manual Supplement, The Scalable Vector Extension (SVE), for ARMv8-A
                           (ARM DDI 0584).

Other publications
                     The following publications are referred to in this manual, or provide more information:

                     •     Announcing the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), Federal Information Processing Standards
                           Publication 197, November 2001.

                     •     IEEE Std 754-2008, IEEE Standard for Floating-point Arithmetic, August 2008.

                     •     IEEE Std 754-1985, IEEE Standard for Floating-point Arithmetic, March 1985.

                     •     Secure Hash Standard (SHA), Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 180-2, August 2002.

                     •     The Galois/Counter Mode of Operation, McGraw, D. and Viega, J., Submission to NIST Modes of Operation
                           Process, January 2004.

                     •     Memory Consistency Models for Shared Memory-Multiprocessors, Gharachorloo, Kourosh, 1995, Stanford
                           University Technical Report CSL-TR-95-685.

                     •     Standard Manufacturer’s Identification Code, JEP106, JEDEC Solid State Technology Association.

                     •     SM3 Cryptographic Hash Algorithm, China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC).

                     •     SM4 Block Cipher Algorithm, China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC).

                     •     The QARMA Block Cipher Family, Roberto Avanzi, Qualcomm Product Security Initiative.
                           Available from https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/444.

xxvi                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                                              Preface
                                                                                                             Feedback

Feedback
                  ARM welcomes feedback on its documentation.

Feedback on this manual
                  If you have comments on the content of this manual, send e-mail to errata@arm.com. Give:
                  •      The title.
                  •      The number, ARM DDI 0487C.a.
                  •      The page numbers to which your comments apply.
                  •      A concise explanation of your comments.

                  ARM also welcomes general suggestions for additions and improvements.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            xxvii
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
Preface
Feedback

xxviii     Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                   Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
