Chapter B2
The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model

                  This chapter gives an application level view of the memory model. It contains the following sections:
                  •     About the ARM memory model on page B2-86.
                  •     Atomicity in the ARM architecture on page B2-88.
                  •     Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page B2-92.
                  •     Caches and memory hierarchy on page B2-104.
                  •     Alignment support on page B2-109.
                  •     Endian support on page B2-111.
                  •     Memory types and attributes on page B2-114.
                  •     Mismatched memory attributes on page B2-125.
                  •     Synchronization and semaphores on page B2-128.

                          Note
                  In this chapter, System register names usually link to the description of the register in Chapter D10 AArch64 System
                  Register Descriptions, for example SCTLR_EL1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          B2-85
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.1 About the ARM memory model

B2.1         About the ARM memory model
                    The ARM architecture is a weakly ordered memory architecture that permits the observation and completion of
                    memory accesses in a different order from the program order. The following sections of this chapter provide the
                    complete definition of the ARMv8 memory model, this introduction is not intended to contradict the definition
                    found in those sections. In general, the basic principles of the ARMv8 memory model are:

                    •     To provide a memory model that has similar weaknesses to those found in the memory models used by
                          high-level programming languages such as C or Java. For example, by permitting independent memory
                          accesses to be re-ordered as seen by other observers.

                    •     To avoid the requirement for multi-copy atomicity in the majority of memory types.

                    •     The provision of instructions and memory barriers to compensate for the lack of multi-copy atomicity in the
                          cases where it would be needed.

                    •     The use of address, data, and control dependencies in the creation of order so as to avoid having excessive
                          numbers of barriers or other explicit instructions in common situations where some order is required by the
                          programmer or the compiler.

                    This section contains:
                    •      Address space.
                    •      Memory type overview.

B2.1.1        Address space
                    Address calculations are performed using 64-bit registers. However, supervisory software can configure the top
                    eight address bits for use as a tag, as described in Address tagging in AArch64 state on page D4-2084. If this is done,
                    address bits[63:56]:
                    •      Are not considered when determining whether the address is valid.
                    •      Are never propagated to the program counter.

                    Supervisory software determines the valid address range. Attempting to access an address that is not valid generates
                    an MMU fault.

                    Simple sequential execution of instructions might overflow the valid address range. For more information, see
                    Virtual address space overflow on page D3-2049.

                    Memory accesses use the Mem[] function. This function makes an access of the required type. If supervisory software
                    configures the top eight address bits for use as a tag, the top eight address bits are ignored.

                    The AccType{} enumeration defines the different access types.

                             Note
                    •     Chapter D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model and Chapter D4 The AArch64 Virtual Memory System
                          Architecture include descriptions of memory system features that are transparent to the application, including
                          memory access, address translation, memory maintenance instructions, and alignment checking and the
                          associated fault handling. These chapters also include pseudocode descriptions of these operations.

                    •     For information on the pseudocode that relates to memory accesses, see Basic memory access on
                          page D3-2077, Unaligned memory access on page D3-2078, and Aligned memory access on page D3-2078.

B2.1.2        Memory type overview
                    ARMv8 provides the following mutually-exclusive memory types:

                    Normal          This is generally used for bulk memory operations, both read/write and read-only operations.

                    Device          The ARM architecture forbids Speculative reads of any type of Device memory. This means Device
                                    memory types are suitable attributes for read-sensitive Locations.

B2-86                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                    B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                B2.1 About the ARM memory model

                                 Locations of the memory map that are assigned to peripherals are usually assigned the Device
                                 memory attribute.
                                 Device memory has additional attributes that have the following effects:
                                 •      They prevent aggregation of reads and writes, maintaining the number and size of the
                                        specified memory accesses. See Gathering on page B2-121.
                                 •      They preserve the access order and synchronization requirements, both for accesses to a
                                        single peripheral and where there is a synchronization requirement on the observability of
                                        one or more memory write and read accesses. See Reordering on page B2-122
                                 •      They indicate whether a write can be acknowledged other than at the end point. See Early
                                        Write Acknowledgement on page B2-123.

                  For more information on Normal memory and Device memory, see Memory types and attributes on page B2-114.

                          Note
                  Earlier versions of the ARM architecture defined a single Device memory type and a Strongly-ordered memory
                  type. A Note in Device memory on page B2-118 describes how these memory types map onto the ARMv8 memory
                  types.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          B2-87
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

B2.2         Atomicity in the ARM architecture
                    Atomicity is a feature of memory accesses, described as atomic accesses. The ARM architecture description refers
                    to two types of atomicity, single-copy atomicity and multi-copy atomicity. In the ARMv8 architecture, the atomicity
                    requirements for memory accesses depend on the memory type, and whether the access is explicit or implicit. For
                    more information, see:
                    •      Requirements for single-copy atomicity.
                    •      Properties of single-copy atomic accesses on page B2-89.
                    •      Multi-copy atomicity on page B2-89.
                    •      Requirements for multi-copy atomicity on page B2-90.
                    •      Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on page B2-90.

                    For more information about the memory types, see Memory type overview on page B2-86.

B2.2.1        Requirements for single-copy atomicity
                    For explicit memory accesses generated from an Exception level the following rules apply:

                    •     A read that is generated by a load instruction that loads a single general-purpose register and is aligned to the
                          size of the read in the instruction is single-copy atomic.

                    •     A write that is generated by a store instruction that stores a single general-purpose register and is aligned to
                          the size of the write in the instruction is single-copy atomic.

                    •     Reads that are generated by a Load Pair instruction that loads two general-purpose registers and are aligned
                          to the size of the load to each register are treated as two single-copy atomic reads, one for each register being
                          loaded.

                    •     Writes that are generated by a Store pair instruction that stores two general-purpose registers and are aligned
                          to the size of the store of each register are treated as two single-copy atomic writes, one for each register being
                          stored.

                    •     Load-Exclusive Pair instructions of two 32-bit quantities and Store-Exclusive Pair instructions of 32-bit
                          quantities are single-copy atomic.

                    •     When the Store-Exclusive of a Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive pair instruction using two 64-bit quantities
                          succeeds, it causes a single-copy atomic update of the entire memory location being updated.

                                   Note
                          To atomically load two 64-bit quantities, perform a Load-Exclusive pair/Store-Exclusive pair sequence of
                          reading and writing the same value for which the Store-Exclusive pair succeeds, and use the read values from
                          the Load-Exclusive pair.

                    •     Where translation table walks generate a read of a translation table entry, this read is single-copy atomic.

                    •     For the atomicity of instruction fetches, see Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on
                          page B2-90.

                    •     Reads to SIMD and floating-point registers of a single 64-bit or smaller quantity that is aligned to the size of
                          the quantity being loaded are treated as single-copy atomic reads.

                    •     Writes from SIMD and floating-point registers of a single 64-bit or smaller quantity that is aligned to the size
                          of the quantity being stored are treated as single-copy atomic writes.

                    •     Element or Structure Reads to SIMD and floating-point registers of 64-bit or smaller elements, where each
                          element is aligned to the size of the element being loaded, have each element treated as a single-copy atomic
                          read.

                    •     Element or Structure Writes from SIMD and floating-point registers of 64-bit or smaller elements, where
                          each element is aligned to the size of the element being stored, have each element treated as a single-copy
                          atomic store.

B2-88                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                               B2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

                  •     Reads to SIMD and floating-point registers of a 128-bit value that is 64-bit aligned in memory are treated as
                        a pair of single-copy atomic 64-bit reads.

                  •     Writes from SIMD and floating-point registers of a 128-bit value that is 64-bit aligned in memory are treated
                        as a pair of single-copy atomic 64-bit writes.

                  All other memory accesses are regarded as streams of accesses to bytes, and no atomicity between accesses to
                  different bytes is ensured by the architecture.

                  All accesses to any byte are single-copy atomic.

                          Note
                  In AArch64 state, no memory accesses from a DC ZVA have single-copy atomicity of any quantity greater than
                  individual bytes.

                  If, according to these rules, an instruction is executed as a sequence of accesses, exceptions, including interrupts,
                  can be taken during that sequence, regardless of the memory type being accessed. If any of these exceptions are
                  returned from using their preferred return address, the instruction that generated the sequence of accesses is
                  re-executed, and so any access performed before the exception was taken is repeated. See also Taking an interrupt
                  or other exception during a multiple-register load or store on page D1-1909.

                          Note
                  The exception behavior for these multiple access instructions means that they are not suitable for use for writes to
                  memory for the purpose of software synchronization.

B2.2.2      Properties of single-copy atomic accesses
                  A memory access instruction that is single-copy atomic has the following properties:

                  1.    For a pair of overlapping single-copy atomic store instructions, all of the overlapping writes generated by one
                        of the stores are Coherence-after the corresponding overlapping writes generated by the other store.

                  2.    For a single-copy atomic load instruction L1 that overlaps a single-copy atomic store instruction S2, if one of
                        the overlapping reads generated by L1 Reads-from one of the overlapping writes generated by S2, then none
                        of the overlapping writes generated by S2 are Coherence-after the corresponding overlapping reads generated
                        by L1.

                  For more information, see Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page B2-92.

B2.2.3      Multi-copy atomicity
                  In a multiprocessing system, writes to a memory location are multi-copy atomic if the following conditions are both
                  true:

                  •     All writes to the same location are serialized, meaning they are observed in the same order by all observers,
                        although some observers might not observe all of the writes.

                  •     A read of a location does not return the value of a write until all observers observe that write.

                          Note
                  Writes that are not coherent are not multi-copy atomic.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           B2-89
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

B2.2.4        Requirements for multi-copy atomicity
                    For Normal memory, writes are not required to be multi-copy atomic.

                    For Device memory, writes are not required to be multi-copy atomic.

                    The ARMv8 memory model is Other-multi-copy atomic. For more information, see Ordering constraints on
                    page B2-96.

B2.2.5        Concurrent modification and execution of instructions
                    The ARMv8 architecture limits the set of instructions that can be executed by one thread of execution as they are
                    being modified by another thread of execution without requiring explicit synchronization.

                    Concurrent modification and execution of instructions can lead to the resulting instruction performing any behavior
                    that can be achieved by executing any sequence of instructions that can be executed from the same Exception level,
                    except where each of the instruction before modification and the instruction after modification is one of a B, BL, BRK,
                    HVC, ISB, NOP, SMC, or SVC instruction.

                    For the B, BL, BRK, HVC, ISB, NOP, SMC, and SVC instructions the architecture guarantees that, after modification of the
                    instruction, behavior is consistent with execution of either:
                    •      The instruction originally fetched.
                    •      A fetch of the modified instruction.

                    If one thread of execution changes a conditional branch instruction, such as B or BL, to another conditional instruction
                    and the change affects both the condition field and the branch target, execution of the changed instruction by another
                    thread of execution before the change is synchronized can lead to either:
                    •       The old condition being associated with the new target address.
                    •       The new condition being associated with the old target address.

                    These possibilities apply regardless of whether the condition, either before or after the change to the branch
                    instruction, is the always condition.

                    For all other instructions, to avoid UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior, instruction
                    modifications must be explicitly synchronized before they are executed. The required synchronization is as follows:

                    1.     No PE must be executing an instruction when another PE is modifying that instruction.

                    2.     To ensure that the modified instructions are observable, a PE that is writing the instructions must issue the
                           following sequence of instructions and operations:
                           ; Coherency example for data and instruction accesses within the same Inner Shareable domain.
                           ; Enter this code with <Wt> containing a new 32-bit instruction,
                           ; to be held in Cacheable space at a location pointed to by Xn.
                                   STR Wt, [Xn]
                                   DC CVAU, Xn         ; Clean data cache by VA to point of unification (PoU)
                                   DSB ISH             ; Ensure visibility of the data cleaned from cache
                                   IC IVAU, Xn         ; Invalidate instruction cache by VA to PoU
                                   DSB ISH             ; Ensure completion of the invalidations

                                    Note
                           •      The DC CVAU operation is not required if the area of memory is either Non-cacheable or Write-Through
                                  Cacheable.
                           •      If the contents of physical memory differ between the mappings, changing the mapping of VAs to PAs
                                  can cause the instructions to be concurrently modified by one PE and executed by another PE. If the
                                  modifications affect instructions other than those listed as being acceptable for modification,
                                  synchronization must be used to avoid UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior.

B2-90                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                               B2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

                  3.    In a multiprocessor system, the IC IVAU is broadcast to all PEs within the Inner Shareable domain of the PE
                        running this sequence. However, when the modified instructions are observable, each PE that is executing
                        the modified instructions must issue the following instruction to ensure execution of the modified
                        instructions:
                         ISB                                   ; Synchronize fetched instruction stream

                  For more information about the required synchronization operation, see Synchronization and coherency issues
                  between data and instruction accesses on page B2-107.

                          Note
                  For information about memory accesses caused by instruction fetches, see Ordering relations on page B2-95.

B2.2.6      Possible implementation restrictions on using atomic instructions
                  In some implementations, and for some memory types, the properties of atomicity can be met only by functionality
                  outside the PE. Some system implementations might not support atomic instructions for all regions of the memory.
                  In particular, this can apply to:

                  •     Any type of memory in the system that does not support hardware cache coherency.

                  •     Device, Non-cacheable memory, or memory that is treated as Non-cacheable, in an implementation that does
                        support hardware cache coherency.

                  In such implementations, it is defined by the system:

                  •     Whether the atomic instructions are atomic in regard to other agents that access memory.

                  •     If the atomic instructions are atomic in regard to other agents that access memory, which address ranges or
                        memory types this applies to.

                  An implementation can choose which memory type is treated as Non-cacheable.

                  The memory types for which it is architecturally guaranteed that the atomic instructions will be atomic are:

                  •     Inner Shareable, Inner Write-Back, Outer Write-Back Normal memory with Read allocation hints and Write
                        allocation hints and not transient.

                  •     Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Back, Outer Write-Back Normal memory with Read allocation hints and Write
                        allocation hints and not transient.

                  If the atomic instructions are not atomic in regard to other agents that access memory, then performing an atomic
                  instruction to such a location can have one or more of the following effects:

                  •     The instruction generates a synchronous External abort.

                  •     The instruction generates a System Error interrupt.

                  •     The instruction generates an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED MMU fault reported using the Data Abort Fault
                        status code of ESR_ELx.DFSC = 110101.
                        For the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime, if the atomic instruction is not supported because of the
                        memory type that is defined in the first stage of translation, or the second stage of translation is not enabled,
                        then this exception is a first stage abort and is taken to EL1. Otherwise, the exception is a second stage abort
                        and is taken to EL2.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instructions are performed, but there is no guarantee that the memory accesses were performed
                        atomically in regard to other agents that access memory. In this case, the instruction might also generate a
                        System Error interrupt.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              B2-91
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

B2.3         Definition of the ARMv8 memory model
                    This section describes observation and ordering in the ARMv8 memory model. It contains the following
                    subsections:
                    •      Locations.
                    •      Ordering and observability on page B2-93.
                    •      Ordering constraints on page B2-96.
                    •      Completion and endpoint ordering on page B2-97.
                    •      Memory barriers on page B2-98.
                    •      Limited ordering regions on page B2-103.

                    For more information about endpoint ordering of memory accesses, see Reordering on page B2-122.

                    In the ARMv8 memory model, the Shareability memory attribute indicates the degree to which hardware must
                    ensure memory coherency between a set of observers, see Memory types and attributes on page B2-114.

                    The ARMv8 architecture defines additional memory attributes and associated behaviors, which are defined in the
                    system level section of this manual. See:
                    •     Chapter D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model.
                    •     Chapter D4 The AArch64 Virtual Memory System Architecture.

                    See also Mismatched memory attributes on page B2-125.

B2.3.1        Locations
                    The ARMv8 memory model provides a set of definitions that are used to constrain the permitted sequences of
                    accesses to memory. The ARMv8 memory model defines:

                    •     The ordering of observation of memory accesses between different observers.

                    •     The ordering of arrival of memory accesses arriving at an endpoint.

                    •     The mechanisms to control the ordering of observation of memory accesses and the arrival of memory
                          accesses at an endpoint.

                    Locations, Memory effects, and Observers
                    The ARMv8 memory model provides the following definition of a Location in memory:

                    Location
                                    A Location refers to a single byte in memory.

                    As part of its execution an instruction might generate a Memory effect. Observers in the system might observe the
                    Memory effects of that instruction on a Location. The ARMv8 memory model provides the following definitions
                    of a Memory effect and an Observer:

                    Memory effect
                                    The Memory effects of an instruction are the read, write, or barrier effects of that instruction. For an
                                    instruction that accesses memory:
                                    •      A read effect is generated for each Location that is read by the instruction.
                                    •      A write effect is generated for each Location that is written by the instruction.
                                    An instruction can generate both read and write effects.
                                    The Memory effects of an instruction I1 are said to appear in program order before the Memory
                                    effects of instruction I2 if and only if I1 occurs before I2 in program order.
                                    For the purposes of describing the ARMv8 memory model, all read and write effects access only
                                    Normal memory locations in a Common Shareability Domain. Where this section refers to a read,
                                    write, or memory barrier without any qualification, then it is referring to the corresponding Memory
                                    effect.

B2-92                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                         B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                  Observer
                                  An Observer refers to either a processing element, or some other memory accessing agent that can
                                  generate reads from or writes to memory.

                  Common Shareability Domain
                                  A Common Shareability Domain for a program is the smallest Shareability domain that contains all
                                  of the active Observers of the Memory effects generated by a program.

B2.3.2      Ordering and observability
                  The ARMv8 memory model permits reordering of memory accesses. This section defines the constraints placed on
                  the reordering of memory accesses using the following:

                  •     Register value dependencies to establish order between instructions on a PE.

                  •     Ordering constraints to establish order between accesses to a Location.

                  Register value dependencies
                  The ARMv8 memory model defines the following dependencies between instructions:

                  Register dependency
                                  A Register dependency from a first data value V1 to a second data value V2 exists within a PE if and
                                  only if either:
                                  •      The register, excluding the AArch64 zero register (XZR or WZR), that is used to hold V1 is
                                         used in the calculation of V2.
                                  •      There is a Register dependency from V1 to a third data value V3 and there is a register
                                         dependency from V3 to V2.

                  Register data dependency
                                  A Register data dependency from a first data value V1 to a second data value V2 exists within a PE
                                  if and only if either:
                                  •      The register, excluding the AArch64 zero register (XZR or WZR) and the AArch32 PC, that
                                         is used to hold V1 and is used in the calculation of V2, and the calculation between V1 and
                                         the V2 does not consist of either:
                                         —      A conditional branch whose condition is determined by V1.
                                         —      A conditional selection, move, or computation whose condition is determined by V1,
                                                where the input data values for the selection, move, or computation do not have a data
                                                dependency on V1.
                                  •      There is a Register data dependency from V1 to a third data value V3, and there is a Register
                                         data dependency from V3 to V2.

                  Address dependency
                                  An Address dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent read R2 exists if and only if there is a
                                  Register data dependency from the data value that is returned by R1 to the address used by R2.
                                  An Address dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent write W2 exists if and only if there is a
                                  Register dependency from the data value that is returned by R1 to the address used by W2.

                  Data dependency
                                  A Data dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent write W2 exists if and only if there is a Register
                                  dependency from the data value returned by R1 to the data value written by W2.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          B2-93
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                    Control dependency
                                    A Control dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent instruction I2 exists if and only if there is a
                                    Register dependency from the data value returned by R1 to the data value used in the evaluation of
                                    a conditional branch or the determination of a synchronous exception on an instruction and I2 is only
                                    executed as a result of one of the possible outcomes of that conditional branch or synchronous
                                    exception.

                    Ordering and observability at a Location
                    Memory effects on a Location are related by the following relations:

                    Reads-from
                                    A Reads-from relation that couples reads and writes to the same Location such that each read is
                                    paired with a single write in the program. A read R2 of a Location Reads-from a write W1 to the
                                    same Location if and only if R2 takes its data from W1.

                                             Note
                                    The Reads-from relation represents a read being satisfied by a write and then returning the written
                                    data.

                    Coherence order
                                    A Coherence order relation for each Location in the program that provides a total order on all writes
                                    from all coherent Observers to that Location, starting with a notional write of the initial value.

                                             Note
                                    The Coherence order of a Location represents the order in which writes to the Location arrive at
                                    memory.

                    Coherence-after
                                    A write W2 to a Location is Coherence-after another write W1 to the same Location if and only if
                                    W2 is sequenced after W1 in the Coherence order of the Location.
                                    A write W2 to a Location is Coherence-after a read R1 of the same location if and only if R1
                                    Reads-from a write W3 to the same Location and W2 is Coherence-after W3.

                    Overlapping accesses
                                    Two Memory effect overlap if and only if they access the same Location. Two instructions overlap
                                    if and only if one or more of their generated Memory effects overlap.

                    Observed-by
                                    A read or a write RW1 from an Observer is Observed-by a write W2 from a different Observer if and
                                    only if W2 is coherence-after RW1.
                                    A write W1 from an Observer is Observed-by a read R2 from a different Observer if and only if R2
                                    Reads-from W1.

                                             Note
                                    The Observed-by relation only relates accesses generated by different Observers.

                    DMB FULL
                                    A DMB FULL is a DMB with neither the LD or the ST qualifier.
                                    Where this section refers to DMB without any qualification, then it is referring to all types of DMB.
                                    Unless a specific shareability domain is defined, a DMB applies to the Common Shareability Domain.
                                    All properties that apply to DMB also apply to the corresponding DSB.

B2-94                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                    B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                        B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                  Ordering relations
                  In addition to the ordering relations for a single Location, the ARMv8 memory model also provides ordering
                  relations to describe the ordering of Memory effects to multiple Locations. These are as follows:

                  Dependency-ordered-before
                                 A dependency creates externally-visible order between a read and another Memory effect generated
                                 by the same Observer. A read R1 is Dependency-ordered-before a read or write RW2 from the same
                                 Observer if and only if R1 appears in program order before RW2 and any of the following cases
                                 apply:
                                 •      There is an Address dependency or a Data dependency from R1 to RW2.
                                 •      RW2 is a write W2 and there is a Control dependency from R1 to W2.
                                 •      RW2 is a read R2 generated by an instruction appearing in program order after an instruction
                                        I3 that generates a Context synchronization event, and there is a Control dependency from R1
                                        to I3.
                                 •      RW2 is a write W2 appearing in program order after a read or a write RW3 and there is an
                                        Address dependency from R1 to RW3.
                                 •      RW2 is a write W2 that is Coherence-after a write W3 and there is a Control dependency or a
                                        Data dependency from R1 to W3.
                                 •      RW2 is a read R2 that Reads-from a write W3 and there is an Address dependency or a Data
                                        dependency from R1 to W3.

                  Atomic-ordered-before
                                 Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions provide some ordering guarantees, even in the
                                 absence of dependencies. A read or a write RW1 is Atomic-ordered-before a read or a write RW2
                                 from the same Observer if and only if RW1 appears in program order before RW2 and either of the
                                 following cases apply:
                                 •      RW1 is a read R1 and RW2 is a write W2 such that R1 and W2 are generated by an atomic
                                        instruction or a successful Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instruction pair to the same
                                        Location.
                                 •      RW1 is a write W1 generated by an atomic instruction or a successful Store-Exclusive
                                        instruction and RW2 is a read R2 generated by an instruction with Acquire or AcquirePC
                                        semantics such that R2 Reads-from W1.
                                 For more information, see Synchronization and semaphores on page B2-128.

                  Barrier-ordered-before
                                 Barrier instructions order prior Memory effects before subsequent Memory effects generated by the
                                 same Observer. A read or a write RW1 is Barrier-ordered-before a read or a write RW2 from the
                                 same Observer if and only if RW1 appears in program order before RW2 and any of the following
                                 cases apply:
                                 •      RW1 appears in program order before a DMB FULL or an atomic instruction with both Acquire
                                        and Release semantics that appears in program order before RW2.
                                 •      RW1 is a write W1 generated by an instruction with Release semantics and RW2 is a read R2
                                        generated by an instruction with Acquire semantics.
                                 •      RW1 is a read R1 and either:
                                        —      R1 appears in program order before a DMB LD that appears in program order before RW2.
                                        —      R1 is generated by an instruction with Acquire or AcquirePC semantics.
                                 •      RW2 is a write W2 and either:
                                        —      RW1 is a write W1 appearing in program order before a DMB ST that appears in program
                                               order before W2.
                                        —      W2 is generated by an instruction with Release semantics.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         B2-95
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                                          —         RW1 appears in program order before a write W3 generated by an instruction with
                                                    Release semantics and W2 is Coherence-after W3.

                    Ordered-before
                                   An arbitrary pair of Memory effects is ordered if it can be linked by a chain of ordered accesses
                                   consistent with external observation. A read or a write RW1 is Ordered-before a read or a write RW2
                                   if and only if any of the following cases apply:
                                   •      RW1 is Observed-by RW2.
                                   •      RW1 is Dependency-ordered-before RW2.
                                   •      RW1 is Atomic-ordered-before RW2.
                                   •      RW1 is Barrier-ordered-before RW2.
                                   •      RW1 is Ordered-before a read or a write that is Ordered-before RW2.

B2.3.3        Ordering constraints
                    The ARMv8 memory model is described as being Other-multi-copy atomic. The definition of Other-multi-copy
                    atomic is as follows:

                    Other-multi-copy atomic
                                   In an Other-multi-copy atomic system, it is required that a write from an Observer, if observed by a
                                   different Observer, is then observed by all other Observers that access the Location coherently. It is,
                                   however, permitted for an Observer to observe its own writes prior to making them visible to other
                                   observers in the system.

                    The Other-multi-copy atomic property of the ARMv8 memory model is enforced by placing constraints on the
                    possible executions of a program. Those executions that meet the constraints given by the ordering model are said
                    to be architecturally well-formed. An implementation that is executing a program is only permitted to exhibit
                    behavior consistent with an architecturally well-formed execution:

                    Architecturally well-formed
                                   An architecturally well-formed execution must satisfy both of the following requirements:
                                   Internal visibility requirement
                                               For a read or a write RW1 that appears in program order before a read or a write RW2 to
                                               the same Location, the internal visibility requirement requires that exactly one of the
                                               following statements is true:
                                                •       RW2 is a write W2 that is Coherence-after RW1.
                                                •       RW1 is a write W1 and RW2 is a read R2 such that either:
                                                        —      R2 Reads-from W1.
                                                        —      R2 Reads-from another write that is Coherence-after W1.
                                                •       RW1 and RW2 are both reads R1 and R2 such that R1 Reads-from a write W3 and
                                                        either:
                                                        —      R2 Reads-from W3.
                                                        —      R2 Reads-from another write that is Coherence-after W3.
                                                          Note
                                                If a Memory effect M1 from an Observer appears in program order before a Memory
                                                effect M2 from the same Observer, then M1 will be seen to occur before M2 by that
                                                Observer.

B2-96                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                         B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                                  External visibility requirement
                                             For a read or a write RW1 from an Observer that is Ordered-before a read or a write RW2
                                             from a different Observer, the external visibility constraint requires that RW2 is not
                                             Observed-by RW1. This means that an Architecturally well-formed execution must not
                                             exhibit a cycle in the Ordered-before relation.
                                                       Note
                                              If a Memory effect M1 from an Observer is Ordered-before another Memory effect M2,
                                              from a different Observer, then M1 will be seen to occur before M2 by all Observers in
                                              the system.

B2.3.4      Completion and endpoint ordering
                  Interaction between Observers in a system is not restricted to communication via shared variables in coherent
                  memory. For example, an Observer could configure an interrupt controller to raise an interrupt on another Observer
                  as a form of message passing. These interactions typically involve an additional agent, which defines the instruction
                  sequence that is required to establish communication links between different Observers. When these forms of
                  interaction are used in conjunction with shared variables, a DSB instruction can be used to enforce ordering between
                  them.

                  For all memory, the completion rules are defined as:

                  •     A read R1 to a Location is complete for a shareability domain when all of the following are true:
                        —      Any write to the same Location by an Observer within the shareability domain will be Coherence-after
                               R1.
                        —      Any translation table walks associated with R1 are complete for that shareability domain.

                  •     A write W1 to a Location is complete for a shareability domain when all of the following are true:
                        —      Any write to the same Location by an Observer within the shareability domain will be Coherence-after
                               W1.
                        —      Any read to the same Location by an Observer within the shareability domain will either Reads-from
                               W1 or Reads-from a write that is Coherence-after W1.
                        —      Any translation table walks associated with the write are complete for that shareability domain.

                  •     A translation table walk is complete for a shareability domain when the memory accesses, including the
                        updates to translation table entries, associated with the translation table walk are complete for that
                        shareability domain, and the TLB is updated.

                  •     A cache maintenance instruction is complete for a shareability domain when the memory effects of the
                        instruction are complete for that shareability domain, and any translation table walks that arise from the
                        instruction are complete for that shareability domain.

                  •     A TLB invalidate instruction is complete when all memory accesses using the TLB entries that have been
                        invalidated are complete.

                  The completion of any cache or TLB maintenance instruction includes its completion on all PEs that are affected
                  by both the instruction and the DSB operation that is required to guarantee visibility of the maintenance instruction.

                          Note
                  These completion rules mean that, for example, a cache maintenance instruction that operates by VA to the PoC
                  completes only after memory at the PoC has been updated.

                  Additionally, for Device-nGnRnE memory, a read or write of a Location in a Memory-mapped peripheral that
                  exhibits side-effects is complete only when the read or write both:
                  •      Can begin to affect the state of the Memory-mapped peripheral.
                  •      Can trigger all associated side-effects, whether they affect other peripheral devices, PEs, or memory.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            B2-97
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                            Note
                    This requirement for Device-nGnRnE memory is consistent with the memory access having reached the peripheral
                    endpoint.

                    Peripherals
                    This section defines a Memory-mapped peripheral and the total order of reads and writes to a peripheral which is
                    defined as the Peripheral coherence order:

                    Memory-mapped peripheral
                                    A Memory-mapped peripheral occupies a memory region of IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size and
                                    can be accessed using load and store instructions. Memory effects to a Memory-mapped peripheral
                                    can have side-effects, such as causing the peripheral to perform an action. Values that are read from
                                    addresses within a Memory-mapped peripheral might not correspond to the last data value written
                                    to those addresses. As such, Memory effects to a Memory-mapped peripheral might not appear in
                                    the Reads-from or Coherence order relations.

                    Peripheral coherence order
                                    The Peripheral coherence order of a Memory-mapped peripheral is a total order on all reads and
                                    writes to that peripheral.

                                             Note
                                    The Peripheral coherence order for a Memory-mapped peripheral signifies the order in which
                                    accesses arrive at the endpoint.

                                    For a read or a write RW1 and a read or a write RW2 to the same peripheral, then RW1 will appear
                                    in the Peripheral coherence order for the peripheral before RW2 if either of the following cases
                                    apply:
                                    •      RW1 and RW2 are accesses using Non-cacheable or Device attributes and RW1 is
                                           Ordered-before RW2.
                                    •      RW1 and RW2 are accesses using Device-nGnRE or Device-nGnRnE attributes and RW1
                                           appears in program order before RW2.

                    Out-of-band-ordered-before
                                    A read or a write RW1 is Out-of-band-ordered-before a read or a write RW2 if and only if either of
                                    the following cases apply:
                                    •      RW1 appears in program order before a DSB instruction that begins an IMPLEMENTATION
                                           DEFINED instruction sequence indirectly leading to the generation of RW2.

                                    •      RW1 is Ordered-before a read or a write RW3 and RW3 is Out-of-band-ordered-before RW2.
                                    If a Memory effect M1 is Out-of-band-ordered-before a read or a write M2, then M1 is seen to occur
                                    before M2 by all Observers.

B2.3.5        Memory barriers
                    Memory barrier is the general term applied to an instruction, or sequence of instructions, that forces synchronization
                    events by a PE with respect to retiring Load/Store instructions. The memory barriers defined by the ARMv8
                    architecture provide a range of functionality, including:
                    •      Ordering of Load/Store instructions.
                    •      Completion of Load/Store instructions.
                    •      Context synchronization.

                    The following subsections describe the ARMv8 memory barrier instructions:
                    •     Instruction Synchronization Barrier (ISB) on page B2-99
                    •     Data Memory Barrier (DMB) on page B2-99.

B2-98                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                      B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                          B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                  •     Data Synchronization Barrier (DSB) on page B2-100.
                  •     Shareability and access limitations on the data barrier operations on page B2-100.
                  •     Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC, and Store-Release on page B2-101.
                  •     LoadLOAcquire, StoreLORelease on page B2-102.

                           Note
                  Depending on the required synchronization, a program might use memory barriers on their own, or it might use them
                  in conjunction with cache maintenance and memory management instructions that in general are only available
                  when software execution is at EL1 or higher.

                  DMB and DSB instructions affect reads and writes to the memory system generated by Load/Store instructions and data
                  or unified cache maintenance instructions being executed by the PE. Instruction fetches or accesses caused by a
                  hardware translation table access are not explicit accesses.

                  Instruction Synchronization Barrier (ISB)
                  An ISB instruction ensures that all instructions that come after the ISB instruction in program order are fetched from
                  the cache or memory after the ISB instruction has completed. Using an ISB ensures that the effects of
                  context-changing operations executed before the ISB are visible to the instructions fetched after the ISB instruction.
                  Examples of context-changing operations that require the insertion of an ISB instruction to ensure the effects of the
                  operation are visible to instructions fetched after the ISB instruction are:
                  •      Completed cache and TLB maintenance instructions.
                  •      Changes to System registers.

                  Any context-changing operations appearing in program order after the ISB instruction only take effect after the ISB
                  has been executed.

                  The pseudocode function for the operation of an ISB is InstructionSynchronizationBarrier().

                  See also Memory barriers on page D3-2079.

                  Data Memory Barrier (DMB)
                  The DMB instruction is a memory barrier instruction that ensures the relative order of memory accesses before the
                  barrier with memory accesses after the barrier. The DMB instruction does not ensure the completion of any of the
                  memory accesses for which it ensures relative order.

                  The full definition of the DMB is covered formally in the Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page B2-92 and
                  this introduction to the DMB instruction is not intended to contradict that section.
                  The basic principle of a DMB instruction is to introduce order between memory accesses that are specified to be
                  affected by the DMB options supplied as arguments to the DMB instruction. The DMB instruction ensures that all affected
                  memory accesses by the PE executing the DMB that appear in program order before the DMB and those which originate
                  from a different PE, to the extent required by the DMB options, which have been Observed-by the PE before the DMB
                  is executed, are Observed-by each PE, to the extent required by the DMB options, before any affected memory
                  accesses that appear in program order after the DMB are Observed-by that PE.

                  The use of a DMB creates order between the Memory effects of instructions as described in the definition of
                  Barrier-ordered-before.
                  DMB only affects memory accesses and the operation of data cache and unified cache maintenance instructions, see
                  A64 Cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2062. It has no effect on the ordering of any other instructions
                  executing on the PE. A DMB instruction intended to ensure the completion of cache maintenance instructions must
                  have an access type of both loads and stores.

                  The pseudocode function for the operation of a DMB is DataMemoryBarrier().

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             B2-99
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                    Data Synchronization Barrier (DSB)
                    A DSB is a memory barrier that ensures that memory accesses that occur before the DSB have completed before the
                    completion of the DSB instruction. In doing this, it acts as a stronger barrier than a DMB and all ordering that is created
                    by a DMB with specific options is also generated by a DSB with the same options.

                    Execution of a DSB:

                    •      At EL2 ensures that any memory accesses caused by Speculative translation table walks from the Non-secure
                           EL1&0 translation regime have been observed.

                    •      At EL3 ensures that any memory accesses caused by speculative translation table walks from any of the
                           following translation regimes have been observed:
                           —     The EL2 or EL2&0 translation regime.
                           —     The Secure EL1&0 translation regime.
                           —     The Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime.

                    For more information, see Use of out-of-context translation regimes on page D4-2103.

                    A DSB completes when all of the following apply:

                    •      All explicit memory accesses that are observed by PEe before the DSB is executed and are of the required
                           access types, and are from observers in the same required shareability domain as PEe, are complete for the
                           set of observers in the required shareability domain.

                    •      If the required access types of the DSB is reads and writes, then all cache maintenance instructions and all TLB
                           maintenance instructions issued by PEe before the DSB are complete for the required shareability domain.
                    In addition, no instruction that appears in program order after the DSB instruction can alter any state of the system or
                    perform any part of its functionality other than:

                    •      Being fetched from memory and decoded.

                    •      Reading the general-purpose, SIMD and floating-point, Special-purpose, or System registers that are directly
                           or indirectly read without causing side-effects until the DSB completes.
                    The pseudocode function for the operation of a DSB is DataSynchronizationBarrier().

                    See also Memory barriers on page D3-2079.

                    Shareability and access limitations on the data barrier operations
                    The DMB and DSB instructions take an argument that specifies:
                    •     The shareability domain over which the instruction must operate. This is one of:
                          —      Full system.
                          —      Outer Shareable.
                          —      Inner Shareable.
                          —      Non-shareable.
                    •     The accesses for which the instruction operates. This is one of:
                          —      Read and write accesses, both before and after the barrier instruction.
                          —      Write accesses only, before and after the barrier instruction.
                          —      Read accesses before the barrier instruction, and read and write accesses after the barrier instruction.
                                           Note
                                  This form of a DMB or DSB instruction can be described as a Load-Load/Store barrier.

                    For more information on whether an access is before or after a barrier instruction, see Data Memory Barrier (DMB)
                    on page B2-99 or Data Synchronization Barrier (DSB).

B2-100                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                      B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                          B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                   Table B2-1 shows how these options are encoded in the <option> field of the instruction:

                                                                 Table B2-1 Encoding of the DMB and DSB <option> parameter

        Accesses                                  Shareability domain

        Before the          After the
                                                  Full system       Outer Shareable          Inner Shareable        Non-shareable
        barrier             barrier

        Reads and writes    Reads and writes      SY                OSH                      ISH                    NSH

        Writes              Writes                ST                OSHST                    ISHST                  NSHST

        Reads               Reads and writes      LD                OSHLD                    ISHLD                  NSHLD

                   See the instruction descriptions for more information:
                   •     DMB on page C6-628.
                   •     DSB on page C6-631.

                           Note
                   ISB also supports an optional limitation argument that can only contain one value that corresponds to full system
                   operation, see ISB on page C6-647.

                   Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC, and Store-Release
                   ARMv8 provides a set of instructions with Acquire semantics for loads, and Release semantics for stores. These
                   instructions support the Release Consistency sequentially consistent (RCsc) model. In addition, ARMv8.3-RCPC
                   provides Load-AcquirePC instructions. The combination of Load-AcquirePC and Store-Release can be use to
                   support the weaker Release Consistency processor consistent (RCpc) model.

                   The full definitions of the Load-Acquire and Load-AcquirePC instructions are covered formally in the Definition of
                   the ARMv8 memory model on page B2-92. This introduction to the Load-Acquire and Load-AcquirePC instructions
                   is not intended to contradict that section.

                   The basic principle of both Load-Acquire and Load-AcquirePC instructions is to introduce order between the
                   memory access generated by the Load-Acquire or Load-AcquirePC instruction and the memory accesses appearing
                   in program order after the Load-Acquire or Load-AcquirePC instruction, such that the memory access generated by
                   the Load-Acquire or Load-AcquirePC instruction is Observed-by each PE, to the extent that the PE is required to
                   observe the access coherently, before any of the memory accesses appearing in program order after the
                   Load-Acquire or Load-AcquirePC instruction are Observed-by that PE, to the extent that the PE is required to
                   observe the accesses coherently.

                   The use of a Load-Acquire or Load-AcquirePC instruction creates order between the Memory effects of instructions
                   as described in the definition of Barrier-ordered-before.

                   The full definition of the Store-Release instruction is covered formally in the Definition of the ARMv8 memory
                   model on page B2-92 and this introduction to the Store-Release instruction is not intended to contradict that section.

                   The basic principle of a Store-Release instruction is to introduce order between the memory accesses generated by
                   the PE executing the Store-Release instruction, together with those which originate from a different PE, to the extent
                   that the PE is required to observe them coherently, Observed-by the PE before executing the Store-release.

                   The use of a Store-Release instruction creates order between the Memory effects of instructions as described in the
                   definition of Barrier-ordered-before.

                   Where a Load-Acquire appears in program order after a Store-Release, then the memory access generated by the
                   Store-Release instruction is Observed-by each PE, to the extent that that PE is required to observe the access
                   coherently, before the memory access generated by the Load-Acquire instruction are Observed-by that PE, to the
                   extent that the PE is required to observe the access coherently. In addition, the use of a Load-Acquire,

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           B2-101
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                    Load-AcquirePC or a Store-Release instruction on accesses to a Memory-mapped peripheral introduces order
                    between the Memory effects of the instructions that access that peripheral, as described in the definition of
                    Peripheral coherence order.

                    Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC and Store-Release, other than Load-Acquire Exclusive Pair and
                    Store-Release-Exclusive Pair, access only a single data element. This access is single-copy atomic. The address of
                    the data object must be aligned to the size of the data element being accessed, otherwise the access generates an
                    Alignment fault.

                    Load-Acquire Exclusive Pair and Store-Release Exclusive Pair access two data elements. The address supplied to
                    the instructions must be aligned to twice the size of the element being loaded, otherwise the access generates an
                    Alignment fault.

                    A Store-Release Exclusive instruction only has the release semantics if the store is successful.

                            Note
                    •     Each Load-Acquire Exclusive and Store-Release Exclusive instruction is essentially a variant of the
                          equivalent Load-Exclusive or Store-Exclusive instruction. All usage restrictions and single-copy atomicity
                          properties:
                          —     That apply to the Load-Exclusive instructions also apply to the Load-Acquire Exclusive instructions.
                          —     That apply to the Store-Exclusive instructions also apply to the Store-Release Exclusive instructions.

                    •     The Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC, and Store-Release instructions can remove the requirement to use the
                          explicit DMB instruction.

                    LoadLOAcquire, StoreLORelease
                    For each PE, the Non-secure physical memory map is divided into a set of LORegions using a table that is held
                    within the PE. Any PA in the Non-secure memory map can be a member of one LORegion. If a PA is assigned to
                    more than one LORegion, then an implementation might treat it as if it has been assigned to fewer LORegions than
                    that have been specified. A PA in the Secure physical memory map cannot be a member of any LORegion. For more
                    information, see Limited ordering regions on page B2-103.

                    ARMv8.1 provides a set of instructions with Acquire semantics for loads, and Release semantics for stores that
                    apply in relation to the defined LORegions. The new variants of the Load-Acquire and Store-Release instructions
                    are LoadLOAcquire and StoreLORelease. See LoadLOAcquire/StoreLORelease on page C3-175.

                    For all memory types, these instructions have the following ordering requirements:

                    •     LoadLOAcquire has the same semantics as Load-Acquire except that the memory accesses affected lie within
                          the same LORegion as the address of the memory access generated by the LoadLOAcquire instruction. See
                          Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC, and Store-Release on page B2-101.

                    •     StoreLORelease has the same semantics as Store-Release except that the memory accesses affected lie within
                          the same LORegion as the address of the memory access generated by the StoreLORelease instruction. See
                          Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC, and Store-Release on page B2-101.

                    In addition, for accesses to Memory-mapped peripherals:

                    •     LoadLOAcquire has the same semantics as Load-Acquire except that the affected Memory effects of
                          instructions that access the peripheral lie within the same LORegion as the address of the memory access
                          generated by the LoadLOAcquire instruction. See Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC, and Store-Release on
                          page B2-101.

                    •     StoreLORelease has the same semantics as Store-Release except that the affected Memory effects of
                          instructions that access the peripheral lie within the same LORegion as the address of the memory access
                          generated by the StoreLORelease instruction. See Load-Acquire, Load-AcquirePC, and Store-Release on
                          page B2-101.

B2-102                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                    B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                        B2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                          Note
                  The LoadLOAcquire/StoreLORelease instructions can remove the requirement to use the explicit DMB instruction.

B2.3.6      Limited ordering regions
                  ARMv8.1 introduces limited ordering regions (LORegions), which allow large systems to perform special
                  load-acquire and store-release instructions that provide order between the memory accesses to a region of the PA
                  map as observed by a set of observers.

                  This feature is supported in AArch64 state only.

                  Specification of the LORegions
                  The LORegions are defined in the Non-secure physical memory map using a set of LORegion descriptors. The
                  number of LORegion descriptors is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and can be discovered by reading the LORID_EL1
                  register.

                  Each LORegion descriptor consists of:
                  •     A tuple of the following values:
                        —      A Start Address.
                        —      An End Address.
                        —      An LORegion Number.
                  •     Valid bit which indicates whether that LORegion descriptor is valid

                  A memory location lies within the LORegion identified by the LORegion Number if the PA lies between the Start
                  Address and the End Address, inclusive. The Start Address must be defined to be aligned to 64KB and the End
                  Address must be defined as the top byte of a 64KB block of memory.

                  The LORegion descriptors are programmed using the LORSA_EL1, LOREA_EL1, LORN_EL1, and LORC_EL1
                  registers in the System register space. These registers are only supported in the Non-secure memory map.

                  If a LoadLOAcquire or a StoreLORelease does not match with any LORegion, then:

                  •     The LoadLOAcquire will behave as a Load-Acquire, and will be ordered in the same way with respect to all
                        accesses, independent of their LORegions.

                  •     The StoreLORelease will behave as a Store-Release, and will be ordered in the same way with respect to all
                        accesses, independent of their LORegions.

                          Note
                  If no LORegions are implemented, then the LoadLOAcquire and StoreLORelease will therefore behave as a
                  Load-Acquire and Store-Release.

                  A new access type AccType_LIMITEDORDERED has been added for these limited ordering instructions to be identified.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       B2-103
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

B2.4         Caches and memory hierarchy
                    The implementation of a memory system depends heavily on the microarchitecture and therefore many details of
                    the memory system are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. ARMv8 defines the application level interface to the memory
                    system, including a hierarchical memory system with multiple levels of cache. This section describes an application
                    level view of this system. It contains the subsections:
                    •      Introduction to caches.
                    •      Memory hierarchy on page B2-105.
                    •      Application level access to functionality related to caches on page B2-106
                    •      Implication of caches for the application programmer on page B2-106.
                    •      Preloading caches on page B2-108.

B2.4.1        Introduction to caches
                    A cache is a block of high-speed memory that contains a number of entries, each consisting of:
                    •     Main memory address information, commonly known as a tag.
                    •     The associated data.

                    Caches increase the average speed of a memory access. Caching takes account of two principles of locality:

                    Spatial locality
                                    An access to one Location is likely to be followed by accesses to adjacent Locations. Examples of
                                    this principle are:
                                    •      Sequential instruction execution.
                                    •      Accessing a data structure.

                    Temporal locality
                                    An access to an area of memory is likely to be repeated in a short time period. An example of this
                                    principle is the execution of a software loop.

                    To minimize the quantity of control information stored, the spatial locality property groups several locations
                    together under the same tag. This logical block is commonly known as a cache line. When data is loaded into a
                    cache, access times for subsequent loads and stores are reduced, resulting in overall performance benefits. An access
                    to information already in a cache is known as a cache hit, and other accesses are called cache misses.

                    Normally, caches are self-managing, with the updates occurring automatically. Whenever the PE accesses a
                    cacheable memory location, the cache is checked. If the access is a cache hit, the access occurs in the cache.
                    Otherwise, the access is made to memory. Typically, when making this access, a cache location is allocated and the
                    cache line loaded from memory. ARMv8 permits different cache topologies and access policies, provided they
                    comply with the memory coherency model described in this manual.

                    Caches introduce a number of potential problems, mainly because:
                    •    Memory accesses can occur at times other than when the programmer would expect them.
                    •    A data item can be held in multiple physical locations.

B2-104                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                 B2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

B2.4.2      Memory hierarchy
                  Typically memory close to a PE has very low latency, but is limited in size and expensive to implement. Further
                  from the PE it is common to implement larger blocks of memory but these have increased latency. To optimize
                  overall performance, an ARMv8 memory system can include multiple levels of cache in a hierarchical memory
                  system that exploits this trade-off between size and latency. Figure B2-1 shows an example of such a system in an
                  ARMv8-A system that supports virtual addressing.

                         Device
                                               Address
                                                                 Physical address
                                             translation
                               Virtual
                              address

                                         System configuration
                                             and control
                               PE,                                                                       Level 3
                                                                                 Level 2                 Cache
                           AArch64 state                    Level 1
                                                                                 Cache
                                                            Cache
                                  X30
                                              Instruction                                                                    Level 4
                                                 fetch                                              DRAM, SRAM,           for example,
                                                                                                    Storage-class         memory card,
                                  X0             Data                                                  memory                  disk

                                                                Figure B2-1 Multiple levels of cache in a memory hierarchy

                           Note
                  In this manual, in a hierarchical memory system, Level 1 refers to the level closest to the processing element, as
                  shown in Figure B2-1.

                  Instructions and data can be held in separate caches or in a unified cache. A cache hierarchy can have one or more
                  levels of separate instruction and data caches, with one or more unified caches that are located at the levels closest
                  to the main memory. Memory coherency for cache topologies can be defined using the conceptual points Point of
                  Unification (PoU), Point of Coherency (PoC), and Point of Persistence (PoP).

                           Note
                  ARMv8 ARMv8.2-DCPoP adds architectural support for Point of Persistence.

                  For more information, including the definitions of PoU, PoC, and PoP, see About cache maintenance in AArch64
                  state on page D3-2058.

                  The cacheability and shareability memory attributes
                  Cacheability and shareability are two attributes that describe the memory hierarchy in a multiprocessing system:

                  Cacheability This attribute defines whether memory locations are allowed to be allocated into a cache or not.
                               Cacheability is defined independently for Inner and Outer Cacheability locations.

                  Shareability    This attribute defines whether memory locations are shareable between different agents in a system.
                                  Marking a memory location as shareable for a particular domain requires hardware to ensure that
                                  the location is coherent for all agents in that domain. Shareability is defined independently for Inner
                                  and Outer Shareability domains.

                  For more information about Cacheability and Shareability, see Memory types and attributes on page B2-114.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           B2-105
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

B2.4.3        Application level access to functionality related to caches
                    As indicated in About the Application level programmers’ model on page B1-76, the application level corresponds
                    to execution at EL0. The architecture defines a set of cache maintenance instructions that software can use to
                    manage cache coherency. Software executing at a higher Exception level can enable use of some of this
                    functionality from EL0, as follows:

                    When the value of SCTLR_EL1.UCI is 1
                                   Software executing at EL0 can access:
                                   •      The data cache maintenance instructions, DC CVAU, DC CVAC, DC CVAP, and DC CIVAC. See The
                                          data cache maintenance instruction (DC) on page D3-2063.
                                   •      The instruction cache maintenance instruction IC IVAU. See The instruction cache
                                          maintenance instruction (IC) on page D3-2063.
                                   Attempted execution of these instructions might generate a Permission fault as described in
                                   Permission fault on page D4-2192.

                    When the value of SCTLR_EL1.UCT is 1
                                   Software executing at EL0 can access the cache type register. See CTR_EL0.

                    When the value of SCTLR_EL1.DZE is 1
                                   Software executing at EL0 can access the data cache zero instruction DC ZVA. See Data cache zero
                                   instruction on page D3-2071.

                    The SCTLR_EL1.{UCI, UCT, DZE} control fields are only accessible by software executing at EL1 or higher.

                    This functionality is UNDEFINED at EL0 when the value of the corresponding SCTLR_EL1 control field is 0, see:
                    •      Traps to EL1 of EL0 execution of cache maintenance instructions on page D1-1913.
                    •      Traps to EL1 of EL0 accesses to the CTR_EL0 on page D1-1913.
                    •      Traps to EL1 of EL0 execution of DC ZVA instructions on page D1-1914.

B2.4.4        Implication of caches for the application programmer
                    In normal operation, the caches are largely invisible to the application programmer. However they can become
                    visible when there is a breakdown in the coherency of the caches. Such a breakdown can occur:
                    •      When memory locations are updated by other agents in the system that do not use hardware management of
                           coherency.
                    •      When memory updates made from the application software must be made visible to other agents in the
                           system, without the use of hardware management of coherency.

                    For example:

                    •     In the absence of hardware management of coherency of DMA accesses, in a system with a DMA controller
                          that reads memory locations that are held in the data cache of a PE, a breakdown of coherency occurs when
                          the PE has written new data in the data cache, but the DMA controller reads the old data held in memory.

                    •     In a Harvard cache implementation, where there are separate instruction and data caches, a breakdown of
                          coherency occurs when new instruction data has been written into the data cache, but the instruction cache
                          still contains the old instruction data.

                    Data coherency issues
                    Software can ensure the data coherency of caches in the following ways:

                    •     By not using the caches in situations where coherency issues can arise. This can be achieved by:
                          —     Using Non-cacheable or, in some cases, Write-Through Cacheable memory.
                          —     Not enabling caches in the system.

                    •     By using cache maintenance instructions to manage the coherency issues in software. See Application level
                          access to functionality related to caches.

B2-106                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                 B2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

                  •     By using hardware coherency mechanisms to ensure the coherency of data accesses to memory for cacheable
                        locations by observers within the different shareability domains, see Non-shareable Normal memory on
                        page B2-116 and Shareable, Inner Shareable, and Outer Shareable Normal memory on page B2-115.

                                 Note
                        The performance of these hardware coherency mechanisms is highly implementation-specific. In some
                        implementations, the mechanism suppresses the ability to cache shareable locations. In other
                        implementations, cache coherency hardware can hold data in caches while managing coherency between
                        observers within the shareability domains.

                          Note
                  Not all these mechanisms are directly available to software operating at EL0 and might involve interaction with
                  software operating at a higher Exception level.

                  Synchronization and coherency issues between data and instruction accesses
                  How far ahead of the current point of execution instructions are fetched from is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Such
                  prefetching can be either a fixed or a dynamically varying number of instructions, and can follow any or all possible
                  future execution paths. For all types of memory:

                  •     The PE might have fetched the instructions from memory at any time since the last Context synchronization
                        event on that PE.

                  •     Any instructions fetched in this way might be executed multiple times, if this is required by the execution of
                        the program, without being refetched from memory. In the absence of a Context synchronization event, there
                        is no limit on the number of times such an instruction might be executed without being refetched from
                        memory.

                  The ARM architecture does not require the hardware to ensure coherency between instruction caches and memory,
                  even for locations of shared memory.

                  If software requires coherency between instruction execution and memory, it must manage this coherency using
                  Context synchronization events and cache maintenance instructions. The following code sequence can be used to
                  allow a PE to execute code that the same PE has written.

                  ; Coherency example for data and instruction accesses within the same Inner Shareable domain.
                  ; Enter this code with <Wt> containing a new 32-bit instruction,
                  ; to be held in Cacheable space at a location pointed to by Xn.
                          STR Wt, [Xn]
                          DC CVAU, Xn         ; Clean data cache by VA to point of unification (PoU)
                          DSB ISH             ; Ensure visibility of the data cleaned from cache
                          IC IVAU, Xn         ; Invalidate instruction cache by VA to PoU
                          DSB ISH             ; Ensure completion of the invalidations
                          ISB                 ; Synchronize the fetched instruction stream

                          Note
                  •     For Non-cacheable or Write-Through accesses, the clean data cache by VA instruction is not required.
                        However, the invalidate instruction cache instruction is required because the ARMv8-A AArch64
                        architecture allows Non-cacheable accesses to be held in an instruction cache. See Non-cacheable accesses
                        and instruction caches on page D3-2057.

                  •     This code can be used when the thread of execution modifying the code is the same thread of execution that
                        is executing the code. The ARMv8 architecture limits the set of instructions that can be executed by one
                        thread of execution as they are being modified by another thread of execution without requiring explicit
                        synchronization. See Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on page B2-90.

                  •     The system software controls whether these cache maintenance instructions are available to the application
                        level by setting SCTLR_EL1.UCI.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          B2-107
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

                             Note
                    If this sequence is not executed between writing data to a location and executing the instruction at that location, the
                    lack of coherency between instruction caches and memory means that the instructions that are executed might be
                    the old instruction or the updated instruction, and which is used can arbitrarily vary during execution. It must not
                    be assumed by software, before the synchronization sequence is executed, that once the updated instruction has been
                    seen, the old instruction will not be seen again.

B2.4.5        Preloading caches
                    The ARM architecture provides memory system hints PRFM, LDNP, and STNP that software can use to communicate
                    the expected use of memory locations to the hardware. The memory system can respond by taking actions that are
                    expected to speed up the memory accesses if they occur. The effect of these memory system hints is
                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Typically, implementations use this information to bring the data or instruction
                    locations into caches.

                    The Preload instructions are hints, and so implementations can treat them as NOPs without affecting the functional
                    behavior of the device. The instructions cannot generate synchronous Data Abort exceptions, but the resulting
                    memory system operations might, under exceptional circumstances, generate an asynchronous External abort,
                    which is taken using an SError interrupt exception. For more information, see ISS encoding for an exception from
                    a Data Abort on page D10-2460.
                    PrefetchHint{} defines the prefetch hint types.

                    The Hint_Prefetch() function signals to the memory system that memory accesses of the type hint to or from the
                    specified address are likely to occur in the near future. The memory system might take some action to speed up the
                    memory accesses when they do occur, such as preloading the specified address into one or more caches as indicated
                    by the innermost cache level target and non-temporal hint stream.
                    For more information on PRFM and Load/Store instructions that provide hints to the memory system, see Prefetch
                    memory on page C3-180 and Load/Store SIMD and Floating-point Non-temporal pair on page C3-178.

B2-108                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                    B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                             B2.5 Alignment support

B2.5       Alignment support
                  This section describes alignment support. It contains the following subsections:
                  •      Instruction alignment.
                  •      Alignment of data accesses.
                  •      Unaligned data access restrictions on page B2-110.

B2.5.1      Instruction alignment
                  A64 instructions must be word-aligned.

                  Attempting to fetch an instruction from a misaligned location results in a PC alignment fault. See PC alignment
                  checking on page D1-1868.

B2.5.2      Alignment of data accesses
                  An unaligned access to any type of Device memory causes an Alignment fault.

                  The alignment requirements for accesses to Normal memory are as follows:

                  •     For all instructions that load or store a single or multiple registers, other than
                        Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive and Load-Acquire/Store-Release, if the address that is accessed is not
                        aligned to the size of the data element being accessed, then one of the following occurs:
                        —      An Alignment fault is generated.
                        —      An unaligned access is performed.
                        When the value of SCTLR_ELx.A at the current Exception level is 1, alignment checking is enabled, and
                        unaligned accesses generate Alignment faults.

                                 Note
                        —      The SCTLR_EL1.A bit applies to software running at EL0 and at EL1, although it can only be
                               accessed from EL1 and higher.
                        —      Alignment checks are based on the size of the accessed elements, not the overall access size. This
                               affects SIMD element and structure loads and stores, and also Load/Store pair instructions.
                        —      These alignment checking rules mean the ARMv8 architecture introduces requirements for 64-bit and
                               128-bit alignment checking.

                  •     All Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive, Load-Acquire/Store-Release, and Compare and Swap memory
                        accesses that access a single element or a pair of elements generate an Alignment fault if the address being
                        accessed is not aligned to the size of the data structure being accessed.

                  A failed alignment check results in an Alignment fault, which is taken as a Data Abort exception, that is taken as
                  follows:

                  •     For an access from Non-secure EL0 or EL1, if the Alignment fault is generated only because the translation
                        tables identify the address being accessed as Device memory then:
                        —      If the first stage of address translation marks the address as Device memory then the exception is taken
                               to EL1.
                        —      If only the second stage of address translation marks the address as Device memory then the exception
                               is taken to EL2.

                  •     Otherwise, the exception is taken to the lowest Exception level that can handle the exception, consistent with
                        the basic requirement that the Exception level never decreases on taking an exception. Therefore:
                        —      Alignment faults taken from EL0 or EL1 are taken to EL1 unless redirected by HCR_EL2.TGE
                        —      Alignment faults taken from EL2 are taken to EL2.
                        —      Alignment faults taken from EL3 are taken to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           B2-109
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.5 Alignment support

B2.5.3        Unaligned data access restrictions
                    The following points apply to unaligned data accesses in ARMv8:

                    •     Accesses are not guaranteed to be single-copy atomic except at the byte access level, see Atomicity in the
                          ARM architecture on page B2-88.

                    •     Unaligned accesses typically take a number of additional cycles to complete compared to a naturally-aligned
                          access.

                    •     An operation that performs an unaligned access can abort on any memory access that it makes, and can abort
                          on more than one access. This means that an unaligned access that occurs across a page boundary can
                          generate an abort on either side of the boundary.

B2-110                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                          B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                      B2.6 Endian support

B2.6         Endian support
                     General description of endianness in the ARM architecture describes the relationship between endianness and
                     memory addressing in the ARM architecture.

                     The following subsections then describe the endianness schemes supported by the architecture:
                     •     Instruction endianness on page B2-112.
                     •     Data endianness on page B2-112.
                     •     Endianness of memory-mapped peripherals on page B2-113.

B2.6.1          General description of endianness in the ARM architecture
                     This section only describes memory addressing and the effects of endianness for data elements up to quadwords of
                     128 bits. However, this description can be extended to apply to larger data elements.

                     For an address A, Figure B2-2 shows, for big-endian and little-endian memory systems, the relationship between:

                     •       The quadword at address A.

                     •       The doubleword at address A and A+8.

                     •       The words at addresses A, A+4, A+8, and A+12.

                     •       The halfwords at addresses A, A+2, A+4, A+6, A+8, A+10, A+12, and A+14.

                     •       The bytes at addresses A, A+1, A+2, A+3, A+4, A+5, A+6, A+7, A+8, A+9, A+10, A+11, A+12, A+13,
                             A+14, and A+15.

                     The terms in Figure B2-2 have the following definitions:
                     B_A            Byte at address A.
                     HW_A           Halfword at address A.
                     MSByte         Most significant byte.
                     LSByte         Least significant byte.

 Big-endian memory system
   MSByte                                                  Incrementing byte address                                             LSByte

                                                            Quadword at address A

                         Doubleword at address A                                            Doubleword at address A+8

           Word at address A                Word at address A+4               Word at address A+8              Word at address A+12

         HW_A            HW_A+2          HW_A+4           HW_A+6            HW_A+8          HW_A+10           HW_A+12      HW_A+14

     B_A    B_A+1 B_A+2 B_A+3 B_A+4 B_A+5 B_A+6 B_A+7 B_A+8 B_A+9 B_A+10 B_A+11 B_A+12 B_A+13 B_A+14 B_A+15

 Little-endian memory system
   MSByte                                                  Incrementing byte address                                             LSByte

                                                            Quadword at address A

                      Doubleword at address A+8                                              Doubleword at address A

         Word at address A+12               Word at address A+8               Word at address A+4               Word at address A

      HW_A+14            HW_A+12         HW_A+10          HW_A+8            HW_A+6           HW_A+4           HW_A+2         HW_A

   B_A+15 B_A+14 B_A+13 B_A+12 B_A+11 B_A+10 B_A+9 B_A+8 B_A+7 B_A+6 B_A+5 B_A+4 B_A+3 B_A+2 B_A+1                                  B_A

                                                                                               Figure B2-2 Endianness relationships

ARM DDI 0487C.a                   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         B2-111
ID121917                                                  Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.6 Endian support

                    The big-endian and little-endian mapping schemes determine the order in which the bytes of a quadword,
                    doubleword, word, or halfword are interpreted. For example, a load of a word from address 0x1000 always results
                    in an access to the bytes at memory locations 0x1000, 0x1001, 0x1002, and 0x1003. The endianness mapping scheme
                    determines the significance of these 4 bytes.

B2.6.2        Instruction endianness
                    In ARMv8-A, A64 instructions have a fixed length of 32 bits and are always little-endian.

B2.6.3        Data endianness
                    SCTLR_EL1.E0E, configurable at EL1 or higher, determines the data endianness for execution at EL0.

                    The data size used for endianness conversions:

                    •      Is the size of the data value that is loaded or stored for SIMD and floating-point register and general-purpose
                           register loads and stores.

                    •      Is the size of the data element that is loaded or stored for SIMD element and data structure loads and stores.
                           For more information, see Endianness in SIMD operations on page B2-113.

                             Note
                    This means the ARMv8 architecture introduces a requirement for 128-bit endian conversions.

                    Instructions to reverse bytes in a general-purpose register or a SIMD and floating-point
                    register
                    An application or device driver might have to interface to memory-mapped peripheral registers or shared memory
                    structures that are not the same endianness as the internal data structures. Similarly, the endianness of the operating
                    system might not match that of the peripheral registers or shared memory. In these cases, the PE requires an efficient
                    method to transform explicitly the endianness of the data.

                    Table B2-2 shows the instructions that provide this functionality:

                                                                                              Table B2-2 Byte reversal instructions

                        Function                                     Instructions        Notes

                        Reverse bytes in 32-bit word or wordsa       REV32               For use with general-purpose registers

                        Reverse bytes in whole register              REV                 For use with general-purpose registers

                        Reverse bytes in 16-bit halfwords            REV16               For use with general-purpose registers

                        Reverse elements in doublewords, vector      REV64               For use with SIMD and floating-point registers

                        Reverse elements in words, vector            REV32               For use with SIMD and floating-point registers

                        Reverse elements in halfwords, vector        REV16               For use with SIMD and floating-point registers
                           a. Can operate on multiple words.

B2-112                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                      B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                  B2.6 Endian support

                  Endianness in SIMD operations
                  SIMD element Load/Store instructions transfer vectors of elements between memory and the SIMD and
                  floating-point register file. An instruction specifies both the length of the transfer and the size of the data elements
                  being transferred. This information is used to load and store data correctly in both big-endian and little-endian
                  systems.

                  For example:

                      LD1 {V0.4H}, [X1]

                  This loads a 64-bit register with four 16-bit values. The four elements appear in the register in array order, with the
                  lowest indexed element fetched from the lowest address. The order of bytes in the elements depends on the
                  endianness configuration, as shown in Figure B2-3. Therefore, the order of the elements in the registers is the same
                  regardless of the endianness configuration.

                                                           64-bit register containing four 16-bit elements

                                 D[15:8]      D[7:0]       C[15:8]         C[7:0]     B[15:8]       B[7:0]      A[15:8]       A[7:0]

                                    0 A[7:0]                                                                          0 A[15:8]
                                    1 A[15:8]                                                                         1 A[7:0]
                                    2 B[7:0]                                                                          2 B[15:8]
                                    3 B[15:8]                                                                         3 B[7:0]
                                    4 C[7:0]           LD1 {V0.4H}, [X1]                        LD1 {V0.4H}, [X1]     4 C[15:8]
                                    5 C[15:8]                                                                         5 C[7:0]
                                    6 D[7:0]                                                                          6 D[15:8]
                                    7 D[15:8]                                                                         7 D[7:0]
                                 Memory system with                                                              Memory system with
                           little-endian addressing (LE)                                                     big-endian addressing (BE)

                                                                                           Figure B2-3 SIMD byte order example

                  The BigEndian() pseudocode function determines the current endianness of the data.
                  The BigEndianReverse() pseudocode function reverses the endianness of a bitstring.

                  The BigEndian() and BigEndianReverse() functions are defined in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode.

B2.6.4      Endianness of memory-mapped peripherals
                  All memory-mapped peripherals defined in the ARM architecture must be little-endian.

                  Peripherals to which this requirement applies include:

                  •      Memory-mapped register interfaces to a debugger, or to a cross-trigger interface, see Chapter H8 About the
                         External Debug Registers.

                  •      The memory-mapped register interface to the system level implementation of the Generic Timer, see
                         Chapter I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer.

                  •      A memory-mapped register interface to the Performance Monitors, see Chapter I3 Recommended External
                         Interface to the Performance Monitors.

                  •      Memory-mapped register interfaces to an ARM Generic Interface Controller, see the ARM® Generic
                         Interrupt Controller Architecture Specification, GIC architecture version 3.0 and version 4.0.
                  •      The memory-mapped register interface to an ARM trace component. See, for example, the ARM® Embedded
                         Trace Macrocell Architecture Specification, ETMv4.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             B2-113
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.7 Memory types and attributes

B2.7         Memory types and attributes
                    In ARMv8 the ordering of accesses for addresses in memory, referred to as the memory order model, is defined by
                    the memory attributes. The following sections describe this model:
                    •     Normal memory.
                    •     Device memory on page B2-118.
                    •     Memory access restrictions on page B2-124.

B2.7.1        Normal memory
                    The Normal memory type attribute applies to most memory in a system. It indicates that the hardware is permitted
                    by the architecture to perform Speculative data read accesses to these locations, regardless of the access permissions
                    for these locations.

                    The Normal memory type has the following properties:

                    •     A write to a memory location with the Normal attribute completes in finite time. This means that it is globally
                          observed for the shareability domain of the memory location in finite time. For a Non-cacheable location, the
                          location is observed by all observers in finite time.

                    •     A completed write to a memory location with the Normal attribute is globally observed for the shareability
                          domain of the memory location in finite time without the need for explicit cache maintenance instructions or
                          barriers. For a Non-cacheable location, the completed write is globally observed for all observers in finite
                          time without the need for explicit cache maintenance instructions or barriers.

                    •     Writes to a memory location with the Normal memory attribute that are Non-cacheable must reach the
                          endpoint for that location in the memory system in finite time.

                    •     Unaligned memory accesses can access Normal memory if the system is configured to generate such
                          accesses.

                    •     There is no requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the elements accessed
                          by multi-register Load/Store instructions. See Multi-register loads and stores that access Normal memory on
                          page B2-118.

                            Note
                    •     The Normal memory attribute is appropriate for locations of memory that are idempotent, meaning that they
                          exhibit all of the following properties:
                          —      Read accesses can be repeated with no side-effects.
                          —      Repeated read accesses return the last value written to the resource being read.
                          —      Read accesses can fetch additional memory locations with no side-effects.
                          —      Write accesses can be repeated with no side-effects if the contents of the location accessed are
                                 unchanged between the repeated writes or as the result of an exception, as described in this section.
                          —      Unaligned accesses can be supported.
                          —      Accesses can be merged before accessing the target memory system.

                    •     An instruction that generates a sequence of accesses as described in Atomicity in the ARM architecture on
                          page B2-88 might be abandoned as a result of an exception being taken during the sequence of accesses. On
                          return from the exception the instruction is restarted, and therefore, one or more of the memory locations
                          might be accessed multiple times. This can result in repeated write accesses to a location that has been
                          changed between the write accesses.

                    The following sections describe the other attributes for Normal memory:
                    •     Shareable Normal memory on page B2-115.
                    •     Non-shareable Normal memory on page B2-116.
                    •     Cacheability attributes for Normal memory on page B2-116.

B2-114                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                      B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                    B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  See also:

                  •     Multi-register loads and stores that access Normal memory on page B2-118.

                  •     Atomicity in the ARM architecture on page B2-88.

                  •     Memory barriers on page B2-98. For accesses to Normal memory, a DMB instruction is required to ensure the
                        required ordering.

                  •     Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on page B2-90.

                  Shareable Normal memory
                  A Normal memory location has a Shareability attribute that is one of:

                  •     Inner Shareable, meaning it applies across the Inner Shareable shareability domain.

                  •     Outer Shareable, meaning it applies across both the Inner Shareable and the Outer Shareable shareability
                        domains.

                  •     Non-shareable.

                  The shareability attributes define the data coherency requirements of the location, that hardware must enforce. They
                  do not affect the coherency requirements of instruction fetches, see Synchronization and coherency issues between
                  data and instruction accesses on page B2-107.

                          Note
                  •     System designers can use the shareability attribute to specify the locations in Normal memory for which
                        coherency must be maintained. However, software developers must not assume that specifying a memory
                        location as Non-shareable permits software to make assumptions about the incoherency of the location
                        between different PEs in a shared memory system. Such assumptions are not portable between different
                        multiprocessing implementations that might use the shareability attribute. Any multiprocessing
                        implementation might implement caches that are shared, inherently, between different processing elements.

                  •     This architecture assumes that all PEs that use the same operating system or hypervisor are in the same Inner
                        Shareable shareability domain.

                  Shareable, Inner Shareable, and Outer Shareable Normal memory

                  The ARM architecture abstracts the system as a series of Inner and Outer Shareability domains.

                  Each Inner Shareability domain contains a set of observers that are data coherent for each member of that set for
                  data accesses with the Inner Shareable attribute made by any member of that set.

                  Each Outer Shareability domain contains a set of observers that are data coherent for each member of that set for
                  data accesses with the Outer Shareable attribute made by any member of that set.

                  The following properties also hold:

                  •     Each observer is only a member of a single Inner Shareability domain.

                  •     Each observer is only a member of a single Outer Shareability domain.

                  •     All observers in an Inner Shareability domain are always members of the same Outer Shareability domain.
                        This means that an Inner Shareability domain is a subset of an Outer Shareability domain, although it is not
                        required to be a proper subset.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        B2-115
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                             Note
                    •      Because all data accesses to Non-cacheable locations are data coherent to all observers, Non-cacheable
                           locations are always treated as Outer Shareable.

                    •      The Inner Shareable domain is expected to be the set of PEs controlled by a single hypervisor or operating
                           system.

                    The details of the use of the shareability attributes are system-specific. Example B2-1 shows how they might be
                    used.

                                                                                      Example B2-1 Use of shareability attributes

                    In an implementation, a particular subsystem with two clusters of PEs has the requirement that:

                    •      In each cluster, the data caches or unified caches of the PEs in the cluster are transparent for all data accesses
                           to memory locations with the Inner Shareable attribute.

                    •      However, between the two clusters, the caches:
                           —    Are not required to be coherent for data accesses that have only the Inner Shareable attribute.
                           —    Are coherent for data accesses that have the Outer Shareable attribute.

                    In this system, each cluster is in a different shareability domain for the Inner Shareable attribute, but all components
                    of the subsystem are in the same shareability domain for the Outer Shareable attribute.

                    A system might implement two such subsystems. If the data caches or unified caches of one subsystem are not
                    transparent to the accesses from the other subsystem, this system has two Outer Shareable shareability domains.

                    Having two levels of shareability means system designers can reduce the performance and power overhead for
                    shared memory locations that do not need to be part of the Outer Shareable shareability domain.

                    For shareable Normal memory, the Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive synchronization primitives take account of
                    the possibility of accesses by more than one observer in the same Shareability domain.

                    Non-shareable Normal memory
                    For Normal memory locations, the Non-shareable attribute identifies Normal memory that is likely to be accessed
                    only by a single PE.

                    A location in Normal memory with the Non-shareable attribute does not require the hardware to make data accesses
                    by different observers coherent, unless the memory is Non-cacheable. For a Non-shareable location, if other
                    observers share the memory system, software must use cache maintenance instructions, if the presence of caches
                    might lead to coherency issues when communicating between the observers. This cache maintenance requirement
                    is in addition to the barrier operations that are required to ensure memory ordering.

                    For Non-shareable Normal memory, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the Load-Exclusive and
                    Store-Exclusive synchronization primitives take account of the possibility of accesses by more than one observer.

                    Cacheability attributes for Normal memory
                    In addition to being Outer Shareable, Inner Shareable or Non-shareable, each region of Normal memory is assigned
                    a Cacheability attribute that is one of:
                    •      Write-Through Cacheable.
                    •      Write-Back Cacheable.
                    •      Non-cacheable.

B2-116                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                       B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                     B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  Also, for Write-Through Cacheable and Write-Back Cacheable Normal memory regions:

                  •      A region might be assigned cache allocation hints for read and write accesses.

                  •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the cache allocation hints can have an additional attribute of
                         Transient or Non-transient.

                  For more information see Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints on page D3-2054.

                  A memory location can be marked as having different cacheability attributes, for example when using aliases in a
                  VA to PA mapping:
                  •     If the attributes differ only in the cache allocation hint, this does not affect the behavior of accesses to that
                        location.
                  •     For other cases, see Mismatched memory attributes on page B2-125.

                  The cacheability attributes provide a mechanism of coherency control with observers that lie outside the shareability
                  domain of a region of memory. In some cases, the use of Write-Through Cacheable or Non-cacheable regions of
                  memory might provide a better mechanism for controlling coherency than the use of hardware coherency
                  mechanisms or the use of cache maintenance routines. To this end, the architecture requires the following properties
                  for Non-cacheable or Write-Through Cacheable memory:

                  •      A completed write to a memory location that is Non-cacheable or Write-Through Cacheable for a level of
                         cache made by an observer accessing the memory system inside the level of cache is visible to all observers
                         accessing the memory system outside the level of cache without the need of explicit cache maintenance.

                  •      A completed write to a memory location that is Non-cacheable for a level of cache made by an observer
                         accessing the memory system outside the level of cache is visible to all observers accessing the memory
                         system inside the level of cache without the need of explicit cache maintenance.

                  •      For accesses to Normal memory that is Non-cacheable, a DMB instruction ensures that all members of Group
                         A reach a single peripheral or block of memory, of IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size, before any member of
                         Group B, where:
                         —      The definition of the operation of a DMB instruction defines Group A and Group B, see Data Memory
                                Barrier (DMB) on page B2-99.
                         —      The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size of the single peripheral or block of memory is defined by the
                                peripheral or block of memory.
                         This applies for all types of DMB instruction.

                           Note
                  Implementations can use the cache allocation hints to indicate a probable performance benefit of caching. For
                  example, a programmer might know that a piece of memory is not going to be accessed again and would be better
                  treated as Non-cacheable. The distinction between memory regions with attributes that differ only in the cache
                  allocation hints exists only as a hint for performance.

                  For Normal memory, the ARM architecture provides cacheability attributes that are defined independently for each
                  of two conceptual levels of cache, the inner and the outer cache. The relationship between these conceptual levels
                  of cache and the implemented physical levels of cache is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and can differ from the
                  boundaries between the Inner and Outer Shareability domains. However:
                  •      Inner refers to the innermost caches, meaning the caches that are closest to the PE, and always includes the
                         lowest level of cache.
                  •      No cache that is controlled by the Inner cacheability attributes can lie outside a cache that is controlled by the
                         Outer cacheability attributes.
                  •      An implementation might not have any outer cache.

                  Example B2-2 on page B2-118, Example B2-3 on page B2-118, and Example B2-4 on page B2-118 describe the
                  possible ways of implementing a system with three levels of cache, level 1 (L1) to level 3 (L3).

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             B2-117
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                            Note
                    •     L1 cache is the level closest to the PE, see Memory hierarchy on page B2-105.

                    •     When managing coherency, system designs must consider both the inner and outer cacheability attributes, as
                          well as the shareability attributes. This is because hardware might have to manage the coherency of caches
                          at one conceptual level, even when another conceptual level has the Non-cacheable attribute.

                                                 Example B2-2 Implementation with two inner and one outer cache levels

                    Implement the three levels of cache in the system, L1 to L3, with:
                    •    The Inner cacheability attribute applied to L1 and L2 cache.
                    •    The Outer cacheability attribute applied to L3 cache.

                                                 Example B2-3 Implementation with three inner and no outer cache levels

                    Implement the three levels of cache in the system, L1 to L3, with the Inner cacheability attribute applied to L1, L2,
                    and L3 cache. Do not use the Outer cacheability attribute.

                                                 Example B2-4 Implementation with one inner and two outer cache levels

                    Implement the three levels of cache in the system, L1 to L3, with:
                    •    The Inner cacheability attribute applied to L1 cache.
                    •    The Outer cacheability attribute applied to L2 and L3 cache.

                    Multi-register loads and stores that access Normal memory
                    For all instructions that load or store more than one general-purpose register from an Exception level there is no
                    requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the elements accessed by these
                    load or store instructions.

                    For all instructions that load or store more than one general-purpose register from an Exception level the order in
                    which the registers are accessed is not defined by the architecture.

                    For all instructions that load or store one or more SIMD&FP registers from an Exception level, there is no
                    requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the element accessed by these
                    load or store instructions.

B2.7.2        Device memory
                    The Device memory type attributes define memory locations where an access to the location can cause side-effects,
                    or where the value returned for a load can vary depending on the number of loads performed. Typically, the Device
                    memory attributes are used for memory-mapped peripherals and similar locations.

                    The attributes for ARMv8 Device memory are:

                    Gathering       Identified as G or nG, see Gathering on page B2-121.

                    Reordering      Identified as R or nR, see Reordering on page B2-122.

                    Early Write Acknowledgement
                                    Identified as E or nE, see Early Write Acknowledgement on page B2-123.

B2-118                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                    B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                  B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  The ARMv8 Device memory types are:

                  Device-nGnRnE          Device non-Gathering, non-Reordering, No Early write acknowledgement.
                                         Equivalent to the Strongly-ordered memory type in earlier versions of the architecture.

                  Device-nGnRE           Device non-Gathering, non-Reordering, Early Write Acknowledgement.
                                         Equivalent to the Device memory type in earlier versions of the architecture.

                  Device-nGRE            Device non-Gathering, Reordering, Early Write Acknowledgement.
                                         ARMv8 adds this memory type to the translation table formats found in earlier versions of
                                         the architecture. The use of barriers is required to order accesses to Device-nGRE memory.

                  Device-GRE             Device Gathering, Reordering, Early Write Acknowledgement.
                                         ARMv8 adds this memory type to the translation table formats found in earlier versions of
                                         the architecture. Device-GRE memory has the fewest constraints. It behaves similar to
                                         Normal memory, with the restriction that Speculative accesses to Device-GRE memory is
                                         forbidden.

                  Collectively these are referred to as any Device memory type. Going down the list, the memory types are described
                  as getting weaker; conversely the going up the list the memory types are described as getting stronger.

                          Note
                  •     As the list of types shows, these additional attributes are hierarchical. For example, a memory location that
                        permits Gathering must also permit Reordering and Early Write Acknowledgement.

                  •     The architecture does not require an implementation to distinguish between each of these memory types and
                        ARM recognizes that not all implementations will do so. The subsection that describes each of the attributes,
                        describes the implementation rules for the attribute.

                  •     Earlier versions of the ARM architecture defined the following memory types:
                        —      Strongly-ordered memory. This is the equivalent of the Device-nGnRnE memory type.
                        —      Device memory. This is the equivalent of the Device-nGnRE memory type.

                  All of these memory types have the following properties:

                  •     Speculative data accesses are not permitted to any memory location with any Device memory attribute. This
                        means that each memory access to any Device memory type must be one that would be generated by a simple
                        sequential execution of the program.
                        The following exceptions to this apply:
                        —      Reads generated by the SIMD and floating-point instructions can access bytes that are not explicitly
                               accessed by the instruction if the bytes accessed are in a 16-byte window, aligned to 16-bytes, that
                               contains at least one byte that is explicitly accessed by the instruction.
                        —      For Device memory with the Gathering attribute, reads generated by the LDNP instructions are
                               permitted to access bytes that are not explicitly accessed by the instruction, provided that the bytes
                               accessed are in a 128-byte window, aligned to 128-bytes, that contains at least one byte that is
                               explicitly accessed by the instruction.
                        —      Where a load or store instruction performs a sequence of memory accesses, as opposed to one
                               single-copy atomic access as defined in the rules for single-copy atomicity, these accesses might occur
                               multiple times as a result of executing the load or store instruction. See Properties of single-copy
                               atomic accesses on page B2-89.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           B2-119
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                                   Note
                          —      An instruction that generates a sequence of accesses as described in Atomicity in the ARM architecture
                                 on page B2-88 might be abandoned as a result of an exception being taken during the sequence of
                                 accesses. On return from the exception, the instruction is restarted, and therefore, one or more of the
                                 memory locations might be accessed multiple times. This can result in repeated accesses to a location
                                 where the program only defines a single access. For this reason, ARM strongly recommends that no
                                 accesses to Device memory are performed from a single instruction that spans the boundary of a
                                 translation granule or which in some other way could lead to some of the accesses being aborted.
                          —      Write speculation that is visible to other observers is prohibited for all memory types.

                    •     A write to a memory location with any Device memory attribute completes in finite time. This means that it
                          is globally observed for all observers in the system in finite time.

                    •     If a location with any Device memory attribute changes without an explicit write by an observer, this change
                          must also be globally observed for all observers in the system in finite time. Such a change might occur in a
                          peripheral location that holds status information.

                    •     A completed write to a memory location with any Device memory attribute is globally observed for all
                          observers in finite time without the need for explicit maintenance.

                    •     Data accesses to memory locations are coherent for all observers in the system, and correspondingly are
                          treated as being Outer Shareable.

                    •     A memory location with any Device memory attribute cannot be allocated into a cache.

                    •     Writes to a memory location with any Device memory attribute must reach the endpoint for that address in
                          the memory system in finite time. Typically, the endpoint is a peripheral or some physical memory.

                    •     For accesses to any Device memory type, a DMB instruction ensures that all members of Group A reach a single
                          peripheral or block of memory, of IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size, before any member of Group B, where:
                          —      The definition of the operation of a DMB instruction defines Group A and Group B, see Data Memory
                                 Barrier (DMB) on page B2-99.
                          —      The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size of the single peripheral or block of memory is defined by the
                                 peripheral or block of memory.
                          This applies for all types of DMB instruction.

                    •     All accesses to memory with any Device memory attribute must be aligned. Any unaligned access generates
                          an Alignment fault at the first stage of translation that defined the location as being Device.

                                   Note
                          In the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime in systems where HCR_EL2.TGE==1 and HCR_EL2.DC==0,
                          any Alignment fault that results from the fact that all locations are treated as Device is a fault at the first stage
                          of translation. This causes ESR_EL2.ISS[24] to be 0.

                    •     Hardware does not prevent speculative instruction fetches from a memory location with any of the Device
                          memory attributes unless the memory location is also marked as Execute-never for all Exception levels.

                                   Note
                          This means that to prevent speculative instruction fetches from memory locations with Device memory
                          attributes, any location that is assigned any Device memory type must also be marked as Execute-never for
                          all Exception levels. Failure to mark a memory location with any Device memory attribute as Execute-never
                          for all Exception levels is a programming error.

                    See also Memory access restrictions on page B2-124.

B2-120                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                         B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                       B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  The memory types for translation table walks cannot be defined as any Device memory type within the TCR_ELx.
                  For the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime, the memory accesses made during a stage 1 translation table walk
                  are subject to a stage 2 translation, and as a result of this second stage of translation, the accesses from the first stage
                  translation table walk might be made to memory locations with any Device memory type. These accesses might be
                  made speculatively. When the value of the HCR_EL2.PTW bit is 1, a stage 2 permission fault is generated if a first
                  stage translation table walk is made to any Device memory type.

                           Note
                  In general, making a translation table walk to any Device memory type is the result of a programming error.

                  For instruction fetches, if branches cause the program counter to point to an area of memory with the Device
                  attribute which is not marked as Execute-never for the current Exception level, an implementation can either:
                  •      Treat the instruction fetch as if it were to a memory location with the Normal Non-cacheable attribute.
                  •      Take a Permission fault.

                  Gathering
                  In the Device memory attribute:
                  G              Indicates that the location has the Gathering attribute.
                  nG             Indicates that the location does not have the Gathering attribute, meaning it is non-Gathering.

                  The Gathering attribute determines whether it is permissible for either:

                  •      Multiple memory accesses of the same type, read or write, to the same memory location to be merged into a
                         single transaction.

                  •      Multiple memory accesses of the same type, read or write, to different memory locations to be merged into
                         a single memory transaction on an interconnect.

                           Note
                  This also applies to writebacks from the cache, whether caused by a Natural eviction or as a result of a cache
                  maintenance instruction.

                  For memory types with the Gathering attribute, either of these behaviors is permitted, provided that the ordering and
                  coherency rules of the memory location are followed.

                  For memory types with the non-Gathering attribute, neither of these behaviors is permitted. As a result:

                  •      The number of memory accesses that are made corresponds to the number that would be generated by a
                         simple sequential execution of the program.

                  •      All accesses occur at their programmed size, except that there is no requirement for the memory system
                         beyond the PE to be able to identify the elements accessed by multi-register Load/Store instructions. See
                         Multi-register loads and stores that access Device memory on page B2-124.

                  Gathering between memory accesses separated by a memory barrier that affects those memory accesses is not
                  permitted. This applies if one memory access is in Group A and one memory access is in Group B. That is, gathering
                  is not permitted between a memory access in Group A and a memory access in Group B if the two accesses are
                  separated by a barrier that affects at least one of the accesses.

                  Gathering between two memory accesses generated by a Load-Acquire/Store-Release is not permitted.

                  A read from a memory location with the non-Gathering attribute cannot come from a cache or a buffer, but must
                  come from the endpoint for that address in the memory system. Typically this is a peripheral or physical memory.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                B2-121
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                            Note
                    •     A read from a memory location with the Gathering attribute can come from intermediate buffering of a
                          previous write, provided that:
                          —      The accesses are not separated by a DMB or DSB barrier that affects both of the accesses, for example if
                                 one access is in Group A and the other is in Group B.
                          —      The accesses are not separated by other ordering constructions that require that the accesses are in
                                 order. Such a construction might be a combination of Load-Acquire and Store-Release.
                          —      The accesses are not generated by a Store-Release instruction.

                    •     The ARM architecture only defines programmer visible behavior. Therefore, gathering can be performed if
                          a programmer cannot tell whether gathering has occurred.

                    An implementation is permitted to perform an access with the Gathering attribute in a manner consistent with the
                    requirements specified by the non-Gathering attribute.

                    An implementation is not permitted to perform an access with the non-Gathering attribute in a manner consistent
                    with the relaxations allowed by the Gathering attribute.

                    Reordering
                    In the Device memory attribute:

                    R               Indicates that the location has the Reordering attribute. Accesses to the location can be reordered
                                    within the same rules that apply to accesses to Normal Non-cacheable memory. All memory types
                                    with the Reordering attribute have the same ordering rules as accesses to Normal Non-cacheable
                                    memory, see Ordering relations on page B2-95.

                    nR              Indicates that the location does not have the Reordering attribute, meaning it is non-Reordering.

                                             Note
                                    Some interconnect fabrics, such as PCIe, perform very limited re-ordering, which is not important
                                    for the software usage. It is outside the scope of the ARM architecture to prohibit the use of a
                                    non-Reordering memory type with these interconnects.

                    For all memory types with the non-Reordering attribute, the order of memory accesses arriving at a single peripheral
                    of IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size, as defined by the peripheral, must be the same order that occurs in a simple
                    sequential execution of the program. That is, the accesses appear in program order. This ordering applies to all
                    accesses using any of the memory types with the non-Reordering attribute. As a result, if there is a mixture of
                    Device-nGnRE and Device-nGnRnE accesses to the same peripheral, these occur in program order. If the memory
                    accesses are not to a peripheral, then this attribute imposes no restrictions.

                            Note
                    •     The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size of the single peripheral is the same as applies for the ordering guarantee
                          provided by the DMB instruction.

                    •     The ARM architecture only defines programmer visible behavior. Therefore, reordering can be performed if
                          a programmer cannot tell whether reordering has occurred.

                    An implementation:

                    •     Is permitted to perform an access with the Reordering attribute in a manner consistent with the requirements
                          specified by the non-Reordering attribute.

                    •     Is not permitted to perform an access with the non-Reordering attribute in a manner consistent with the
                          relaxations allowed by the Reordering attribute.

B2-122                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                    B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                  B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  The non-Reordering attribute does not require any additional ordering, other than that which applies to Normal
                  memory, between:

                  •     Accesses with the non-Reordering attribute and accesses with the Reordering attribute.

                  •     Accesses with the non-Reordering attribute and accesses to Normal memory.

                  •     Accesses with the non-Reordering attribute and accesses to different peripherals of IMPLEMENTATION
                        DEFINED size.

                  The non-Reordering attribute has no effect on the ordering of cache maintenance instructions, even if the memory
                  location specified in the instruction has the non-Reordering attribute.

                  Early Write Acknowledgement
                  In the Device memory attribute:
                  E              Indicates that the location has the Early Write Acknowledgement attribute.
                  nE             Indicates that the location has the No Early Write Acknowledgement attribute.

                  For memory system endpoints where the system architecture in which the PE is operating requires that
                  acknowledgement of a write comes from the endpoint, assigning the No Early Write Acknowledgement attribute to
                  a Device memory location guarantees that:
                  •     Only the endpoint of the write access returns a write acknowledgement of the access.
                  •     No earlier point in the memory system returns a write acknowledgement.

                  This means that a DSB barrier instruction, executed by the PE that performed the write to the No Early Write
                  Acknowledgement Location, completes only after the write has reached its endpoint in the memory system.

                  Peripherals are an example of system endpoints that require that the acknowledgement of a write comes from the
                  endpoint.

                          Note
                  •     The Early Write Acknowledgement attribute only affects where the endpoint acknowledgement is returned
                        from, and does not affect the ordering of arrival at the endpoint between accesses, which is determined by
                        either the Device Reordering attribute, or the use of barriers to create order.

                  •     The areas of the physical memory map for which write acknowledgement from the endpoint is required is
                        outside the scope of the ARM Architecture definition and must be defined as part of the system architecture
                        in which the PE is operating. In particular, regions of memory handled as PCIe configuration writes are
                        expected to support write acknowledgement from the endpoint.

                  •      ARM recognizes that not all areas of a physical memory map will be capable of supporting write
                        acknowledgement from the endpoint. In particular, ARM expects that regions of memory handled as posted
                        writes under PCIe will not support write acknowledgement from the endpoint.

                  •     For maximum software compatibility, ARM strongly recommends that all peripherals for which standard
                        software drivers expect that the use of a DSB instruction will determine that a write has reached its endpoint
                        are placed in areas of the physical memory map that support write acknowledgement from the endpoint.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          B2-123
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.7 Memory types and attributes

                    Multi-register loads and stores that access Device memory
                    For all instructions that load or store more than one general-purpose register from an Exception level there is no
                    requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the elements accessed by these
                    load or store instructions.

                    For all instructions that load or store more than one general-purpose register from an Exception level the order in
                    which the registers are accessed is not defined by the architecture. This applies even to accesses to any type of
                    Device memory.

                    For all instructions that load or store one or more floating-point and SIMD registers from an Exception level, there
                    is no requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the element accessed by
                    these load or store instructions, even for access to any type of Device memory.

B2.7.3        Memory access restrictions
                    The following restrictions apply to memory accesses:

                    •     For accesses to any two bytes, p and q, that are generated by the same instruction:
                          —      The bytes p and q must have the same memory type and shareability attributes, otherwise the results
                                 are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. For example, an LD1, ST1, or an unaligned load or store that spans
                                 the boundary between Normal memory and Device memory is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.
                          —      Except for possible differences in the cache allocation hints, ARM deprecates having different
                                 cacheability attributes for bytes p and q.
                          For the permitted CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior, see Crossing a page boundary with different
                          memory types or Shareability attributes on page K1-6417.

                    •     If the accesses of an instruction that causes multiple accesses to any type of Device memory cross an address
                          boundary that corresponds to the smallest implemented translation granule, then behavior is CONSTRAINED
                          UNPREDICTABLE, and Crossing a peripheral boundary with a Device access on page K1-6417 describes the
                          permitted behaviors. For this reason, it is important that an access to a volatile memory device is not made
                          using a single instruction that crosses an address boundary of the size of the smallest implemented translation
                          granule.

                                   Note
                          —      The boundary referred to is between two Device memory regions that are both of the size of the
                                 smallest implemented translation granule and aligned to the size of the smallest implemented
                                 translation granule.
                          —      This restriction means it is important that an access to a volatile memory device is not made using a
                                 single instruction that crosses an address boundary of the size of the smallest implemented translation
                                 granule.
                          —      ARM expects this restriction to constrain the placing of volatile memory devices in the system
                                 memory map, rather than expecting a compiler to be aware of the alignment of memory accesses.

B2-124                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                 B2.8 Mismatched memory attributes

B2.8       Mismatched memory attributes
                  Memory attributes are controlled by privileged software. For more information, see Chapter D4 The AArch64
                  Virtual Memory System Architecture.

                  Physical memory locations are accessed with mismatched attributes if all accesses to the location do not use a
                  common definition of all of the following attributes of that location:
                  •     Memory type, Device or Normal.
                  •     Shareability.
                  •     Cacheability, for the same level of the inner or outer cache, but excluding any cache allocation hints.

                  Collectively these are referred to as memory attributes.

                            Note
                  In this document, the terms location and memory location refer to any byte within the current coherency granule
                  and are used interchangeably.

                  When a memory Location is accessed with mismatched attributes, the only software visible effects are one or more
                  of the following:

                  •     Uniprocessor semantics for reads and writes to that memory Location might be lost. This means:
                        —      A read of the memory Location by one agent might not return the value most recently written to that
                               memory Location by the same agent.
                        —      Multiple writes to the memory Location by one agent with different memory attributes might not be
                               ordered in program order.

                  •     There might be a loss of coherency when multiple agents attempt to access a memory Location.

                  •     There might be a loss of properties derived from the memory type, as described in later bullets in this section.

                  •     If all Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instructions executed across all threads to access a given memory
                        Location do not use consistent memory attributes, the Exclusives monitor state becomes UNKNOWN.

                  •     Bytes written without the Write-Back cacheable attribute within the same Write-Back granule as bytes
                        written with the Write-Back cacheable attribute might have their values reverted to the old values as a result
                        of cache Write-Back.

                  The loss of properties associated with mismatched memory type attributes refers only to the following properties of
                  Device memory that are additional to the properties of Normal memory:
                  •     Prohibition of Speculative read accesses.
                  •     Prohibition on Gathering.
                  •     Prohibition on Re-ordering.

                  For the following situations, when a physical memory Location is accessed with mismatched attributes, a more
                  restrictive set of behaviors applies. The description of each situation also describes the behaviors that apply:

                  1.    If the only memory type mismatch associated with a memory Location across all users of the memory
                        Location is between different types of Device memory, then all accesses might take the properties of the
                        weakest Device memory type.

                  2.    Any agent that reads that memory Location using the same common definition of the Shareability and
                        Cacheability attributes is guaranteed to access it coherently, to the extent required by that common definition
                        of the memory attributes, only if all the following conditions are met:
                        •      All writes are performed to an alias of the memory Location that uses the same definition of the
                               Shareability and Cacheability attributes.
                        •      Either:
                               —      In the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime, HCR_EL2.MIOCNCE has a value of 0.
                               —      All aliases with write permission have the Inner Cacheability attribute the same as the Outer
                                      Cacheability attribute.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          B2-125
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.8 Mismatched memory attributes

                          •      Either:
                                 —        All writes are performed to an alias of the memory Location that has Inner Cacheability and
                                          Outer Cacheability attributes both as Non-cacheable.
                                 —        All aliases to a memory Location use a definition of the Shareability attributes that encompasses
                                          all the agents with permission to access the Location.

                    3.    The possible software-visible effects caused by mismatched attributes for a memory Location are defined
                          more precisely if all of the mismatched attributes define the memory Location as one of:
                          •     Any Device memory type.
                          •     Normal Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable memory.
                          In these cases, the only permitted software-visible effects of the mismatched attributes are one or more of the
                          following:
                          •      Possible loss of properties derived from the memory type when multiple agents attempt to access the
                                 memory Location.
                          •      Possible reordering of memory transactions to the same memory Location with different memory
                                 attributes, potentially leading to a loss of coherency or uniprocessor semantics. Any possible loss of
                                 coherency or uniprocessor semantics can be avoided by inserting DMB barrier instructions between
                                 accesses to the same memory Location that might use different attributes.

                    Where there is a loss of the uniprocessor semantics, ordering, or coherency, the following approaches can be used:

                    1.    If the mismatched attributes for a memory location all assign the same shareability attribute to a Location that
                          has a cacheable attribute, any loss of uniprocessor semantics, ordering, or coherency within a shareability
                          domain can be avoided by use of software cache management. To do so, software must use the techniques
                          that are required for the software management of the ordering or coherency of cacheable Locations between
                          agents in different shareability domains. This means:
                          •      Before writing to a cacheable Location not using the Write-Back attribute, software must invalidate,
                                 or clean, a Location from the caches if any agent might have written to the Location with the
                                 Write-Back attribute. This avoids the possibility of overwriting the Location with stale data.
                          •      After writing to a cacheable Location with the Write-Back attribute, software must clean the Location
                                 from the caches, to make the write visible to external memory.
                          •      Before reading the Location with a cacheable attribute, software must invalidate, or clean and
                                 invalidate, the Location from the caches, to ensure that any value held in the caches reflects the last
                                 value made visible in external memory.
                          •      Executing a DMB barrier instruction, with scope that applies to the common shareability of the accesses,
                                 between any accesses to the same cacheable Location that use different attributes.
                          In all cases:
                          •      Location refers to any byte within the current coherency granule.
                          •      A clean and invalidate instruction can be used instead of a clean instruction, or instead of an invalidate
                                 instruction.
                          •      In the sequences outlined in this section, all cache maintenance instructions and memory transactions
                                 must be completed, or ordered by the use of barrier operations, if they are not naturally ordered by the
                                 use of a common address, see Ordering and completion of data and instruction cache instructions on
                                 page D3-2069.

                                   Note
                          With software management of coherency, race conditions can cause loss of data. A race condition occurs
                          when different agents write simultaneously to bytes that are in the same Location, and the invalidate, write,
                          clean sequence of one agent overlaps with the equivalent sequence of another agent. A race condition also
                          occurs if the first operation of either sequence is a clean, rather than an invalidate.

B2-126                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                      B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                  B2.8 Mismatched memory attributes

                  2.    If the mismatched attributes for a Location mean that multiple cacheable accesses to the Location might be
                        made with different shareability attributes, then uniprocessor semantics, ordering, and coherency are
                        guaranteed only if:
                        •      Each PE that accesses the Location with a cacheable attribute performs a clean and invalidate of the
                               Location before and after accessing that Location.
                        •      A DMB barrier with scope that covers the full shareability of the accesses is placed between any accesses
                               to the same memory Location that use different attributes.

                                 Note
                        The Note in rule 1 of this list, about possible race conditions, also applies to this rule.

                  In addition, if multiple agents attempt to use Load-Exclusive or Store-Exclusive instructions to access a Location,
                  and the accesses from the different agents have different memory attributes associated with the Location, the
                  Exclusives monitor state becomes UNKNOWN.
                  ARM strongly recommends that software does not use mismatched attributes for aliases of the same Location. An
                  implementation might not optimize the performance of a system that uses mismatched aliases.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           B2-127
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

B2.9         Synchronization and semaphores
                    ARMv8 provides non-blocking synchronization of shared memory, using synchronization primitives. The
                    information in this section about memory accesses by synchronization primitives applies to accesses to both Normal
                    memory and to any type of Device memory.

                                 Note
                    Use of the ARMv8 synchronization primitives scales for multiprocessing system designs.

                    Table B2-3 shows the synchronization primitives and the associated CLREX instruction.

                                     Table B2-3 Synchronization primitives and associated instruction, A64 instruction set

                        Transaction size         Additional semantics                 Load-Exclusive a          Store-Exclusive a          Other a

                        Byte                     -                                    LDXRB                     STXRB                      -

                                                 Load-Acquire/Store-Release           LDAXRB                    STLXRB                     -

                        Halfword                 -                                    LDXRH                     STXRH                      -

                                                 Load-Acquire/Store-Release           LDAXRH                    STLXRH                     -

                        Register b               -                                    LDXR                      STXR                       -

                                                 Load-Acquire/Store-Release           LDAXR                     STLXR                      -

                        Pair b                   -                                    LDXP                      STXP                       -

                                                 Load-Acquire/Store-Release           LDAXP                     STLXP                      -

                        None                     Clear-Exclusive                      -                         -                          CLREX

                           a. Instruction in the A64 instruction set.
                           b. A register instruction operates on a doubleword if accessing an X register, or on a word if accessing a W register
                              A pair instruction operates on two doublewords if access X registers, or on two words if accessing W registers.

                    Except for the row showing the CLREX instruction, the two instructions in a single row are a
                    Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instruction pair. The model for the use of a Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive
                    instruction pair accessing a non-aborting memory address x is:

                    •       The Load-Exclusive instruction reads a value from memory address x.

                    •       The corresponding Store-Exclusive instruction succeeds in writing back to memory address x only if no other
                            observer, process, or thread has performed a more recent store to address x. The Store-Exclusive instruction
                            returns a status bit that indicates whether the memory write succeeded.

                    A Load-Exclusive instruction marks a small block of memory for exclusive access. The size of the marked block is
                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, see Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page B2-134. A
                    Store-Exclusive instruction to any address in the marked block clears the marking.

                                 Note
                    In this section, the term PE includes any observer that can generate a Load-Exclusive or a Store-Exclusive
                    instruction.

                    The following sections give more information:
                    •     Exclusive access instructions and Non-shareable memory locations on page B2-129.
                    •     Exclusive access instructions and Shareable memory locations on page B2-131.
                    •     Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page B2-134.
                    •     Context switch support on page B2-134.

B2-128                            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                       B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                  •     Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instruction usage restrictions on page B2-135.
                  •     Use of WFE and SEV instructions by spin-locks on page B2-138.

B2.9.1      Exclusive access instructions and Non-shareable memory locations
                  For memory locations for which the shareability attribute is Non-shareable, the exclusive access instructions rely
                  on a local Exclusives monitor, or local monitor, that marks any address from which the PE executes a
                  Load-Exclusive instruction. Any non-aborted attempt by the same PE to use a Store-Exclusive instruction to modify
                  any address is guaranteed to clear the marking.

                  A Load-Exclusive instruction performs a load from memory, and:
                  •    The executing PE marks the physical memory address for exclusive access.
                  •    The local monitor of the executing PE transitions to the Exclusive Access state.

                  A Store-Exclusive instruction performs a conditional store to memory that depends on the state of the local monitor:

                  If the local monitor is in the Exclusive Access state
                                  •      If the address of the Store-Exclusive instruction is the same as the address that has been
                                         marked in the monitor by an earlier Load-Exclusive instruction, then the store occurs.
                                         Otherwise, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the store occurs.
                                  •      A status value is returned to a register:
                                         —      If the store took place, the status value is 0.
                                         —      Otherwise, the status value is 1.
                                  •      The local monitor of the executing PE transitions to the Open Access state.
                                  When an Exclusives monitor is in the Exclusive Access state, the monitor is set.

                  If the local monitor is in the Open Access state
                                 •       No store takes place.
                                 •       A status value of 1 is returned to a register.
                                 •       The local monitor remains in the Open Access state.
                                  When an Exclusives monitor is in the Open Access state, the monitor is clear.

                  The Store-Exclusive instruction defines the register to which the status value is returned.

                  When a PE writes using any instruction other than a Store-Exclusive instruction:

                  •     If the write is to a PA that is not marked as Exclusive Access by its local monitor and that local monitor is in
                        the Exclusive Access state, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the write affects the state of the local
                        monitor.

                  •     If the write is to a PA that is marked as Exclusive Access by its local monitor, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                        whether the write affects the state of the local monitor.

                  It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a store to a marked PA causes a mark in the local monitor to be cleared if
                  that store is by an observer other than the one that caused the PA to be marked.

                  Figure B2-4 on page B2-130 shows the state machine for the local monitor and the effect of each of the operations
                  shown in the figure.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           B2-129
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                                                                LoadExcl(x)                                LoadExcl(x)

                                                        Open                                   Exclusive
                                                       Access                                   Access

                                      StoreExcl(x)              Store(Marked_address)*                     Store(Marked_address)*
                                          Store(x)              Store(!Marked_address)*                    Store(!Marked_address)*
                                             CLREX              StoreExcl(Marked_address)
                                                                StoreExcl(!Marked_address)
                                                                CLREX
                                       Operations marked * are possible alternative IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED options.
                                       In the diagram: LoadExcl represents any Load-Exclusive instruction
                                                       StoreExcl represents any Store-Exclusive instruction
                                                       Store represents any other store instruction.
              Any LoadExcl operation updates the marked address to the most significant bits of the address x used for the operation.

                                                                            Figure B2-4 Local monitor state machine diagram

                    For more information about marking, see Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page B2-134.

                             Note
                    For the local monitor state machine, as shown in Figure B2-4:

                    •      The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED options for the local monitor are consistent with the local monitor being
                           constructed so that it does not hold any PA, but instead treats any access as matching the address of the
                           previous Load-Exclusive instruction.

                    •      A local monitor implementation can be unaware of Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions from
                           other PEs.

                    •      The architecture does not require a load instruction by another PE, that is not a Load-Exclusive instruction,
                           to have any effect on the local monitor.

                    •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the transition from Exclusive Access to Open Access state occurs
                           when the Store or StoreExcl is from another observer.

                    Changes to the local monitor state resulting from speculative execution
                    The architecture permits a local monitor to transition to the Open Access state as a result of speculation, or from
                    some other cause. This is in addition to the transitions to Open Access state caused by the architectural execution
                    of an operation shown in Figure B2-4.

                    An implementation must ensure that:

                    •      The local monitor cannot be seen to transition to the Exclusive Access state except as a result of the
                           architectural execution of one of the operations shown in Figure B2-4.

                    •      Any transition of the local monitor to the Open Access state not caused by the architectural execution of an
                           operation shown in Figure B2-4 must not indefinitely delay forward progress of execution.

B2-130                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                      B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                               B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

B2.9.2      Exclusive access instructions and Shareable memory locations
                  In the context of this section, a shareable memory location is a memory location that has, or is treated as if it has, a
                  Shareability attribute of Inner Shareable or Outer Shareable.

                  For shareable memory locations, exclusive access instructions rely on:

                  •      A local monitor for each PE in the system, that marks any address from which the PE executes a
                         Load-Exclusive. The local monitor operates as described in Exclusive access instructions and Non-shareable
                         memory locations on page B2-129, except that for shareable memory any Store-Exclusive is then subject to
                         checking by the global monitor if it is described in that section as doing at least one of the following:
                         —     Updating memory.
                         —     Returning a status value of 0.
                         The local monitor can ignore accesses from other PEs in the system.

                  •      A global monitor that marks a PA as exclusive access for a particular PE. This marking is used later to
                         determine whether a Store-Exclusive to that address that has not been failed by the local monitor can occur.
                         Any successful write to the marked block by any other observer in the shareability domain of the memory
                         location is guaranteed to clear the marking. For each PE in the system, the global monitor:
                         —      Can hold at least one marked block.
                         —      Maintains a state machine for each marked block it can hold.

                                  Note
                         For each PE, the architecture only requires global monitor support for a single marked address. Any situation
                         that might benefit from the use of multiple marked addresses on a single PE is UNPREDICTABLE or
                         CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, see Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instruction usage restrictions on
                         page B2-135.

                           Note
                  The global monitor can either reside within the PE, or exist as a secondary monitor at the memory interfaces. The
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED aspects of the monitors mean that the global monitor and local monitor can be combined
                  into a single unit, provided that the unit performs the global monitor and local monitor functions defined in this
                  manual.

                  For shareable memory locations, in some implementations and for some memory types, the properties of the global
                  monitor require functionality outside the PE. Some system implementations might not implement this functionality
                  for all locations of memory. In particular, this can apply to:
                  •       Any type of memory in the system implementation that does not support hardware cache coherency.
                  •       Non-cacheable memory, or memory treated as Non-cacheable, in an implementation that does support
                          hardware cache coherency.

                  In such a system, it is defined by the system:
                  •      Whether the global monitor is implemented.
                  •      If the global monitor is implemented, which address ranges or memory types it monitors.

                           Note
                  To support the use of the Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive mechanism when address translation is disabled, a system
                  might define at least one location of memory, of at least the size of the translation granule, in the system memory
                  map to support the global monitor for all ARM PEs within a common Inner Shareable domain. However, this is not
                  an architectural requirement. Therefore, architecturally-compliant software that requires mutual exclusion must not
                  rely on using the Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive mechanism, and must instead use a software algorithm such as
                  Lamport’s Bakery algorithm to achieve mutual exclusion.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             B2-131
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                    Because implementations can choose which memory types are treated as Non-cacheable, the only memory types for
                    which it is architecturally guaranteed that a global Exclusives monitor is implemented are:

                    •     Inner Shareable, Inner Write-Back, Outer Write-Back Normal memory with Read allocation hints and Write
                          allocation hints and not transient.

                    •     Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Back, Outer Write-Back Normal memory with Read allocation hints and Write
                          allocation hints and not transient.

                    If the global monitor is not implemented for an address range or memory type, then performing a Load-Exclusive
                    or a Store-Exclusive instruction to such a location has one or more of the following effects:

                    •     The instruction generates an External abort.

                    •     The instruction generates an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED MMU fault. This is reported using the Data Abort
                          Fault status code of ESR_ELx.DFSC = 110101.
                          If the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED MMU fault is generated for the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime then:
                          —      If the fault is generated because of the memory type defined in the first stage of translation, or if the
                                 second stage of translation is disabled, then this is a first stage fault and the exception is taken to EL1.
                          —      Otherwise, the fault is a second stage fault and the exception is taken to EL2.
                          The priority of this fault is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                    •     The Load-Exclusive instruction is treated as if it were accessing a Non-shareable location, but the state of the
                          local monitor becomes UNKNOWN.

                    •     The Store-Exclusive instruction is treated as if it were accessing a Non-shareable location, but the state of the
                          local monitor becomes UNKNOWN. In this case, if the store exclusive instruction is a store exclusive pair of
                          64-bit quantities, then the two quantities being stored might not be stored atomically.

                    •     The value held in the result register of the Store-Exclusive instruction becomes UNKNOWN.

                    In addition, for write transactions generated by non-PE observers that do not implement exclusive accesses or other
                    atomic access mechanisms, the effect that writes have on the global and local monitors used by ARM PEs is
                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. The writes might not clear the global monitors of other PEs for:
                    •      Some address ranges.
                    •      Some memory types.

                    Operation of the global Exclusives monitor
                    A Load-Exclusive instruction from shareable memory performs a load from memory, and causes the PA of the
                    access to be marked as exclusive access for the requesting PE. This access can also cause the exclusive access mark
                    to be removed from any other PA that has been marked by the requesting PE.

                            Note
                    The global monitor only supports a single outstanding exclusive access to shareable memory per PE.

                    A Load-Exclusive instruction by one PE has no effect on the global monitor state for any other PE.

                    A Store-Exclusive instruction performs a conditional store to memory:

                    •     The store is guaranteed to succeed only if the PA accessed is marked as exclusive access for the requesting
                          PE and both the local monitor and the global monitor state machines for the requesting PE are in the
                          Exclusive Access state. In this case:
                          —      A status value of 0 is returned to a register to acknowledge the successful store.
                          —      The final state of the global monitor state machine for the requesting PE is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                          —      If the address accessed is marked for exclusive access in the global monitor state machine for any other
                                 PE, then that state machine transitions to Open Access state.

B2-132                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                       B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                   •      If no address is marked as exclusive access for the requesting PE, the store does not succeed:
                          —      A status value of 1 is returned to a register to indicate that the store failed.
                          —      The global monitor is not affected and remains in Open Access state for the requesting PE.

                   •      If a different PA is marked as exclusive access for the requesting PE, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                          the store succeeds or not:
                          —     If the store succeeds a status value of 0 is returned to a register, otherwise a value of 1 is returned.
                          —     If the global monitor state machine for the PE was in the Exclusive Access state before the
                                Store-Exclusive instruction it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether that state machine transitions to
                                the Open Access state.

                   The Store-Exclusive instruction defines the register to which the status value is returned.

                   In a shared memory system, the global monitor implements a separate state machine for each PE in the system. The
                   state machine for accesses to shareable memory by PE(n) can respond to all the shareable memory accesses visible
                   to it. This means that it responds to:
                   •       Accesses generated by PE(n).
                   •       Accesses generated by the other observers in the shareability domain of the memory location. These accesses
                           are identified as (!n).

                   In a shared memory system, the global monitor implements a separate state machine for each observer that can
                   generate a Load-Exclusive or a Store-Exclusive instruction in the system.

                   A global monitor:
                   •     In the Exclusive Access state is set.
                   •     In the Open Access state is clear.

                   Clear global monitor event

                   Whenever the global monitor state for a PE changes from Exclusive access to Open access, an event is generated
                   and held in the Event register for that PE. This register is used by the Wait for Event mechanism, see Mechanisms
                   for entering a low-power state on page D1-1954.

                   Figure B2-5 shows the state machine for PE(n) in a global monitor.

                                        LoadExcl(x,n)                                           LoadExcl(x,n)

                                Open                                                  Exclusive
                               Access                                                  Access

                  CLREX(n)              StoreExcl(Marked_address,!n)‡                           StoreExcl(Marked_address,!n)‡
                 CLREX(!n)              Store(Marked_address,!n)                                Store(!Marked_address,n)
            LoadExcl(x,!n)              StoreExcl(Marked_address,n)*                            StoreExcl(Marked_address,n)*
            StoreExcl(x,n)              StoreExcl(!Marked_address,n)*                           StoreExcl(!Marked_address,n)*
           StoreExcl(x,!n)              Store(Marked_address,n)*                                Store(Marked_address,n)*
                Store(x,n)              CLREX(n)*                                               CLREX(n)*
               Store(x,!n)                                                                      StoreExcl(!Marked_address,!n)
                                                                                                Store(!Marked_address,!n)
                                                                                                CLREX(!n)
                    ‡StoreExcl(Marked_address,!n) clears the monitor only if the StoreExcl updates memory
                     Operations marked * are possible alternative IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED options.
                     In the diagram: LoadExcl represents any Load-Exclusive instruction
                                     StoreExcl represents any Store-Exclusive instruction
                                     Store represents any other store instruction.

          Any LoadExcl operation updates the marked address to the most significant bits of the address x used for the operation.

                              Figure B2-5 Global monitor state machine diagram for PE(n) in a multiprocessor system

                   For more information about marking, see Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page B2-134.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            B2-133
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                            Note
                    For the global monitor state machine, as shown in Figure B2-5 on page B2-133:

                    •     The architecture does not require a load instruction by another PE, that is not a Load-Exclusive instruction,
                          to have any effect on the global monitor.

                    •     Whether a Store-Exclusive instruction successfully updates memory or not depends on whether the address
                          accessed matches the marked shareable memory address for the PE issuing the Store-Exclusive instruction,
                          and whether the local and global monitors are in the exclusive state. For this reason, Figure B2-5 on
                          page B2-133 only shows how the operations by (!n) cause state transitions of the state machine for PE(n).

                    •     A Load-Exclusive instruction can only update the marked shareable memory address for the PE issuing the
                          Load-Exclusive instruction.

                    •     When the global monitor is in the Exclusive Access state, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a CLREX
                          instruction causes the global monitor to transition from Exclusive Access to Open Access state.

                    •     It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED:
                          —      Whether a modification to a Non-shareable memory location can cause a global monitor to transition
                                 from Exclusive Access to Open Access state.
                          —      Whether a Load-Exclusive instruction to a Non-shareable memory location can cause a global monitor
                                 to transition from Open Access to Exclusive Access state.

B2.9.3        Marking and the size of the marked memory block
                    When a Load-Exclusive instruction is executed, the resulting marked block ignores the least significant bits of the
                    64-bit memory address.

                    When a Load-Exclusive instruction is executed, a marked block of size 2a bytes is created by ignoring the least
                    significant bits of the memory address. A marked address is any address within this marked block. The size of the
                    marked memory block is called the Exclusives reservation granule. The Exclusives reservation granule is
                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED in the range 4-512 words.

                            Note
                    This definition means that the Exclusives reservation granule is:
                    •     4 words in an implementation where a is 4.
                    •     512 words in an implementation where a is 11.

                    For example, in an implementation where a is 4, a successful LDXRB of address 0x341B4 defines a marked block using
                    bits[47:4] of the address. This means that the four words of memory from 0x341B0 to 0x341BF are marked for
                    exclusive access.

                    In some implementations the CTR identifies the Exclusives reservation granule, see CTR_EL0. Otherwise, software
                    must assume that the maximum Exclusives reservation granule, 512 words, is implemented.

B2.9.4        Context switch support
                    An exception return clears the local monitor. As a result, performing a CLREX instruction as part of a context switch
                    is not required in most situations.

                            Note
                    Context switching is not an application level operation. However, this information is included here to complete the
                    description of the exclusive operations.

B2-134                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                      B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                               B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

B2.9.5      Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instruction usage restrictions
                  The Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions are intended to work together as a pair, for example a
                  LDXP/STXP pair or a LDXR/STXR pair. To support different implementations of these functions, software must follow the
                  notes and restrictions given here.

                  The following notes describe the use of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl instruction pair, to indicate the use of any of the
                  Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instruction pairs shown in Table B2-3 on page B2-128. In this context, a
                  LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair comprises two instructions in the same thread of execution:

                  •     The exclusives support a single outstanding exclusive access for each PE thread that is executed. The
                        architecture makes use of this by not requiring an address or size check as part of the IsExclusiveLocal()
                        function. If the target VA of a StoreExcl is different from the VA of the preceding LoadExcl instruction in the
                        same thread of execution, behavior can be CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE with the following behavior:
                        —      The StoreExcl either passes or fails, the status value returned by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN, and the
                               states of the local and global monitors for that PE are UNKNOWN.
                                        Note
                               This means the StoreExcl might pass for some instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched
                               addresses, and fail for other instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched addresses.

                        —      The data at the address accessed by the LoadExcl, and at the address accessed by the StoreExcl, is
                               UNKNOWN.

                        This means software can rely on a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair to eventually succeed only if the LoadExcl and the
                        StoreExcl are executed with the same VA.

                  •     An implementation of the Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions can require that, in any thread of
                        execution, the transaction size of a StoreExcl instruction is the same as the transaction size of the preceding
                        LoadExcl instruction executed in that thread. If the transaction size of a StoreExcl instruction is different from
                        the preceding LoadExcl instruction in the same thread of execution, behavior can be CONSTRAINED
                        UNPREDICTABLE with the following behavior:

                        —      The StoreExcl either passes or fails, and the status value returned by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN.
                                        Note
                               This means the StoreExcl might pass for some instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched
                               transaction sizes, and fail for other instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched transaction
                               sizes.

                        —      The block of data of the size of the larger of the transaction sizes used by the LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair
                               at the address accessed by the LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair, is UNKNOWN.
                        This means software can rely on a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair to eventually succeed only if the LoadExcl and the
                        StoreExcl have the same transaction size.

                  •     An implementation of the LoadExcl and StoreExcl instructions can require that, in any thread of execution,
                        the StoreExcl instruction accesses the same number of registers as the preceding LoadExcl instruction
                        executed in that thread. If the StoreExcl instruction accesses a different number of registers than the preceding
                        LoadExcl instruction in the same thread of execution, behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. As a result,
                        software can rely on an LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair to eventually succeed only if they access the same number
                        of registers. For more information, see CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior when
                        Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive access a different number of registers on page B2-137.

                  •     LoadExcl/StoreExcl loops are guaranteed to make forward progress only if, for any LoadExcl/StoreExcl loop
                        within a single thread of execution, the software meets all of the following conditions:
                        1            Between the Load-Exclusive and the Store-Exclusive, there are no explicit memory accesses,
                                     preloads, direct or indirect System register writes, address translation instructions, cache or TLB
                                     maintenance instructions, exception generating instructions, exception returns, or indirect
                                     branches.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            B2-135
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                          2           Between the Store-Exclusive returning a failing result and the retry of the corresponding
                                      Load-Exclusive:
                                      •      There are no stores or PRFM instructions to any address within the Exclusives reservation
                                             granule accessed by the Store-Exclusive.
                                      •      There are no loads or preloads to any address within the Exclusives reservation granule
                                             accessed by the Store-Exclusive that use a different VA alias to that address.
                                      •      There are no direct or indirect System register writes, address translation instructions,
                                             cache or TLB maintenance instructions, exception generating instructions, exception
                                             returns, or indirect branches.
                                      •      All loads and stores are to a block of contiguous virtual memory of not more than 512
                                             bytes in size.
                          The Exclusives monitor can be cleared at any time without an application-related cause, provided that such
                          clearing is not systematically repeated so as to prevent the forward progress in finite time of at least one of
                          the threads that is accessing the Exclusives monitor. However, it is permissible for the LoadExcl/StoreExcl
                          loop not to make forward progress if a different thread is repeatedly doing any of the following in a tight loop:
                          —      Performing stores to a PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.
                          —      Prefetching with intent to write to a PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.
                          —      Executing data cache clean, data cache invalidate, or data cache clean and invalidate instructions to a
                                 PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.
                          —      Executing instruction cache invalidate all instructions.
                          —      Executing instruction cache invalidate by VA instructions to a PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.

                    •     Implementations can benefit from keeping the LoadExcl and StoreExcl operations close together in a single
                          thread of execution. This minimizes the likelihood of the Exclusives monitor state being cleared between the
                          LoadExcl instruction and the StoreExcl instruction. Therefore, for best performance, ARM strongly
                          recommends a limit of 128 bytes between LoadExcl and StoreExcl instructions in a single thread of execution.

                    •     The architecture sets an upper limit of 2048 bytes on the Exclusives reservation granule that can be marked
                          as exclusive. For performance reasons, ARM recommends that objects that are accessed by exclusive
                          accesses are separated by the size of the Exclusives reservation granule. This is a performance guideline
                          rather than a functional requirement.

                    •     After taking a Data Abort exception, the state of the Exclusives monitors is UNKNOWN.

                    •     For the memory location accessed by a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair, if the memory attributes for a StoreExcl
                          instruction are different from the memory attributes for the preceding LoadExcl instruction in the same thread
                          of execution, behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. Where this occurs because the translation of the
                          accessed address changes between the LoadExcl instruction and the StoreExcl instruction, the CONSTRAINED
                          UNPREDICTABLE behavior is as follows:

                          —      The StoreExcl either passes or fails, and the status value returned by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN.
                                          Note
                                 This means the StoreExcl might pass for some instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with changed
                                 memory attributes, and fail for other instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with changed memory
                                 attributes.

                          —      The data at the address accessed by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN.

                                   Note
                          Another bullet point in this list covers the case where the memory attributes of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair
                          differ as a result of using different VAs with different attributes that point to the same PA.

B2-136                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                     B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                              B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                  •     The effect of a data or unified cache invalidate, clean, or clean and invalidate instruction on a local or global
                        Exclusives monitor that is in the Exclusive Access state is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and the instruction
                        might clear the monitor, or it might leave it in the Exclusive Access state. For address-based maintenance
                        instructions, this also applies to the monitors of other PEs in the same shareability domain as the PE executing
                        the cache maintenance instruction, as determined by the shareability domain of the address being maintained.

                                 Note
                        ARM strongly recommends that implementations ensure that the use of such maintenance instructions by a
                        PE in the Non-secure state cannot cause a denial of service on a PE in the Secure state.

                  •     If the mapping of the VA to PA is changed between the LoadExcl instruction and the STREX instruction, and
                        the change is performed using a break-before-make sequence as described in Using break-before-make when
                        updating translation table entries on page D4-2208, if the StoreExcl is performed after another write to the
                        same PA as the StoreExcl, and that other write was performed after the old translation was properly
                        invalidated and that invalidation was properly synchronized, then the StoreExcl will not pass its monitor
                        check.

                                 Note
                        ARM expects that, in many implementations, either:
                        —   The TLB invalidation will clear either the local or global monitor.
                        —   The PA will be checked between the LoadExcl and StoreExcl.

                  •     The Exclusive Access state for an address accessed by a PE can be lost as a result of a PFRM PST* instruction
                        to the same PA executed by another PE. This means that a very high rate of repeated PFRM PST* accesses to a
                        memory location might impede the forward progress of another PE.

                          Note
                  In the event of repeatedly-contending LoadExcl/StoreExcl instruction sequences from multiple PEs, an
                  implementation must ensure that forward progress is made by at least one PE.

                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior when Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive
                  access a different number of registers
                  As stated in this section, an implementation can require that the instructions of a Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive
                  pair access the same number of registers. In such an implementation, this means behavior is CONSTRAINED
                  UNPREDICTABLE if, in a single thread of execution, either:

                  •     An LDXP instruction of two 32-bit quantities is followed by an STXR instruction of one 64-bit quantity at the
                        same address.

                  •     An LDXR instruction of one 64-bit quantity is followed by an STXP instruction of two 32-bit quantities at the
                        same address.

                  In these cases, the CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior must be one of:

                  •     The STXP or STXR instruction generates an external Data Abort.

                  •     The STXP or STXR instruction generates an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED MMU fault reported using the Data
                        Abort Fault status code of ESR_ELx.DFSC = 0b110101.

                  •     The STXP or STXR instruction always fails, returning a status of 1.

                  •     The STXP or STXR instruction always passes, returning a status of 0.

                  •     This STXP or STXR instruction has the same pass or fail behavior that it would have had if the instruction had
                        used the same size and number of registers as the preceding LDXR or LDXP instruction.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            B2-137
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
B2 The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model
B2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

B2.9.6        Use of WFE and SEV instructions by spin-locks
                    ARMv8 provides Wait For Event, Send Event, and Send Event Local instructions, WFE, SEV, and SEVL, that can assist
                    with reducing power consumption and bus contention caused by PEs repeatedly attempting to obtain a spin-lock.
                    These instructions can be used at the application level, but a complete understanding of what they do depends on a
                    system level understanding of exceptions. They are described in Wait for Event mechanism and Send event on
                    page D1-1954. However, in ARMv8, when the global monitor for a PE changes from Exclusive Access state to
                    Open Access state, an event is generated.

                            Note
                    This is equivalent to issuing an SEVL instruction on the PE for which the monitor state has changed. It removes the
                    need for spinlock code to include an SEV instruction after clearing a spinlock.

B2-138                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
