Chapter D3
The AArch64 System Level Memory Model

                  This chapter provides a system level view of the general features of the memory system. It contains the following
                  sections:
                  •      About the memory system architecture on page D3-2048.
                  •      Address space on page D3-2049.
                  •      Mixed-endian support on page D3-2050.
                  •      Cache support on page D3-2051.
                  •      External aborts on page D3-2074.
                  •      Memory barrier instructions on page D3-2076.
                  •      Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions on page D3-2077.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      D3-2047
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.1 About the memory system architecture

D3.1        About the memory system architecture
                    The ARM architecture supports different implementation choices for the memory system microarchitecture and
                    memory hierarchy, depending on the requirements of the system being implemented. In this respect, the memory
                    system architecture describes a design space in which an implementation is made. The architecture does not
                    prescribe a particular form for the memory systems. Key concepts are abstracted in a way that permits
                    implementation choices to be made while enabling the development of common software routines that do not have
                    to be specific to a particular microarchitectural form of the memory system. For more information about the concept
                    of a hierarchical memory system see Memory hierarchy on page B2-105.

D3.1.1        Form of the memory system architecture
                    The ARMv8 A-profile architecture includes a Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA). Chapter D4 The
                    AArch64 Virtual Memory System Architecture describes the AArch64 view of the VMSA.

D3.1.2        Memory attributes
                    Memory types and attributes on page B2-114 describes the memory attributes, including how different memory
                    types have different attributes. Each location in memory has a set of memory attributes, and the translation tables
                    define the virtual memory locations, and the attributes for each location.

                    Table D3-1 shows the memory attributes that are visible at the system level.

                                                                                             Table D3-1 Memory attribute summary

                                       Memory type              Shareability                     Cacheability

                                       Device a                 Outer Shareable                  Non-cacheable.

                                       Normal                   One of:                          One of b:
                                                                •     Non-shareable.             •     Non-cacheable.
                                                                •     Inner Shareable.           •     Write-Through Cacheable.
                                                                •     Outer Shareable.           •     Write-Back Cacheable.
                                          a. Takes additional attributes, see Device memory on page B2-118.
                                          b. See also Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints on page D3-2054.

                    For more information on cacheability and shareability see Shareable Normal memory on page B2-115,
                    Non-shareable Normal memory on page B2-116, and Caches and memory hierarchy on page B2-104.

D3-2048                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                        D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                               D3.2 Address space

D3.2       Address space
                  The ARMv8 architecture is designed to support a wide range of applications with different memory requirements.
                  It supports a range of physical address (PA) sizes, and provides associated control and identification mechanisms.
                  For more information, see Address size configuration on page D4-2097.

D3.2.1      Virtual address space overflow
                  When a PE performs a Simple sequential execution of instructions, it calculates:

                      (address_of_current_instruction) + (size_of_executed_instruction)

                  This calculation is performed after each instruction to determine which instruction to execute next.

                  If the address calculation performed after executing an instruction overflows 0xFFFF FFFF FFFF FFFF, the program
                  counter becomes UNKNOWN.

                          Note
                  Address tags are not propagated to the program counter, so the tag does not affect the address calculation.

                  Where an instruction accesses a sequential set of bytes that crosses the 0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFF boundary when
                  tagged addresses are not used, or the 0xxxFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFF boundary when tagged addresses are used, then the
                  virtual address accessed for the bytes above this boundary is UNKNOWN. When tagged addresses are used, the value
                  of the tag associated with the address also becomes UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D3-2049
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.3 Mixed-endian support

D3.3        Mixed-endian support
                   A control bit, SCTLR_EL1.E0E is provided to allow the endianness of explicit data accesses made while executing
                   at EL0 to be controlled independently of those made while executing at EL1. Table D3-2 shows the endianness of
                   explicit data accesses and translation table walks.

                                                                                                 Table D3-2 Endianness support

 Exception level      Explicit data accesses          Stage 1 translation table walks          Stage 2 translation table walks

 EL0                  SCTLR_EL1.E0E                   SCTLR_EL1.EE                             SCTLR_EL2.EE

 EL1                  SCTLR_EL1.EE                    SCTLR_EL1.EE                             SCTLR_EL2.EE

 EL2                  SCTLR_EL2.EE                    SCTLR_EL2.EE                             N/A

 EL3                  SCTLR_EL3.EE                    SCTLR_EL3.EE                             N/A

                           Note
                   SCTLR_EL1.E0E has no effect on the endianness of the LDTR, LDTRH, LDTRSH, and LDTRSW instructions, or on the
                   endianness of the STTR and STTRH instructions, when these are executed at EL1.

                   AArch64 state provides the following options for endianness support:
                   •    All Exception levels support mixed-endianness:
                        —      SCTLR_ELx.EE is RW and SCTLR_EL1.E0E is RW.
                   •    Only EL0 supports mixed-endianness and EL1, EL2, and EL3 support only little-endianness:
                        —      SCTLR_ELx is RES0 and SCTLR_EL1.E0E is RW.
                   •    Only EL0 supports mixed-endianness and EL1, EL2, and EL3 support only big-endianness:
                        —      SCTLR_ELx is RES1 and SCTLR_EL1.E0E is RW.
                   •    All Exception levels support only little-endianness:
                        —      SCTLR_ELx is RES0 and SCTLR_EL1.E0E is RES0.
                   •    All Exception levels support only big-endianness:
                        —      SCTLR_ELx is RES1 and SCTLR_EL1.E0E is RES1.
                   If mixed endian support is implemented for an Exception level using AArch32, endianness is controlled by
                   PSTATE.E. For exception returns to AArch32 state, PSTATE.E is copied from SPSR_ELx.E. If the target Exception
                   level supports only little-endian accesses, SPSR_ELx.E is RES0. If the target Exception level supports only
                   big-endian accesses, SPSR_ELx.E is RES1. PSTATE.E is ignored in AArch64 state.
                   The BigEndian() function determines whether the current Exception level and Execution state are using big-endian
                   data. This function is defined in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode.

                   For more information about endianness in the ARM architecture see Endian support on page B2-111.

D3-2050                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                     Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                         D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                D3.4 Cache support

D3.4       Cache support
                  This section describes the ARMv8 cache identification and control mechanisms, and the A64 cache maintenance
                  instructions, in the following sections:
                  •      General behavior of the caches.
                  •      Cache identification on page D3-2052.
                  •      Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints on page D3-2054.
                  •      Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses on page D3-2055.
                  •      Behavior of caches at reset on page D3-2057
                  •      Non-cacheable accesses and instruction caches on page D3-2057.
                  •      About cache maintenance in AArch64 state on page D3-2058.
                  •      A64 Cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2062
                  •      Data cache zero instruction on page D3-2071.
                  •      Cache lockdown on page D3-2072.
                  •      System level caches on page D3-2073.
                  •      Branch prediction on page D3-2073.

                  See also Caches in a VMSAv8-64 implementation on page D4-2221.

D3.4.1      General behavior of the caches
                  When a memory location has a Normal Cacheable memory attribute, determining whether a copy of the memory
                  location is held in a cache still depends on many aspects of the implementation. The following non-exhaustive list
                  of factors might be involved:
                  •      The size, line length, and associativity of the cache.
                  •      The cache allocation algorithm.
                  •      Activity by other elements of the system that can access the memory.
                  •      Speculative instruction fetching algorithms.
                  •      Speculative data fetching algorithms.
                  •      Interrupt behaviors.

                  Given this range of factors, and the large variety of cache systems that might be implemented, the architecture
                  cannot guarantee whether:
                  •     A memory location present in the cache remains in the cache.
                  •     A memory location not present in the cache is brought into the cache.

                  Instead, the following principles apply to the behavior of caches:

                  •     The architecture has a concept of an entry locked down in the cache. How lockdown is achieved is
                        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and lockdown might not be supported by:
                        —     A particular implementation.
                        —     Some memory attributes.

                  •     An unlocked entry in a cache might not remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that an
                        unlocked cache entry remains in the cache or remains incoherent with the rest of memory. Software must not
                        assume that an unlocked item that remains in the cache remains dirty.

                  •     A locked entry in a cache is guaranteed to remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that a
                        locked cache entry remains incoherent with the rest of memory, that is, it might not remain dirty.

                                 Note
                        For more information, see The interaction of cache lockdown with cache maintenance instructions on
                        page D3-2072.

                  •     Any memory location that has a Normal Cacheable attribute at either the current Exception level or at a
                        higher Exception level can be allocated to a cache at any time.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      D3-2051
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                   •     It is guaranteed that no memory location that does not have a Normal Cacheable attribute is allocated into the
                         cache.

                   •     It is guaranteed that no memory location is allocated to the cache if it has a Normal Non-cacheable attribute
                         or any type of Device memory attribute in both:
                         —       The translation regime at the current Exception level.
                         —       The translation regime at any higher Exception level.

                   •     For data accesses, any memory location with a Normal Inner Shareable or Normal Outer Shareable attribute
                         is guaranteed to be coherent with all masters in its shareability domain.

                   •     Any memory location is not guaranteed to remain incoherent with the rest of memory.

                   •     The eviction of a cache entry from a cache level can overwrite memory that has been written by another
                         observer only if the entry contains a memory location that has been written to by an observer in the
                         shareability domain of that memory location. The maximum size of the memory that can be overwritten is
                         called the Cache Write-back Granule. In some implementations the CTR_EL0 identifies the Cache
                         Write-back Granule.

                   •     The allocation of a memory location into a cache cannot cause the most recent value of that memory location
                         to become invisible to an observer if it was previously visible to that observer.

                           Note
                   The Cacheability attribute of an address is determined by the applicable translation table entry for that address, as
                   modified by any applicable System register Cacheability controls, such as the SCTLR_EL1.{I, C} controls.

                   For the purpose of these principles, a cache entry covers at least 16 bytes and no more than 2KB of contiguous
                   address space, aligned to the size of the cache entry.

D3.4.2       Cache identification
                   The ARMv8 cache identification registers describe the implemented caches that are affected by cache maintenance
                   instructions executed on the PE. This includes the cache maintenance instructions that:
                   •      Affect the entire cache, for example IC IALLU.
                   •      Operate by VA, for example IC IVAU.
                   •      Operate by set/way, for example DC ISW.
                   The cache identification registers are:

                   •     The Cache Type Register, CTR_EL0, that defines:
                         —    The minimum line length of any of the instruction caches affected by the instruction cache
                              maintenance instructions.
                         —    The minimum line length of any of the data or unified caches, affected by the data cache maintenance
                              instruction.
                         —    The cache indexing and tagging policy of the Level 1 instruction cache.

                                  Note
                         It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether caches beyond the PoC will be reported by this mechanism, and
                         because of the possible existence of system caches some caches before the PoC might not be reported. For
                         more information about system caches see System level caches on page D3-2073.

                   •     A single Cache Level ID Register, CLIDR_EL1, that defines:
                         —     The type of cache that is implemented and can be maintained using the architected cache maintenance
                               instructions that operate by set/way or operate on the entire cache at each cache level, up to the
                               maximum of seven levels.
                         —     The Level of Coherence (LoC) for the caches. See Terms used in describing the cache maintenance
                               instructions on page D3-2058 for the definition of LoC.

D3-2052                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                           D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                  D3.4 Cache support

                        —      The Level of Unification Uniprocessor (LoUU) for the caches. See Terms used in describing the cache
                               maintenance instructions on page D3-2058 for the definition of LoUU.
                        —      An optional ICB field to indicate the boundary between the caches use for caching Inner Cacheable
                               memory regions and those used only for caching Outer Cacheable regions.

                  •     A single Cache Size Selection Register, CSSELR_EL1, that selects the cache level and cache type of the
                        current Cache Size Identification Register.

                  •     For each implemented cache that is identifiable by this mechanism, across all the levels of caching, a Cache
                        Size Identification Register, CCSIDR_EL1, that defines:
                        —      Whether the cache supports Write-Through, Write-Back, Read-Allocate and Write-Allocate.
                        —      The number of sets, associativity and line length of the cache. See Terms used in describing the cache
                               maintenance instructions on page D3-2058 for a definition of these terms.

                                 Note
                        From ARMv8.3, multiple formats of the Cache Size Identification Register are supported. For more
                        information, see Possible formats of the Cache Size Identification Register, CCSIDR_EL1.

                  To determine the cache topology associated with a PE:

                  1.    Read the Cache Type Register to find the indexing and tagging policy used for the Level 1 instruction cache.
                        This register also provides the size of the smallest cache lines used for the instruction caches, and for the data
                        and unified caches. These values are used in cache maintenance instructions.

                  2.    Read the Cache Level ID Register to find what caches are implemented. The register includes seven Cache
                        type fields, for cache levels 1 to 7. Scanning these fields, starting from Level 1, identifies the instruction, data
                        or unified caches implemented at each level. This scan ends when it reaches a level at which no caches are
                        defined. The Cache Level ID Register also specifies the Level of Unification (LoU) and the Level of
                        Coherence (LoC) for the cache implementation.

                  3.    For each cache identified at stage 2:
                        •      Write to the Cache Size Selection Register to select the required cache. A cache is identified by its
                               level, and whether it is:
                               —       An instruction cache.
                               —       A data or unified cache.
                        •      Read the Cache Size Identification Register to find details of the cache.

                  Possible formats of the Cache Size Identification Register, CCSIDR_EL1
                  From ARMv8.3, the Cache Size Identification Register, CCSIDR_EL1 has two different formats available for
                  defining the number of sets and associativity of the cache. For a definition of these terms, see Terms used in
                  describing the cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2058.
                  When ARMv8.3-CCIDX is implemented:

                  •     CCSIDR_EL1 is a 64-bit register.

                  •     The length of the CCSIDR_EL1.Assoc field is 21 bits. This limits the associativity of the currently selected
                        cache to 221.

                  •     The length of the CCSIDR_EL1.NumSets field is 24 bits. This limits the number of sets in the currently
                        selected cache to 224.
                  This is the 64-bit format of the Cache Size Identification Register.

                  When ARMv8.3-CCIDX is not implemented:

                  •     CCSIDR_EL1 is a 32-bit register.

                  •     The length of the CCSIDR_EL1.Assoc field is 10 bits. This limits the associativity of the currently selected
                        cache to 210.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             D3-2053
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                   •      The length of the CCSIDR_EL1.NumSets field is 15 bits. This limits the number of sets in the currently
                          selected cache to 215.

                   This is the 32-bit format of the Cache Size Identification Register.

                   When one of these formats is implemented, it is implemented across all the levels of caching.

D3.4.3       Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints
                   Cacheability only applies to Normal memory, and can be defined independently for Inner and Outer cache locations.
                   All types of Device memory are always treated as Non-cacheable.

                   As described in Memory types and attributes on page B2-114, the memory attributes include a cacheability attribute
                   that is one of:
                   •       Non-cacheable.
                   •       Write-Through cacheable.
                   •       Write-Back cacheable.

                   In ARMv8, Cacheability attributes other than Non-cacheable can be complemented by a cache allocation hint. This
                   is an indication to the memory system of whether allocating a value to a cache is likely to improve performance. In
                   addition, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a cache transient hint is supported, see Transient cacheability
                   hint.

                   The cache allocation hints are assigned independently for read and write accesses, and therefore when the Transient
                   hit is supported the following cache allocation hints can be assigned:

                   For read accesses:        Read-Allocate, Transient Read-Allocate, or No Read-Allocate.

                   For write accesses:       Write-Allocate, Transient Write-Allocate, or No Write-Allocate.

                            Note
                   •      A Cacheable location with both No Read-Allocate and No Write-Allocate hints is not the same as a
                          Non-cacheable location. A Non-cacheable location has coherency guarantees for all observers within the
                          system that do not apply for a location that is Cacheable, No Read-Allocate, No Write-Allocate.

                   •      Implementations can use the cache allocation hints to limit cache pollution to a part of a cache, such as to a
                          subset of ways.

                   •      For VMSAv8-64 translation table walks, the TCR_ELx.{IRGNn, ORGNn} fields define the memory
                          attributes of the translation tables, including the cacheability. However, this assignment supports only a
                          subset of the cacheability attributes described in this section.

                   The architecture does not require an implementation to make any use of cache allocation hints. This means an
                   implementation might not make any distinction between memory locations with attributes that differ only in their
                   cache allocation hint.

                   Transient cacheability hint
                   In ARMv8, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a Transient hint is supported. In an implementation that
                   supports the Transient hint, the Transient hint is a qualifier of the cache allocation hints, and indicates that the benefit
                   of caching is for a relatively short period. It indicates that it might be better to restrict allocation of transient entries,
                   to avoid possibly casting-out other, less transient, entries.

                            Note
                   The architecture does not specify what is meant by a relatively short period.

D3-2054                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                         D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                D3.4 Cache support

                  The description of the AArch64 MAIR_EL1, MAIR_EL2, and MAIR_EL3 registers, and the AArch32 MAIR0,
                  MAIR1, HMAIR0, and HMAIR1 registers, includes the assignment of the Transient hint in an implementation that
                  supports this option. In this assignment:
                  •     The Transient hint is defined independently for Inner Cacheable and Outer Cacheable memory regions.
                  •     A single Transient hint applies to both read and write accesses to a memory region.

D3.4.4      Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses
                  In ARMv8, Cacheability control fields can force all memory locations with the Normal memory type to be treated
                  as Non-cacheable, regardless of their assigned Cacheability attribute. Independent controls are provided for each
                  stage of address translation, with separate controls for:
                  •      Data accesses. These controls also apply to accesses to the translation tables.
                  •      Instruction accesses.

                          Note
                  These Cacheability controls replace the cache enable controls provided in previous versions of the ARM
                  architecture.

                  The Cacheability control fields and their effects are as follows:

                  For the EL1&0 translation regime
                                  •      When the value of SCTLR_EL1.C is 0:
                                         —    All stage 1 translations for data accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                         —    All accesses to the EL1&0 stage 1 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                  •      When the value of SCTLR_EL1.I is 0:
                                         —    All stage 1 translations for instruction accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                  •      When the value of HCR_EL2.CD is 1:
                                         —    All stage 2 translations for data accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                         —    All accesses to the EL1&0 stage 2 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                  •      When the value of HCR_EL2.ID is 1:
                                         —    All stage 2 translations for instruction accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                  •      When the value of HCR_EL2.DC is 1, all Non-secure stage 1 translations and all accesses to
                                         the Non-secure EL1&0 stage 1 translation tables, are treated as accesses to Normal
                                         Non-shareable Inner Write-Back Cacheable Read-Allocate Write-Allocate, Outer
                                         Write-Back Cacheable Read-Allocate Write-Allocate memory, regardless of the value of
                                         SCTLR_EL1.{I, C}. This applies to translations for both data and instruction accesses.

                                           Note
                                  •      In Non-secure state, the stage 1 and stage 2 cacheability attributes are combined as described
                                         in Combining the stage 1 and stage 2 cacheability attributes for Normal memory on
                                         page D4-2181.
                                  •      The SCTLR_EL1.{C, I} and HCR_EL2.DC fields have no effect on the EL2, EL2&0, and
                                         EL3 translation regimes.
                                  •      The HCR_EL2.{ID, CD} fields affect only stage 2 of the Non-secure EL1&0 translation
                                         regime.
                                  •      In Non-secure state, when EL2 is using AArch64 and EL1 is using AArch32, the
                                         HCR_EL2.{ID, CD, DC} controls apply as described here, but the EL1 controls are
                                         SCTLR.{C, I}.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        D3-2055
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                   For the EL2 translation regime
                                    •     When the value of SCTLR_EL2.C is 0:
                                          —      All data accesses to Normal memory using the EL2 translation regime are
                                                 Non-cacheable.
                                          —      All accesses to the EL2 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                    •     When the value of SCTLR_EL2.I is 0:
                                          —      All instruction accesses to Normal memory using the EL2 translation regime are
                                                 Non-cacheable.

                                            Note
                                    The SCTLR_EL2.{I, C} fields have no effect on the EL1&0 and EL3 translation regimes.

                   For the EL2&0 translation regime
                                    •     When the value of SCTLR_EL2.C is 0:
                                          —    All stage 1 translations for data accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                          —    All accesses to the EL2&0 stage 1 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                    •     When the value of SCTLR_EL2.I is 0:
                                          —      All stage 1 translations for instruction accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.

                   For the EL3 translation regime
                                    •     When the value of SCTLR_EL3.C is 0:
                                          —      All data accesses to Normal memory using the EL3 translation regime are
                                                 Non-cacheable.
                                          —      All accesses to the EL3 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                    •     When the value of SCTLR_EL3.I is 0:
                                          —      All instruction accesses to Normal memory using the EL3 translation regime are
                                                 Non-cacheable.

                                            Note
                                    The SCTLR_EL3.{I, C} fields have no effect on the EL1&0, EL2, and EL2&0 translation regimes.

                   In addition:

                   •     For translation regimes other than the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime, if the value of SCTLR_ELx.M
                         is 0, indicating that stage 1 translations are disabled for that translation regime, then:
                         —        If the value of SCTLR_ELx.I is 0, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                  translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                         —        If the value of SCTLR_ELx.I is 1, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                  translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Through cacheable, Outer Write-Through
                                  cacheable.

                   •     For the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime, if the value of SCTLR_EL1.M is 0, indicating that stage 1
                         translations are disabled for that translation regime, and the value of HCR_EL2.DC is 0:
                         —        If the value of SCTLR_EL1.I is 0, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                  translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                         —        If the value of SCTLR_EL1.I is 1, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                  translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Through Cacheable, Outer Write-Through
                                  Cacheable.

                   The effect of SCTLR_ELx.C, HCR_EL2.DC and HCR_EL2.CD is reflected in the result of the address translation
                   instructions in the PAR when these bits have an effect on the stages of translation being reported in the PAR.

D3-2056                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                         D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                D3.4 Cache support

                          Note
                  •     In conjunction with the requirements in Non-cacheable accesses and instruction caches, the requirements in
                        this section mean the architecturally required effect of SCTLR_ELx.I is limited to its effect on caching
                        instruction accesses in unified caches.

                  •     This specification can give rise to different cacheability attributes between instruction and data accesses to
                        the same location. Where this occurs, the measures for mismatch memory attributes described in Mismatched
                        memory attributes on page B2-125 must be followed to manage the corresponding loss of coherency.

D3.4.5      Behavior of caches at reset
                  In ARMv8:

                  •     All caches reset to IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED states that might be UNKNOWN.

                  •     The Cacheability control fields described in Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses on
                        page D3-2055 reset to values that force all memory locations to be treated as Non-cacheable.

                                 Note
                        This applies only to the controls that apply to the Translation regime that is used by the Exception level and
                        Security state entered on reset.

                  •     An implementation can require the use of a specific cache initialization routine to invalidate its storage array
                        before caching is enabled. The exact form of any required initialization routine is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED,
                        and the routine must be documented clearly as part of the documentation of the device.

                  •     If an implementation permits cache hits when the Cacheability control fields force all memory locations to
                        be treated as Non-cacheable then the cache initialization routine must:
                        —      Provide a mechanism to ensure the correct initialization of the caches.
                        —      Be documented clearly as part of the documentation of the device.
                        In particular, if an implementation permits cache hits when the Cacheability controls force all memory
                        locations to be treated as Non-cacheable, and the cache contents are not invalidated at reset, the initialization
                        routine must avoid any possibility of running from an uninitialized cache. It is acceptable for an initialization
                        routine to require a fixed instruction sequence to be placed in a restricted range of memory.

                  •     ARM recommends that whenever an invalidation routine is required, it is based on the ARMv8 cache
                        maintenance instructions.

                  See also TLB behavior at reset on page D4-2205.

D3.4.6      Non-cacheable accesses and instruction caches
                  In AArch64 state, instruction accesses to Non-cacheable Normal memory can be held in instruction caches.

                  Correspondingly, the sequence for ensuring that modifications to instructions are available for execution must
                  include invalidation of the modified locations from the instruction cache, even if the instructions are held in Normal
                  Non-cacheable memory. This includes cases where System register Cacheability control fields force instruction
                  accesses to memory to be Non-cacheable.

                  Therefore when using self-modified code in Non-cacheable space in a uniprocessor system, the following sequence
                  is required:

                  ; Enter this code with <Wt> containing the new 32-bit instruction
                  ; to be held at a location pointed to by <Xn> in Normal Non-cacheable memory.
                  STR <Wt>, [Xn]
                  DSB ISH; Ensure visibility of the data stored
                  IC IVAU, [Xn] ; Invalidate instruction cache by VA to PoU
                  DSB ISH; Ensure completion of the invalidations
                  ISB ;

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D3-2057
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                   In a multiprocessor system, the IC IVAU is broadcast to all PEs within the Inner Shareable domain of the PE running
                   this sequence, but additional software steps might be required to synchronize the threads with other PEs. This might
                   be necessary so that the PEs executing the modified instructions can execute an ISB after completing the
                   invalidation, and to avoid issues associated with concurrent modification and execution of instruction sequences.

                   Larger blocks of instructions can be modified using the IC IALLU instruction for a uniprocessor system, or a IC
                   IALLUIS for a multiprocessor system.

                            Note
                   This section applies even when the Cacheability control fields force instruction accesses to memory in AArch64
                   state to be Non-cacheable, as described in Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses on
                   page D3-2055.

D3.4.7       About cache maintenance in AArch64 state
                   The following sections give general information about cache maintenance:
                   •     Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions.
                   •     The ARMv8 abstraction of the cache hierarchy on page D3-2061.

                   The following sections describe the A64 cache maintenance instructions:
                   •     The instruction cache maintenance instruction (IC) on page D3-2063.
                   •     The data cache maintenance instruction (DC) on page D3-2063.

                            Note
                   Some descriptions of the cache maintenance instructions refer to the cacheability of the address on which the
                   instruction operates. The Cacheability of an address is determined by the applicable translation table entry for that
                   address, as modified by any applicable System register Cacheability controls, such as the SCTLR_EL1.{I, C}
                   controls.

                   Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions
                   Cache maintenance instructions are defined to act on particular memory locations. Instruction scope can be defined:
                   •     By the virtual address of the memory location to be maintained, referred to as operating by VA.
                   •     By a mechanism that describes the location in the hardware of the cache, referred to as operating by set/way.

                   In addition, for instruction caches, there are instructions that invalidate all entries.

                   The following subsections define the terms used in the descriptions of the cache maintenance instructions:
                   •     Terminology for cache maintenance instructions operating by set/way.
                   •     Terminology for Clean, Invalidate, and Clean and Invalidate instructions on page D3-2059.

                            Note
                   There is no terminology specific to cache maintenance instructions that operate by VA. When all applicable stages
                   of translation are disabled, the VA used is identical to the PA. For more information about memory system behavior
                   when address translation is disabled, see The effects of disabling a stage of address translation on page D4-2136.

                   Terminology for cache maintenance instructions operating by set/way

                   Cache maintenance instruction that operate by set/way refer to the particular structures in a cache. Three parameters
                   describe the location in a cache hierarchy that an instruction works on. These parameters are:

                   Level           The cache level of the hierarchy. The number of levels of cache is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. The
                                   cache levels that can be managed using the architected cache maintenance instructions that operate
                                   by set/way can be determined from the CLIDR_EL1.
                                   In the ARM architecture, the lower numbered cache levels are those closest to the PE. See Memory
                                   hierarchy on page B2-105.

D3-2058                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                           D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                  D3.4 Cache support

                  Set              Each level of a cache is split up into a number of sets. Each set is a set of locations in a cache level
                                   to which an address can be assigned. Usually, the set number is an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                   function of an address.
                                   In the ARM architecture, sets are numbered from 0.

                  Way              The associativity of a cache is the number of locations in a set to which a specific address can be
                                   assigned. The way number specifies one of these locations.
                                   In the ARM architecture, ways are numbered from 0.

                            Note
                  Because the allocation of a memory address to a cache location is entirely IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, ARM expects
                  that most portable software will use only the cache maintenance instructions by set/way as single steps in a routine
                  to perform maintenance on the entire cache.

                  Terminology for Clean, Invalidate, and Clean and Invalidate instructions

                  Caches introduce coherency problems in two possible directions:

                  1.      An update to a memory location by a PE that accesses a cache might not be visible to other observers that
                          can access memory. This can occur because new updates are still in the cache and are not visible yet to the
                          other observers that do not access that cache.

                  2.      Updates to memory locations by other observers that can access memory might not be visible to a PE that
                          accesses a cache. This can occur when the cache contains an old, or stale, copy of the memory location that
                          has been updated.

                  The Clean and Invalidate instructions address these two issues. The definitions of these instructions are:

                  Clean            A cache clean instruction ensures that updates made by an observer that controls the cache are made
                                   visible to other observers that can access memory at the point to which the instruction is performed.
                                   Once the Clean has completed, the new memory values are guaranteed to be visible to the point to
                                   which the instruction is performed, for example to the Point of Unification.
                                   The cleaning of a cache entry from a cache can overwrite memory that has been written by another
                                   observer only if the entry contains a location that has been written to by an observer in the
                                   shareability domain of that memory location.

                  Invalidate       A cache invalidate instruction ensures that updates made visible by observers that access memory
                                   at the point to which the invalidate is defined, are made visible to an observer that controls the cache.
                                   This might result in the loss of updates to the locations affected by the invalidate instruction that
                                   have been written by observers that access the cache, if those updates have not been cleaned from
                                   the cache since they were made.
                                   If the address of an entry on which the invalidate instruction operates is Normal, Non-cacheable or
                                   any type of Device memory then an invalidate instruction also ensures that this address is not
                                   present in the cache.

                                            Note
                                   Entries for addresses that are Normal Cacheable can be allocated to the cache at any time, and so
                                   the cache invalidate instruction cannot ensure that the address is not present in a cache.

                  Clean and Invalidate
                                   A cache clean and invalidate instruction behaves as the execution of a clean instruction followed
                                   immediately by an invalidate instruction. Both instructions are performed to the same location.

                  The points to which a cache maintenance instruction can be defined differ depending on whether the instruction
                  operates by VA or by set/way:

                  •       For instructions operating by set/way, the point is defined to be to the next level of caching. For the All
                          operations, the point is defined as the Point of Unification for each location held in the cache.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            D3-2059
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                   •     For instructions operating by VA, the following conceptual points are defined:
                         Point of Coherency (PoC)
                                    The point at which all agents that can access memory are guaranteed to see the same copy of a
                                    memory location for accesses of any memory type or cacheability attribute. In many cases this is
                                    effectively the main system memory, although the architecture does not prohibit the
                                    implementation of caches beyond the PoC that have no effect on the coherency between memory
                                    system agents.
                                             Note
                                    The presence of system caches can affect the determination of the point of coherency as described
                                    in System level caches on page D3-2073.

                         Point of Unification (PoU)
                                    The PoU for a PE is the point by which the instruction and data caches and the translation table
                                    walks of that PE are guaranteed to see the same copy of a memory location. In many cases, the
                                    Point of Unification is the point in a uniprocessor memory system by which the instruction and
                                    data caches and the translation table walks have merged.
                                    The PoU for an Inner Shareable shareability domain is the point by which the instruction and data
                                    caches and the translation table walks of all the PEs in that Inner Shareable shareability domain
                                    are guaranteed to see the same copy of a memory location. Defining this point permits
                                    self-modifying software to ensure future instruction fetches are associated with the modified
                                    version of the software by using the standard correctness policy of:
                                    1.     Clean data cache entry by address.
                                    2.     Invalidate instruction cache entry by address.
                         Point of Persistence (PoP)
                                    The point in a memory system, if it exists, at or beyond the Point of Coherency, where a write to
                                    memory is maintained when system power is removed, and reliably recovered when power is
                                    restored to the affected locations in memory.
                                             Note
                                    •      Such memory is sometimes called non-volatile memory. For example, the Storage-class
                                           memory shown in Figure B2-1 on page B2-105 could be used as target memory for this
                                           feature.
                                    •      The PoP is relevant to the behavior of a PE only when ARMv8.2-DCPoP is implemented,
                                           see DC CVAP.

                         The following fields in the CLIDR_EL1 relate to the PoC and PoU:
                         LoC, Level of Coherence
                                   This field defines the last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or
                                   invalidating to the Point of Coherency. The LoC value is a cache level, so, for example, if LoC
                                   contains the value 3:
                                    •      A clean to the Point of Coherency operation requires the level 1, level 2 and level 3 caches
                                           to be cleaned.
                                    •       Level 4 cache is the first level that does not have to be maintained.
                                    If the LoC field value is 0x0, this means that no levels of cache need to cleaned or invalidated
                                    when cleaning or invalidating to the Point of Coherency.
                                    If the LoC field value is a nonzero value that corresponds to a level that is not implemented, this
                                    indicates that all implemented caches are before the Point of Coherency.
                         LoUU, Level of Unification, uniprocessor
                                  This field defines the last level of data cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning
                                  or invalidating to the Point of Unification for the PE. As with LoC, the LoUU value is a cache
                                  level.
                                  If the LoUU field value is 0x0, this means that no levels of data cache need to be cleaned or
                                  invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the Point of Unification.

D3-2060                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                     Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                          D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                 D3.4 Cache support

                                     If the LoUU field value is a nonzero value that corresponds to a level that is not implemented,
                                     this indicates that all implemented caches are before the Point of Unification.
                        LoUIS, Level of Unification, Inner Shareable
                                  In any implementation:
                                     •      This field defines the last level of data or unified cache that must be cleaned or invalidated
                                            when cleaning or invalidating to the Point of Unification for the Inner Shareable
                                            shareability domain. As with LoC, the LoUIS value is a cache level.
                                     •      If the LoUIS field value is 0x0, this means that no levels of data or unified cache need to
                                            cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the Point of Unification for the
                                            Inner Shareable shareability domain.
                                     •      If the LoUIS field value is a nonzero value that corresponds to a level that is not
                                            implemented, this indicates that all implemented caches are before the Point of
                                            Unification.

                  The ARMv8 abstraction of the cache hierarchy
                  The following subsections describe the ARMv8 abstraction of the cache hierarchy:
                  •     Cache maintenance instructions that operate by VA.
                  •     Cache maintenance instructions that operate by set/way.

                  Cache maintenance instructions that operate by VA

                  The VA-based cache maintenance instructions are described as operating by VA. Each of these instructions is always
                  qualified as being one of:
                  •      Performed to the Point of Coherency.
                  •      Performed to the Point of Unification.
                  •      When ARMv8.2-DCPoP is implemented, performed to the Point of Persistence.

                  See Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2058 for definitions of these terms,
                  and for more information about possible meanings of VA.

                  A64 Cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2062 lists the VA-based maintenance instructions.

                  The CTR_EL0 holds minimum line length values for:
                  •    The instruction caches.
                  •    The data and unified caches.

                  These values support efficient invalidation of a range of VAs, because this value is the most efficient address stride
                  to use to apply a sequence of VA-based maintenance instructions to a range of VAs.

                  For the Invalidate data or unified cache line by VA instruction, the Cache Write-back Granule field of the CTR_EL0
                  defines the maximum granule that a single invalidate instruction can invalidate. This meaning of the Cache
                  Write-back Granule is in addition to its defining the maximum size that can be written back.

                  Cache maintenance instructions that operate by set/way

                  A64 Cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2062 lists the set/way-based maintenance instructions. Some
                  encodings of these instructions include a required field that specifies the cache level for the instruction:

                  •     A clean instruction cleans from the level of cache specified through to at least the next level of cache, moving
                        further from the PE.

                  •     An invalidate instruction invalidates only at the level specified.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            D3-2061
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

D3.4.8          A64 Cache maintenance instructions
                     The A64 cache maintenance instructions are part of the A64 system instruction class in the register encoding space.
                     For encoding details and other general information on these system instructions, see System instructions on
                     page C3-164, SYS on page C6-979 and Cache maintenance instructions, and data cache zero on page C5-333.

                     Table D3-3 shows the AArch64 system instructions that perform instruction or data cache maintenance. Instructions
                     that take an argument include Xt in the entry in the System instruction column.

                             Note
                     •     In Table D3-3 the Point of Unification is the Point of Unification of the PE executing the cache maintenance
                           instruction.

                     •     In general, the AArch32 instruction and data cache maintenance instructions provide equivalent functionality
                           to the AArch64 cache maintenance instructions, see AArch32 cache and branch predictor maintenance
                           instructions on page G3-4820. However, the data cache clean to the Point of Persistence instruction,
                           implemented when ARMv8.2-DCPoP is implemented, is supported in AArch64 state only.

                                                                       Table D3-3 System instructions for cache maintenance

 System instruction       Instruction                                                     Notes

 Instruction cache maintenance instructions

 IC IALLUIS               Invalidate all to Point of Unification, Inner Shareable         EL1 or higher access.

 IC IALLU                 Invalidate all to Point of Unification                          EL1 or higher access.

 IC IVAU, Xt              Invalidate by virtual address to Point of Unification           When SCTLR_EL1.UCI == 1, EL0 access.
                                                                                          Otherwise, EL1 or higher access.

 Data cache maintenance instructions

 DC IVAC, Xt              Invalidate by virtual address to Point of Coherency             EL1 or higher access.

 DC ISW, Xt               Invalidate by set/way                                           EL1 or higher access.

 DC CVAC, Xt              Clean by virtual address to Point of Coherency                  When SCTLR_EL1.UCI == 1, EL0 access.
                                                                                          Otherwise EL1 or higher access.

 DC CVAP, Xt              Clean by virtual address to Point of Persistence a              When SCTLR_EL1.UCI == 1, EL0 access.
                                                                                          Otherwise EL1 or higher access.

 DC CSW, Xt               Clean by set/way                                                EL1 or higher access.

 DC CVAU, Xt              Clean by virtual address to Point of Unification                When SCTLR_EL1.UCI == 1, EL0 access.
                                                                                          Otherwise EL1 or higher access.

 DC CIVAC, Xt             Clean and invalidate by virtual address to Point of             When SCTLR_EL1.UCI == 1, EL0 access.
                          Coherency                                                       Otherwise EL1 or higher access.

 DC CISW, Xt              Clean and invalidate by set/way                                 EL1 or higher access.

    a. Supported only when ARMv8.2-DCPoP is implemented.

                     A DSB or DMB instruction intended to ensure the completion of cache or branch predictor maintenance instructions
                     must have an access type of both loads and stores.

                     The following subsections give more information about these instructions:
                     •     The instruction cache maintenance instruction (IC) on page D3-2063.
                     •     The data cache maintenance instruction (DC) on page D3-2063.

D3-2062                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                          D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                 D3.4 Cache support

                  •      EL0 accessibility of cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2065.
                  •      General requirements for the scope of maintenance instructions on page D3-2065.
                  •      Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the PoC on page D3-2065.
                  •      Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the PoP on page D3-2066.
                  •      Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the PoU on page D3-2066.
                  •      Effects of All and set/way maintenance instructions on page D3-2067.
                  •      Effects of virtualization and Security state on the cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2067.
                  •      Boundary conditions for cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2068.
                  •      Ordering and completion of data and instruction cache instructions on page D3-2069.
                  •      Performing cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2070.

                  The instruction cache maintenance instruction (IC)
                  System instructions on page C3-164 describes the A64 assembly syntax for this instruction.

                  When an IC instruction requires an address argument this takes the form of a 64-bit register that holds the VA
                  argument. No alignment restrictions apply for this address.

                  Any cache maintenance instruction operating by VA includes as part of any required VA to PA translation:
                  •     For an instruction executed at EL1, or at EL2 when HCR_EL2.E2H==1, the current ASID.
                  •     The current Security state.
                  •     Whether the instruction was executed at EL2, or in Non-secure EL1 state.
                  •     For an instruction executed in Non-secure EL1 state, the current VMID.

                  That VA to PA translation might fault. However, for an instruction cache maintenance instruction that operates by
                  VA:

                  •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the instruction can generate:
                         —       An Access flag fault.
                         —       A Translation fault.

                  •      The instruction cannot generate a Permission fault, except for:
                         —      The possible generation of a Permission fault by the execution of an IC IVAU instruction at EL0 when
                                the specified address does not have read access at EL0, as described in EL0 accessibility of cache
                                maintenance instructions on page D3-2065.
                         —      The possible Permission fault on a Stage 2 fault on a stage 1 translation table walk.

                  For more information about possible faults on a cache maintenance instruction that operates by VA see VMSAv8-64
                  memory aborts on page D4-2191.

                  See also Ordering and completion of data and instruction cache instructions on page D3-2069.

                  The data cache maintenance instruction (DC)
                  System instructions on page C3-164 describes the A64 assembly syntax for this instruction.

                  When a DC instruction requires a set/way/level argument this takes the form of a 64-bit register, the upper 32 bits of
                  which are RES0.
                  If a data cache maintenance by set/way instruction specifies a set, way, or level argument that is larger than the value
                  supported by the implementation then the instruction is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, see Out of range values of
                  the Set/Way/Index fields in cache maintenance instructions on page K1-6427 or the instruction description.

                  When a DC instruction requires an address argument this takes the form of a 64-bit register that holds the VA
                  argument. No alignment restrictions apply for this address.

                  Any cache maintenance instruction operating by VA includes as part of any required VA to PA translation:
                  •     For an instruction executed at EL1, or at EL2 when HCR_EL2.E2H==1, the current ASID.
                  •     The current Security state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D3-2063
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                   •     Whether the instruction was executed at EL2, or in Non-secure EL1 state.
                   •     For an instruction executed in Non-secure EL1 state, the current VMID.

                   That VA to PA translation might fault. However, a data or unified cache maintenance instruction that operates by
                   VA cannot generate a Permission fault except in the following cases:
                   •     The possible generation of a Permission fault by:
                         —     The execution of a DC IVAC instruction when the specified address does not have write permission.
                         —     The execution of an enabled DC * instruction at EL0 when the specified address does not have read
                               access at EL0, as described in EL0 accessibility of cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2065.
                         The description of Permission faults includes possible constraints on the generation of Permission faults on
                         cache maintenance by VA instructions.
                   •     The possible Permission fault on a Stage 2 fault on a stage 1 translation table walk.

                   For more information about possible faults on a VA to PA translation see VMSAv8-64 memory aborts on
                   page D4-2191.

                   When executed at EL1, a DC ISW instruction performs a clean and invalidate, meaning it performs the same
                   maintenance as a DC CISW instruction, if all of the following apply:
                   •     EL2 is implemented.
                   •     Either:
                         —      The value of HCR_EL2.SWIO is 1, forcing a cache clean to perform a clean and invalidate.
                         —      The value of HCR_EL2.VM is 1, meaning EL1&0 stage two address translation is enabled.
                   •     Either EL3 is not implemented, or EL3 is implemented and the value of SCR_EL3.NS is 1

                   When executed at EL1, a DC IVAC instruction performs a clean and invalidate, meaning it performs the same
                   maintenance as a DC CIVAC instruction, if all of the following apply:
                   •     EL2 is implemented.
                   •     The value of HCR_EL2.VM is 1, meaning EL1&0 stage two address translation is enabled.
                   •     Either EL3 is not implemented, or EL3 is implemented and the value of SCR_EL3.NS is 1

                           Note
                   This also applies to the AArch32 cache maintenance instructions DCIMVAC and DCISW. See AArch32 data cache
                   maintenance instructions (DC*) on page G3-4822.

                   When ARMv8.2-DCPoP is implemented, meaning the DC CVAP instruction is implemented, if the memory system
                   does not support the Point of Persistence, a data cache clean to the PoP, DC CVAP, behaves as a data cache clean to
                   the PoC, DC CVAC.

                           Note
                   •     Support for the Point of Persistence does not change the definition or behavior of the CLIDR_EL1 System
                         register.

                   •     Because a DSB SYS instruction will not complete until all previous DC CVAP instructions have completed, the
                         following sequence can be used to ensure the completion of any store to the Point of Persistence, where the
                         store might be to Non-cacheable memory:
                                DMB              ; Note this can be any DMB that applies to both loads and stores
                                DC CVAP, Xt
                                DSB SYS

                   •     If caches that are invisible to the programmer exist beyond the Point of Coherency but before the Point of
                         Persistence and hold data that is marked as Non-cacheable, the DC CVAP operation causes the Non-cacheable
                         locations to be cleaned from those caches.

                   If a memory fault that sets the FAR for the translation regime applicable for the cache maintenance instruction is
                   generated from a data cache maintenance instruction, the FAR holds the address specified in the register argument
                   of the instruction.

D3-2064                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                     Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                         D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                D3.4 Cache support

                          Note
                  Despite its mnemonic, DC ZVA is not a cache maintenance instruction.

                  See also EL0 accessibility of cache maintenance instructions and Ordering and completion of data and instruction
                  cache instructions on page D3-2069.

                  EL0 accessibility of cache maintenance instructions
                  The SCTLR_EL1.UCI bit enables EL0 access for the DC CVAU, DC CVAC, DC CVAP, DC CIVAC, and IC IVAU instructions.
                  When EL0 use of these instructions is disabled because SCTLR_EL1.UCI == 0, executing one of these instructions
                  at EL0 generates a trap to EL1, that is reported using EC = 0x18.

                          Note
                  DC CVAP is implemented only if ARMv8.2-DCPoP is implemented.

                  For these instructions read access permission is required. When the value of SCTLR_EL1.UCI is 1:

                  •     For the DC CVAU, DC CVAC, DC CVAP, and DC CIVAC instructions, if the instruction is executed at EL0 and the
                        address specified in the argument cannot be read at EL0, a Permission fault might be generated.

                  •     For the IC IVAU instruction, if the instruction is executed at EL0 and the address specified in the argument
                        cannot be read at EL0, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a Permission fault is generated.
                  For more information see the description of Permission faults, In the case of a DC * instruction executed at EL0 when
                  the address specified cannot be read at EL0 the Permission fault is generated unless one of the permitted constraints
                  described in that section applies and means the fault cannot be generated.

                  Software can read the CTR_EL0 to discover the stride needed for cache maintenance instructions. The
                  SCTLR_EL1.UCT bit enables EL0 access to the CTR_EL0. When EL0 access to the Cache Type register is
                  disabled, a register access instruction executed at EL0 is trapped to EL1 using EC = 0x18.

                  General requirements for the scope of maintenance instructions
                  The ARMv8 specification of the cache maintenance instructions describes what each instruction is guaranteed to do
                  in a system. It does not limit other behaviors that might occur, provided they are consistent with the requirements
                  described in General behavior of the caches on page D3-2051, Behavior of caches at reset on page D3-2057, and
                  Preloading caches on page B2-108.

                  This means that as a side-effect of a cache maintenance instruction:
                  •     Any location in the cache might be cleaned.
                  •     Any unlocked location in the cache might be cleaned and invalidated.

                          Note
                  ARM recommends that, for best performance, such side-effects are kept to a minimum. ARM strongly recommends
                  that the side-effects of operations performed in Non-secure state do not have a significant performance impact on
                  execution in Secure state.

                  Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the PoC
                  For Normal memory that is not Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable, cache maintenance instructions that
                  operate by VA to the PoC must affect the caches of other PEs in the shareability domain described by the shareability
                  attributes of the VA supplied with the instruction.

                  For Device memory and Normal memory that is Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable, these instructions must
                  affect the caches of all PEs in the Outer Shareable shareability domain of the PE on which the instruction is
                  operating.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        D3-2065
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                       In all cases, for any affected PE, these instructions affect all data and unified caches to the PoC. Table D3-4 shows
                       the scope of these Data and unified cache maintenance instructions.

                                                      Table D3-4 PEs affected by cache maintenance instructions to the PoC

 Shareability         PEs affected                                                                            Effective to

 Non-shareable        The PE executing the instruction                                                        The PoC of the entire system

 Inner Shareable      All PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE executing the         The PoC of the entire system
                      instruction

 Outer Shareable      All PEs in the same Outer Shareable shareability domain as the PE executing the         The PoC of the entire system
                      instruction

                       Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the PoP
                       For Normal memory that is not Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable, cache maintenance instructions that
                       operate by VA to the PoP must affect the caches of other PEs in the shareability domain described by the shareability
                       attributes of the VA supplied with the instruction.

                       For Device memory and Normal memory that is Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable, these instructions must
                       affect the caches of all PEs in the Outer Shareable shareability domain of the PE on which the instruction is
                       operating.

                       In all cases, for any affected PE, these instructions affect all data and unified caches to the PoP. Table D3-5 shows
                       the scope of these Data and unified cache maintenance to the PoP instructions.

                                                      Table D3-5 PEs affected by cache maintenance instructions to the PoP

 Shareability         PEs affected                                                                            Effective to

 Non-shareable        The PE executing the instruction                                                        The PoPof the entire system

 Inner Shareable      All PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE executing the         The PoP of the entire system
                      instruction

 Outer Shareable      All PEs in the same Outer Shareable shareability domain as the PE executing the         The PoP of the entire system
                      instruction

                       Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the PoU
                       For cache maintenance instructions that operate by VA to the PoU, Table D3-6 shows how, for a VA in a Normal or
                       Device memory location, the shareability attribute of the VA determines the minimum set of PEs affected, and the
                       point to which the instruction must be effective.

                                                      Table D3-6 PEs affected by cache maintenance instructions to the PoU

 Shareability           PEs affected                         Effective to

 Non-shareable          The PE executing the instruction     The PoU of instruction cache fills, data cache fills and write-backs, and
                                                             translation table walks, on the PE executing the instruction

 Inner Shareable or     All PEs in the same Inner            The PoU of instruction cache fills, data cache fills and write-backs, and
 Outer Shareable        Shareable shareability domain as     translation table walks, of all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability
                        the PE executing the instruction     domain as the PE executing the instruction

D3-2066                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                              D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                     D3.4 Cache support

                                Note
                      The set of PEs guaranteed to be affected is never greater than the PEs in the Inner Shareable shareability domain
                      containing the PE executing the instruction.

                      Effects of All and set/way maintenance instructions
                      The IC IALLU and DC set/way instructions apply only to the caches of the PE that performs the instruction.

                      The IC IALLUIS instruction can affect the caches of all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the
                      PE that performs the instruction. This instruction has an effect to the Point of Unification of instruction cache fills,
                      data cache fills, and write-backs, and translation table walks, of all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability
                      domain.

                                Note
                      The possible presence of system caches, as described in System level caches on page D3-2073, means architecture
                      does not guarantee that all levels of the cache can be maintained using set/way instructions.

                      Effects of virtualization and Security state on the cache maintenance instructions
                      Each Security state has its own physical address (PA) space, therefore cache entries are associated with PA space.

                      Table D3-7 shows the effects of virtualization and security on the cache maintenance instructions. In the table, the
                      Specified entries are entries that the architecture requires the instruction to affect. The rules described in General
                      behavior of the caches on page D3-2051 mean that an instruction might also affect other entries.

                                          Table D3-7 Effects of virtualization and security on the maintenance instructions

 Cache maintenance                 Security
                                                    Specified entries
 instructions                      state

 Data or unified cache maintenance instructions

  Invalidate, Clean, or Clean      Both             All lines that hold the PA that, in the current Security state, is mapped to by the
  and Invalidate by VA:                             combination of all of:
  DC IVAC, DC CVAC, DC CVAP,                        •      The specified VA.
  DC CVAU, DC CIVAC, DC CVAP                        •      For an instruction executed at EL1 or EL0, the current ASID if the location is
                                                           mapped to by a non-global page.
                                                    •      For an instruction executed at Non-secure EL1 or Non-secure EL0, the current
                                                           VMID a.

  Invalidate, Clean, or Clean      Non-secure       Line specified by set/way provided that the entry comes from the Non-secure PA
  and Invalidate by set/way:                        space.
  DC ISW, DC CSW, DC CISW
                                   Secure           Line specified by set/way regardless of the PA space that the entry has come from.

 Instruction cache maintenance instructions

  Invalidate by VA:                Both             All lines corresponding to the specified VAb in the current translation regime and:
  IC IVAU                                           •      For an instruction executed at EL1 or EL0, the current ASID.
                                                    •      For an instruction executed at Non-secure EL1 or Non-secure EL0, the current
                                                           VMID a.

  Invalidate All:                  Both             For an instruction executed at:
  IC IALLU, IC IALLUIS                              •     Non-secure EL1, all instruction cache lines containing entries associated with
                                                          the current VMIDa.
                                                    •     EL2, all instruction cache lines containing Non-secure entries.
                                                    •     EL3 or Secure EL1, all instruction cache lines.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D3-2067
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

    a. Dependencies on the VMID apply even when HCR_EL2.VM is set to 0. The architecture does not define a reset value for
       VTTBR_EL2.VMID, and therefore, in any implementation that includes EL2, the boot software executed when reset is deasserted must
       initialize VTTBR_EL2.VMID.
    b. The type of instruction cache used affects the interpretation of the specified entries in this table such that:
       • For a PIPT instruction cache, the cache maintenance applies to all entries whose physical address corresponds to the specified address.
       • For a VIPT instruction cache, the cache maintenance applies to entries whose virtual index and physical tag corresponds to the specified
       address.
       For information on types of instruction cache see Instruction caches on page D4-2221.

                       For locked entries and entries that might be locked, the behavior of cache maintenance instructions described in The
                       interaction of cache lockdown with cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2072 applies.

                       With an implementation that generates aborts if entries are locked or might be locked in the cache, when the use of
                       lockdown aborts is enabled, these aborts can occur on any cache maintenance instructions.

                       In an implementation that includes EL2:

                       •       The architecture does not require cache cleaning when switching between virtual machines. Cache
                               invalidation by set/way must not present an opportunity for one virtual machine to corrupt state associated
                               with a second virtual machine. To ensure this requirement is met, Non-secure clean by set/way instructions
                               can, instead, perform a clean and invalidate by set/way.

                       •       As described in The data cache maintenance instruction (DC) on page D3-2063, the AArch64 Data cache
                               invalidate instructions, DC IVAC and DC ISW, when executed at EL1 and EL0, and the AArch32 Data cache
                               invalidate instructions DCIMVAC and DCISW, when executed at EL1, can be configured to perform a cache clean
                               as well as a cache invalidation.

                       •       When the value of HCR_EL2.FB is 1, TLB and instruction cache invalidate instructions executed in the
                               Non-secure EL1 Exception level are broadcast across the Inner Shareable domain. When Non-secure EL1 is
                               using AArch64, this applies to the TLBI VMALLE1, TLBI VAE1, TLBI ASIDE1, TLBI VAAE1, TLBI VALE1, TLBI VAALE1,
                               and IC IALLU instructions. This means the instruction performs the invalidation that would be performed by
                               the corresponding Inner Shareable instruction, for example IC IALLU performs the invalidation that would be
                               performed by IC IALLUIS.
                       For more information about the cache maintenance instructions, see About cache maintenance in AArch64 state on
                       page D3-2058, A64 Cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2062, and Chapter D4 The AArch64 Virtual
                       Memory System Architecture.

                       Boundary conditions for cache maintenance instructions
                       Cache maintenance instructions operate on the caches regardless of whether the System register Cacheability
                       controls force all memory accesses to be Non-cacheable.

                       For VA-based cache maintenance instructions, the instruction operates on the caches regardless of the memory type
                       and cacheability attributes marked for the memory address in the VMSA translation table entries. This means that
                       the effects of the cache maintenance instructions can apply regardless of:

                       •       Whether the address accessed:
                               —    Is Normal memory or Device memory.
                               —    Has the Cacheable attribute or the Non-cacheable attribute.

                       •       Any applicable domain control of the address accessed.

                       •       The access permissions for the address accessed, other than the effect of the stage two write permission on
                               data or unified cache invalidation instructions.

D3-2068                            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                           Non-Confidential                                                              ID121917
                                                                                          D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                 D3.4 Cache support

                  Ordering and completion of data and instruction cache instructions
                  All data cache instructions, other than DC ZVA, that specify an address:

                  •      Execute in program order relative to loads or stores that access an address in Normal memory with either
                         Inner Write Through or Inner Write Back attributes within the same cache line of minimum size, as indicated
                         by CTR_EL0.DMinLine.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to loads or stores that access any address with the Device memory attribute,
                         or with Normal memory with Inner Non-cacheable attribute unless a DMB or DSB is executed between the
                         instructions.

                  •      Execute in program order relative to other data cache maintenance instructions, other than DC ZVA, that specify
                         an address within the same cache line of minimum size, as indicated by CTR_EL0.DMinLine.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to loads or stores that access an address in a different cache line of minimum
                         size, as indicated by CTR_EL0.DMinLine, unless a DMB or DSB is executed between the instructions.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to other data cache maintenance instructions, other than DC ZVA, that specify
                         an address in a different cache line of minimum size, as indicated by CTR_EL0.DMinLine, unless a DMB or
                         DSB is executed between the instructions.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to data cache maintenance instructions that do not specify an address unless
                         a DMB or DSB is executed between the instructions.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to instruction cache maintenance instructions unless a DSB is executed
                         between the instructions.

                           Note
                  •      Data cache ordering rules by address are consistent with physically indexed physically tagged caches. See
                         Data and unified caches on page D4-2221.

                  •      Data cache zero instruction on page D3-2071 describes the ordering and completion rules for Data Cache
                         Zero.

                  All data cache maintenance instructions that do not specify an address:

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to data cache maintenance instructions that do not specify an address unless
                         a DMB or DSB is executed between the instructions.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to data cache maintenance instructions that specify an address, other than
                         Data Cache Zero, unless a DMB or DSB is executed between the instructions.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to loads or stores unless a DMB or DSB is executed between the instructions.

                  •      Can execute in any order relative to instruction cache maintenance instructions unless a DSB is executed
                         between the instructions.

                  All instruction cache maintenance instructions can execute in any order relative to other instruction cache
                  instructions, data cache instructions, loads, and stores unless a DSB is executed between the instructions.
                  A cache maintenance instruction can complete at any time after it is executed, but is only guaranteed to be complete,
                  and its effects visible to other observers, following a DSB instruction executed by the PE that executed the cache
                  maintenance instruction. See also the requirements for cache maintenance instructions in Completion and endpoint
                  ordering on page B2-97.

                  In all cases, where the text in this section refers to a DMB or a DSB, this means a DMB or DSB whose required access type
                  is both loads and stores.

                           Note
                  These ordering requirements are extended from the requirements in AArch32 state given in:
                  •     Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4829.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            D3-2069
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

                   •        AArch32 instruction cache maintenance instructions (IC*) on page G3-4821.

                   Performing cache maintenance instructions
                   To ensure all cache lines in a block of address space are maintained through all levels of cache ARM strongly
                   recommends that software:

                   •        For data or unified cache maintenance, uses the CTR_EL0.DMinLine value to determine the loop increment
                            size for a loop of data cache maintenance by VA instructions.

                   •        For instruction cache maintenance, uses the CTR_EL0.IMinLine value to determine the loop increment size
                            for a loop of instruction cache maintenance by VA instructions.

                   Example code for cache maintenance instructions

                   The cache maintenance instructions by set/way can clean or invalidate, or both, the entirety of one or more levels
                   of cache attached to a PE. However, unless all PEs attached to the caches regard all memory locations as
                   Non-cacheable, it is not possible to prevent locations being allocated into the cache during such a sequence of the
                   cache maintenance instructions.

                             Note
                   Since the set/way instructions are performed only locally, there is no guarantee of the atomicity of cache
                   maintenance between different PEs, even if those different PEs are each executing the same cache maintenance
                   instructions at the same time. Since any cacheable line can be allocated into the cache at any time, it is possible for
                   a cache line to migrate from an entry in the cache of one PE to the cache of a different PE in a way that means the
                   line is not affected by set/way based cache maintenance. Therefore, ARM strongly discourages the use of set/way
                   instructions to manage coherency in coherent systems. The expected use of the cache maintenance instructions that
                   operate by set/way is limited to the cache maintenance associated with the powerdown and powerup of caches, if
                   this is required by the implementation.

                   The limitations of cache maintenance by set/way mean maintenance by set/way does not happen on multiple PEs,
                   and cannot be made to happen atomically for each address on each PE. Therefore in multiprocessor or multithreaded
                   systems, the use of cache maintenance by set/way to clean, or clean and invalidate, the entire cache for coherency
                   management with very large buffers or with buffers with unknown address can fail to provide the expected
                   coherency results because of speculation by other PEs, or possibly by other threads. The only way that these
                   instructions can be used in this way is to first ensure that all PEs that might cause speculative accesses to caches that
                   need to be maintained are not capable of generating speculative accesses. This can be achieved by ensuring that
                   those PEs have no memory locations with a Normal Cacheable attribute. Such an approach can have very large
                   system performance effects, and ARM advises implementers to use hardware coherency mechanisms in systems
                   where this will be an issue.

                   System level caches on page D3-2073 refers to other limitations of cache maintenance by set/way.

                   The following example code for cleaning a data or unified cache to the Point of Coherency illustrates a generic
                   mechanism for cleaning the entire data or unified cache to the Point of Coherency. It assumes that the current Cache
                   Size Identification Register is in 32-bit format. For more information, see Possible formats of the Cache Size
                   Identification Register, CCSIDR_EL1 on page D3-2053.

                             MRS      X0, CLIDR_EL1
                             AND      W3, W0, #0x07000000       // Get 2 x Level of Coherence
                             LSR      W3, W3, #23
                             CBZ      W3, Finished
                             MOV      W10, #0                   // W10 = 2 x cache level
                             MOV      W8, #1                    // W8 = constant 0b1
                   Loop1:    ADD      W2, W10, W10, LSR #1      // Calculate 3 x cache level
                             LSR      W1, W0, W2                // extract 3-bit cache type for this level
                             AND      W1, W1, #0x7
                             CMP      W1, #2
                             B.LT     Skip                      // No data or unified cache at this level
                             MSR      CSSELR_EL1, X10           // Select this cache level
                             ISB                                // Synchronize change of CSSELR

D3-2070                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                         D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                D3.4 Cache support

                          MRS      X1, CCSIDR_EL1             // Read CCSIDR
                          AND      W2, W1, #7                 // W2 = log2(linelen)-4
                          ADD      W2, W2, #4                 // W2 = log2(linelen)
                          UBFX     W4, W1, #3, #10            // W4 = max way number, right aligned
                          CLZ      W5, W4                     // W5 = 32-log2(ways), bit position of way in DC operand
                          LSL      W9, W4, W5                 // W9 = max way number, aligned to position in DC operand
                          LSL      W16, W8, W5                // W16 = amount to decrement way number per iteration
                  Loop2: UBFX      W7, W1, #13, #15           // W7 = max set number, right aligned
                          LSL      W7, W7, W2                 // W7 = max set number, aligned to position in DC operand
                          LSL      W17, W8, W2                // W17 = amount to decrement set number per iteration
                  Loop3: ORR       W11, W10, W9               // W11 = combine way number and cache number ...
                          ORR      W11, W11, W7               // ... and set number for DC operand
                          DC       CSW, X11                   // Do data cache clean by set and way
                          SUBS     W7, W7, W17                // Decrement set number
                          B.GE     Loop3
                          SUBS     X9, X9, X16                // Decrement way number
                          B.GE     Loop2
                  Skip:   ADD      W10, W10, #2               // Increment 2 x cache level
                          CMP      W3, W10
                          DSB                                 // Ensure completion of previous cache maintenance instruction
                          B.GT     Loop1
                  Finished:

                  Similar approaches can be used for all cache maintenance instructions.

D3.4.9      Data cache zero instruction
                  The Data Cache Zero by Address instruction, DC ZVA, writes 0x00 to each byte of a block of N bytes, aligned in
                  memory to N bytes in size, where:

                  •     The block in memory is identified by the address supplied as an argument to the DC ZVA instruction. There are
                        no alignment restrictions on this address.

                                 Note
                        This means that each byte of the block of memory that includes the supplied address is set to zero.

                  •     The DCZID_EL0 register indicates the block size, N bytes, that is written with byte values of zero.

                  Software can restrict access to this instruction. See Configurable instruction enables and disables, and trap controls
                  on page D1-1910 and the description of the DC ZVA instruction.
                  The DC ZVA instruction behaves as a set of stores to the location being accessed, and:
                  •     Generates a Permission fault if the translation regime being used when the instruction is executed does not
                        permit writes to the locations.
                  •     Requires the same considerations for ordering and the management of coherency as any other store
                        instruction.

                  In addition:

                  •     When the instruction is executed, it can generate memory faults or watchpoints that are prioritized in the same
                        way as other memory related faults or watchpoints. Where a synchronous Data Abort fault or a watchpoint
                        is generated, the CM bit in the syndrome field is not set to 1, which would be the case for all other cache
                        maintenance instructions. See ISS encoding for an exception from a Data Abort on page D10-2460 for more
                        information about the encoding of the associated ESR_ELx.ISS field.

                  •     If the memory region being zeroed is any type of Device memory, then DC ZVA generates an Alignment fault
                        which is prioritized in the same way as other alignment faults that are determined by the memory type.

                          Note
                  The architecture makes no statements about whether or not a DC ZVA instruction causes allocation to any particular
                  level of the cache, for addresses that have a cacheable attribute for those levels of cache.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D3-2071
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.4 Cache support

D3.4.10      Cache lockdown
                   The concept of an entry locked in a cache is allowed, but not architecturally defined. How lockdown is achieved is
                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED and might not be supported by:
                   •     An implementation.
                   •     Some memory attributes.

                   An unlocked entry in a cache might not remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that an unlocked
                   cache entry remains in the cache or remains incoherent with the rest of memory. Software must not assume that an
                   unlocked item that remains in the cache remains dirty.

                   A locked entry in a cache is guaranteed to remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that a locked
                   cache entry remains incoherent with the rest of memory, that is, it might not remain dirty.

                   The interaction of cache lockdown with cache maintenance instructions
                   The interaction of cache lockdown and cache maintenance instructions is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. However, an
                   architecturally-defined cache maintenance instruction on a locked cache line must comply with the following
                   general rules:

                   •     The effect of the following instructions on locked cache entries is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED:
                         —     Cache clean by set/way, DC CSW.
                         —     Cache invalidate by set/way, DC ISW.
                         —     Cache clean and invalidate by set/way, DC CISW.
                         —     Instruction cache invalidate all, IC IALLU and IC IALLUIS.
                         However, one of the following approaches must be adopted in all these cases:
                         1.     If the instruction specified an invalidation, a locked entry is not invalidated from the cache.
                         2.     If the instruction specified a clean it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether locked entries are cleaned.
                         3.     If an entry is locked down, or could be locked down, an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED Data Abort
                                exception is generated, using the DFSC value defined for this purpose, see ISS encoding for an
                                exception from a Data Abort on page D10-2460.
                         This permits a usage model for cache invalidate routines to operate on a large range of addresses by
                         performing the required operation on the entire cache, without having to consider whether any cache entries
                         are locked.

                   The effect of the following instructions is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED:
                   •     Cache clean by virtual address, DC CVAC, DC CVAP, and DC CVAU.
                   •     Cache invalidate by virtual address, DC IVAC.
                   •     Cache clean and invalidate by virtual address, DC CIVAC.
                   However, one of the following approaches must be adopted in all these cases:

                   1.    If the instruction specified an invalidation, a locked entry is invalidated from the cache. For the clean and
                         invalidate instructions, the entry must be cleaned before it is invalidated.

                   2.    If the instruction specified an invalidation, a locked entry is not invalidated from the cache. If the instruction
                         specified a clean it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether locked entries are cleaned.

                   3.    If an entry is locked down, or could be locked down, an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED Data Abort exception is
                         generated, using the DFSC value defined for this purpose. See ESR_ELx on page K13-6595.

                   In an implementation that includes EL2, if HCR_EL2.TIDCP is set to 1, any exception relating to lockdown of an
                   entry associated with Non-secure memory is routed to EL2.

D3-2072                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                         D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                D3.4 Cache support

                          Note
                  An implementation that uses an abort mechanism for entries that can be locked down but are not actually locked
                  down must:

                  •     Document the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED instruction sequences that perform the required operations on
                        entries that are not locked down.

                  •     Implement one of the other permitted alternatives for the locked entries.

                  ARM recommends that, when possible, such IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED instruction sequences use
                  architecturally-defined instructions. This minimizes the number of customized instructions required.

                  In addition, an implementation that uses an abort to handle cache maintenance instructions for entries that might be
                  locked must provide a mechanism that ensures that no entries are locked in the cache.

                  The reset setting of the cache must be that no cache entries are locked.

                  Additional cache functions for the implementation of lockdown

                  An implementation can add additional cache maintenance functions for the handling of lockdown in the
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED spaces reserved for Cache Lockdown, see Reserved encodings for IMPLEMENTATION
                  DEFINED registers on page D9-2345.

D3.4.11     System level caches
                  The ARM Architecture defines a system cache as a cache that is not described in the PE Cache Identification
                  registers, CCSIDR_EL1 and CLIDR_EL1, and for which the set/way cache maintenance instructions do not apply.

                  Conceptually, three classes of system cache can be envisaged:

                  1.    System caches which lie before the point of coherency and cannot be managed by any cache maintenance
                        instructions. Such systems fundamentally undermine the concept of cache maintenance instructions
                        operating to the point of coherency, as they imply the use of non-architecture mechanisms to manage
                        coherency. The use of such systems in the ARM architecture is explicitly prohibited.

                  2.    System caches which lie before the point of coherency and can be managed by cache maintenance by address
                        instructions that apply to the point of coherency, but cannot be managed by cache maintenance by set/way
                        instructions. Where maintenance of the entirety of such a cache must be performed, as in the case for power
                        management, it must be performed using non-architectural mechanisms.

                  3.    System caches which lie beyond the point of coherency and so are invisible to the software. The management
                        of such caches is outside the scope of the architecture.

D3.4.12     Branch prediction
                  ARMv8 does not define any branch predictor maintenance instructions for AArch64 state.

                  If branch prediction is architecturally visible, cache maintenance must also apply to branch prediction.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       D3-2073
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.5 External aborts

D3.5        External aborts
                   The ARM architecture defines External aborts as errors that occur in the memory system, other than those that are
                   detected by the MMU or debug logic. An External abort might signal a data corruption to the PE. For example, a
                   memory location might have been corrupted, and this corruption is detected by hardware using a parity or error
                   correction code (ECC). The error might have been propagated. The RAS Extension provides mechanisms for
                   software to determine the extent of the corruption and contain propagation of the error. For more information, see
                   the ARM® Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Specification, ARMv8, for the ARMv8-A architecture
                   profile.

                   An External abort is one of the following:
                   •    Synchronous.
                   •    Precise asynchronous.
                   •    Imprecise asynchronous.

                   For more information, see Exception terminology on page D1-1851.

                   The RAS Extension provides a more granular taxonomy of aborts. When the RAS Extension is not implemented,
                   the ARM architecture does not provide any method to distinguish between precise asynchronous and imprecise
                   asynchronous External aborts.

                   VMSAv8-64 permits External aborts on data accesses, translation table walks, and instruction fetches to be either
                   synchronous or asynchronous.

                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED which External aborts, if any, are supported. Asynchronous aborts are taken as
                   SError interrupt exceptions. See Asynchronous exception types, routing, masking and priorities on page D1-1902.

                   Synchronous External aborts are reported using the Instruction Abort and Data Abort exceptions. See Synchronous
                   exception types, routing and priorities on page D1-1894.

                   Normally, External aborts are rare. An imprecise asynchronous External abort is likely to be fatal to the process that
                   is running, ARM recommends that implementations make External aborts precise wherever possible.

                   The following subsections give more information about possible External aborts:
                   •     External abort on an instruction fetch.
                   •     External abort on data read or write.
                   •     Provision for the classification of External aborts on page D3-2075.
                   •     Parity or ECC error reporting, RAS Extension not implemented on page D3-2075.

D3.5.1       External abort on an instruction fetch
                   An External abort on an instruction fetch can be either synchronous or asynchronous.

                   A synchronous External abort on an instruction fetch is taken precisely using the Instruction Abort exception.

                   An implementation can report the External abort asynchronously from the instruction that it applies to. In such an
                   implementation the abort is taken using the SError interrupt exception.

D3.5.2       External abort on data read or write
                   Externally-generated errors that occur during a data read or write can be either synchronous or asynchronous.

                   A synchronous External abort on a data read or write is taken precisely using the Data Abort exception.

                   An implementation can report the External abort asynchronously from the instruction that generated the access. In
                   such an implementation the abort is taken using the SError interrupt exception.

                   The effect of a failed memory access is described in Effect of Data Aborts on page D1-1899.

D3-2074                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                         D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                D3.5 External aborts

D3.5.3      Provision for the classification of External aborts
                  In AArch64 state, an implementation can use ESR_ELx.EA, ISS[9], to provide more information about
                  synchronous External aborts. For all synchronous aborts other than synchronous External aborts, ESR_ELx.EA,
                  ISS[9], returns a value of 0.

                  If the RAS Extension is implemented:
                  •      The ESR_ELx.SET field provides information about the state of the PE following a synchronous External
                         abort.
                  •      The ESR_ELx.AET field might contain more information following an asynchronous abort taken as an
                         SError interrupt.
                  •      The implementation might define error record registers.

                  For more information, see:
                  •     ISS encoding for an exception from an Instruction Abort on page D10-2457.
                  •     ISS encoding for an exception from a Data Abort on page D10-2460.
                  •     ISS encoding for an SError interrupt on page D10-2466.
                  •     ARM® Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Specification, ARMv8, for the ARMv8-A architecture
                        profile.

D3.5.4      Parity or ECC error reporting, RAS Extension not implemented
                  The ARM architecture supports the reporting of both synchronous and asynchronous parity or ECC errors from the
                  cache system. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED what parity or ECC errors in the cache systems, if any, result in
                  synchronous or asynchronous parity or ECC errors.

                  A fault code is defined for reporting parity or ECC errors, see Use of the ESR_EL1, ESR_EL2, and ESR_EL3 on
                  page D1-1876. However, when parity or ECC error reporting is implemented, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                  whether a parity or ECC error is reported using the assigned fault code or using another appropriate encoding.

                  For all purposes other than the Fault status encoding, parity or ECC errors are treated as External aborts.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D3-2075
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.6 Memory barrier instructions

D3.6        Memory barrier instructions
                   Memory barriers on page B2-98 describes the memory barrier instructions. This section describes the system level
                   controls of those instructions.

D3.6.1       EL2 control of the shareability of data barrier instructions executed at Non-secure EL0 or EL1
                   In an implementation that includes EL2 and supports shareability limitations on the data barrier instructions, the
                   HCR_EL2.BSU field can modify the required shareability of an instruction that is executed at EL0 or EL1 in
                   Non-secure state. Table D3-8 shows the encoding of this field.

                    Table D3-8 EL2 control of shareability of barrier instructions executed at Non-secure EL0 or EL1

                                                       HCR_EL2.BSU           Minimum shareability of barrier instructions

                                                       00                    No effect, shareability is as specified by the instruction

                                                       01                    Inner Shareable

                                                       10                    Outer Shareable

                                                       11                    Full system

                   For an instruction executed at EL0 or EL1 in Non-secure state, Table D3-9 shows how the HCR_EL2.BSU is
                   combined with the shareability specified by the argument of the DMB or DSB instruction to give the scope of the
                   instruction.

                      Table D3-9 Effect of HCR_EL2.BSU on barrier instructions executed at Non-secure EL1 or EL0

                Shareability specified by the DMB or DSB argument                 HCR_EL2.BSU              Resultant shareability

                Full system                                                       Any                      Full system

                Outer Shareable                                                   00, 01, or 10            Outer Shareable

                                                                                  11, Full system          Full system

                Inner Shareable                                                   00 or 01                 Inner Shareable

                                                                                  10, Outer Shareable      Outer Shareable

                                                                                  11, Full system          Full system

                Non-shareable                                                     00, No effect            Non-shareable

                                                                                  01, Inner Shareable      Inner Shareable

                                                                                  10, Outer Shareable      Outer Shareable

                                                                                  11, Full system          Full system

D3-2076                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                    D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                 D3.7 Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions

D3.7       Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions
                  This section lists the pseudocode describing general memory operations:
                  •      Memory data type definitions.
                  •      Basic memory access.
                  •      Aligned memory access on page D3-2078.
                  •      Unaligned memory access on page D3-2078.
                  •      Exclusives monitors operations on page D3-2078.
                  •      Access permission checking on page D3-2079.
                  •      Abort exceptions on page D3-2079.
                  •      Memory barriers on page D3-2079.

D3.7.1      Memory data type definitions
                  This section lists the memory data types.

                  The memory data types are:
                  •    Address descriptor, defined by the AddressDescriptor type.
                  •    Full address, defined by the FullAddress type.
                  •    Memory attributes, defined by the MemoryAttributes type.
                  •    Memory type, defined by the MemType enumeration.
                  •    Device memory type, defined by the DeviceType enumeration.
                  •    Normal memory attributes, defined by the MemAttrHints type.
                  •    Cacheability attributes, defined by the MemAttr_NC, MemAttr_WT, and MemAttr_WB constants.
                  •    Allocation hints, defined by the MemHint_No, MemHint_WA, MemHint_RA, and MemHint_RWA constants.
                  •    Access permissions, defined by the Permissions type.
                  These types are defined in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode.

D3.7.2      Basic memory access
                  The two forms of the _Mem[] accessor, non-assignment (memory read) _Mem[] and assignment (memory write)
                  _Mem[], are the operations that perform single-copy atomic, aligned, little-endian memory accesses of size bytes to
                  or from the underlying physical memory array of bytes.

                  The functions address the array using desc.paddress, that supplies:
                  •     The physical address.
                  •     An NS bit that selects between the Secure and Non-secure parts of the array.

                  The attributes in desc.memattrs are used by the memory system to determine caching and ordering behaviors as
                  described in Memory types and attributes on page B2-114, Ordering and observability on page B2-93, and
                  Atomicity in the ARM architecture on page B2-88.

                  An additional parameter to the _Mem[] accessor defines the access type, for example normal, exclusive, ordered, or
                  streaming, and whether the access is made as part of a translation table walk.

                  The actual implemented array of physical memory might be smaller than the maximum size permitted by the
                  architecture. In this case the scheme for aliasing is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, or some parts of the address space
                  might give rise to External aborts or a System Error.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       D3-2077
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.7 Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions

                              Note
                     The permitted physical memory size is:

                     •     252 bytes in an implementation that includes ARMv8.2-LPA. However, only 248 bytes are accessible using
                           the 4KB or 16KB translation granule.

                     •     248 bytes otherwise.

                     PAMax() returns the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size of the physical address.

D3.7.3         Aligned memory access
                     The two MemSingle[] accessors, non-assignment (memory read) AArch64.MemSingle[] and assignment (memory
                     write) AArch64.MemSingle[], make atomic, little-endian accesses of size bytes. These functions are defined in
                     Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode.

D3.7.4         Unaligned memory access
                     The two Mem[] accessors, Non-assignment (memory read) Mem[] and Assignment (memory write) Mem[], make
                     accesses of the required type. If an access is not architecturally defined to be atomic, Mem[] synthesizes accesses
                     from multiple calls to AArch64.MemSingle[]. It also reverses the byte order if the access is big-endian.
                     The AArch64.CheckAlignment() function checks the alignment of memory accesses.

D3.7.5         Exclusives monitors operations
                     The AArch64.SetExclusiveMonitors() function sets the Exclusives monitors for a block of bytes, the size of which
                     is determined by size, at the virtual address defined by address.
                     The AArch64.ExclusiveMonitorsPass() function checks whether the Exclusives monitors are set to include the
                     location of a number of bytes specified by size, at the virtual address defined by address. The atomic write that
                     follows after the Exclusives monitors have been set must be to the same physical address. It is permitted, but not
                     required, for this function to return FALSE if the virtual address is not the same as that used in the previous call to
                     AArch64.SetExclusiveMonitors().

                     The ExclusiveMonitorsStatus() function returns 0 if the previous atomic write was to the same physical memory
                     locations selected by AArch64.ExclusiveMonitorsPass() and therefore succeeded. Otherwise the function returns 1,
                     indicating that the address translation delivered a different physical address.

                     The MarkExclusiveGlobal() procedure takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid and
                     the size of the transfer. The procedure records that the PE processorid has requested exclusive access covering at
                     least size bytes from address paddress. The size of the location marked as exclusive is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED,
                     up to a limit of 2KB and no smaller than two words, and aligned in the address space to the size of the location. It
                     is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether this causes any previous request for exclusive access to any other address
                     by the same PE to be cleared.

                     The MarkExclusiveLocal() procedure takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid and
                     the size of the transfer. The procedure records in a local record that PE processorid has requested exclusive access
                     to an address covering at least size bytes from address paddress. The size of the location marked as exclusive is
                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and can at its largest cover the whole of memory but is no smaller than two words, and
                     is aligned in the address space to the size of the location. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this procedure
                     also performs a MarkExclusiveGlobal() using the same parameters.
                     The IsExclusiveGlobal() function takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid and the
                     size of the transfer. The function returns TRUE if the PE processorid has marked in a global record an address range
                     as exclusive access requested that covers at least size bytes from address paddress. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                     whether it returns TRUE or FALSE if a global record has marked a different address as exclusive access requested.
                     If no address is marked in a global record as exclusive access, IsExclusiveGlobal() returns FALSE.

D3-2078                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                     D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
                                                                  D3.7 Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions

                  The IsExclusiveLocal() function takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid and the
                  size of the transfer. The function returns TRUE if the PE processorid has marked an address range as exclusive
                  access requested that covers at least the size bytes from address paddress. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                  this function returns TRUE or FALSE if the address marked as exclusive access requested does not cover all of size
                  bytes from address paddress. If no address is marked as exclusive access requested, then this function returns
                  FALSE. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this result is ANDed with the result of IsExclusiveGlobal() with
                  the same parameters.

                  The ClearExclusiveByAddress() procedure takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid
                  and the size of the transfer. The procedure clears the global records of all PEs, other than processorid, for which an
                  address region including any of size bytes starting from paddress has had a request for an exclusive access. It is
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the equivalent global record of the PE processorid is also cleared if any of size
                  bytes starting from paddress has had a request for an exclusive access, or if any other address has had a request for
                  an exclusive access.

                  The ClearExclusiveLocal() procedure takes as arguments the PE identifier processorid. The procedure clears the
                  local record of PE processorid for which an address has had a request for an exclusive access. It is IMPLEMENTATION
                  DEFINED whether this operation also clears the global record of PE processorid that an address has had a request for
                  an exclusive access.

                  These functions are defined in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode.

D3.7.6      Access permission checking
                  The function AArch64.CheckPermission() is used by the architecture to perform access permission checking based
                  on attributes derived from the translation tables or location descriptors. It returns the result of the call to
                  AArch64.NoFault().

                  These functions are defined in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode.

                  The interpretation of access permission is shown in Memory access control on page D4-2155.

D3.7.7      Abort exceptions
                  The function AArch64.Abort() generates either a Data Abort or an Instruction Abort exception by calling
                  AArch64.DataAbort() or AArch64.InstructionAbort(). It also can generate a debug exception for debug related faults,
                  see Chapter D2 AArch64 Self-hosted Debug.

                  The function AArch64.DataAbort() generates a Data Abort exception, routes the exception to EL2 or EL3, and
                  records the information required for the Exception Syndrome registers, ESR_ELx. See ISS encoding for an
                  exception from a Data Abort on page D10-2460. A second stage abort might also record the intermediate physical
                  address, IPA, but this depends on the type of the abort.

                  For a synchronous abort, AArch64.DataAbort() also sets the FAR to the VA of the abort.
                  The function AArch64.InstructionAbort() generates an Instruction Abort exception, routes the exception to EL2 or
                  EL3, and records the information required for the Exception Syndrome registers, ESR_ELx, see ISS encoding for
                  an exception from an Instruction Abort on page D10-2457. A second stage abort might also record the intermediate
                  physical address, IPA, but this depends on the type of the abort.

                  For a synchronous abort, AArch64.InstructionAbort() also sets the FAR to the VA of the abort.
                  The FaultRecord type describes a fault. Functions that check for faults return a record of this type appropriate to the
                  type of fault. Pseudocode description of the MMU faults on page D4-2200 provides a number of wrappers to
                  generate FaultRecords.

                  The function AArch64.NoFault() returns a null record that indicates no fault. The IsFault() function tests whether a
                  FaultRecord contains a fault.

D3.7.8      Memory barriers
                  The definition for the memory barrier functions is given by the enumerations MBReqDomain and MBReqTypes.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D3-2079
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D3 The AArch64 System Level Memory Model
D3.7 Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions

                     These enumerations define the required shareability domains and required access types used as arguments for DMB
                     and DSB instructions.

                     The procedures DataMemoryBarrier, DataSynchronizationBarrier, and InstructionSynchronizationBarrier perform
                     the memory barriers.

D3-2080                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
