Chapter D5
The Performance Monitors Extension

                  This chapter describes the ARMv8 implementation of the ARM Performance Monitors, that are an optional
                  non-invasive debug component. It describes version 3 of the Performance Monitor Unit (PMU) architecture,
                  PMUv3. It contains the following sections:
                  •     About the Performance Monitors on page D5-2226.
                  •     Accuracy of the Performance Monitors on page D5-2228.
                  •     Behavior on overflow on page D5-2230.
                  •     Attributability on page D5-2232.
                  •     Effect of EL3 and EL2 on page D5-2233.
                  •     Event filtering on page D5-2235
                  •     Performance Monitors and Debug state on page D5-2237.
                  •     Counter enables on page D5-2238.
                  •     Counter access on page D5-2239.
                  •     PMU events and event numbers on page D5-2240.
                  •     Performance Monitors Extension registers on page D5-2268.

                          Note
                  Table K13-1 on page K13-6592 disambiguates the general register references used in this chapter.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  D5-2225
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.1 About the Performance Monitors

D5.1         About the Performance Monitors
                    In ARMv8-A, the Performance Monitors Extension is an OPTIONAL feature of an implementation, but ARM
                    strongly recommends that ARMv8-A implementations include version 3 of the Performance Monitors Extension,
                    PMUv3.

                             Note
                    No previous versions of the Performance Monitors Extension can be implemented in ARMv8.

                    The basic form of the Performance Monitors is:

                    •     A 64-bit cycle counter, see Time as measured by the Performance Monitors cycle counter on page D5-2227.

                    •     A number of 32-bit event counters. The event counted by each counter is programmable. ARMv8 provides
                          space for up to 31 counters. The actual number of counters is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and the
                          specification includes an identification mechanism.

                                    Note
                          ARM recommends that at least two counters are implemented, and that hypervisors provide at least this many
                          counters to guest operating systems.

                    •     When EL2 is implemented, the required controls to partition the implemented counters into the following
                          sets:
                          —      A set which is available for use by the guest operating system.
                          —      A set which is available for use by the hypervisor.

                                    Note
                          ARMv8.3-NV does not introduce any changes to the Performance Monitors, see Nested virtualization on
                          page D4-2188.

                    •     Controls for:
                          —     Enabling and resetting counters.
                          —     Flagging overflows.
                          —     Enabling interrupts on overflow.
                          Monitoring software can enable the cycle counter independently of the event counters.

                    The PMU architecture uses event numbers to identify an event. It:
                    •    Defines event numbers for common events, for use across many architectures and microarchitectures.
                                    Note
                          Implementations that include PMUv3 must, as a minimum requirement, implement a subset of the common
                          events. See Common event numbers on page D5-2245.

                    •     Reserves a large event number space for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events.

                    The full set of events for an implementation is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. ARM recommends that implementations
                    include all of the events that are appropriate to the architecture profile and microarchitecture of the implementation.

                    When an implementation includes the Performance Monitors Extension, ARMv8 defines the following possible
                    interfaces to the Performance Monitors Extension registers:

                    •     A System register interface. This interface is mandatory.

                                    Note
                          In AArch32 state, the interface is in the (coproc == 0b1111) encoding space.

D5-2226                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                               D5.1 About the Performance Monitors

                  •     An external debug interface which optionally supports memory-mapped accesses. Implementation of this
                        interface is OPTIONAL. See Chapter I3 Recommended External Interface to the Performance Monitors.

                  An operating system can use the System registers to access the counters.

                  Also, if required, the operating system can enable application software to access the counters. This enables an
                  application to monitor its own performance with fine-grain control without requiring operating system support. For
                  example, an application might implement per-function performance monitoring.

                  To enable interaction with external monitoring, an implementation might consider additional enhancements, such
                  as providing:

                  •     A set of events, from which a selection can be exported onto a bus for use as external events.

                  •     The ability to count external events. This enhancement requires the implementation to include a set of
                        external event input signals.

                  The Performance Monitors Extension is common to AArch64 operation and AArch32 operation. This means the
                  ARMv8 architecture defines both AArch64 and AArch32 System registers to access the Performance Monitors. For
                  example, the Performance Monitors Cycle Count Register is accessible as:
                  •     When executing in AArch64 state, PMCCNTR_EL0.
                  •     When executing in AArch32 state, PMCCNTR.

D5.1.1      Time as measured by the Performance Monitors cycle counter
                  The Performance Monitors cycle counter, accessed through PMCCNTR_EL0 or PMCCNTR, increments from the
                  hardware processor clock, not PE clock cycles.

                  The relationship between the count recorded by the Performance Monitors cycle counter and the passage of real
                  time is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                          Note
                  •     This means that, in an implementation where PEs are multithreaded, the counter continues to increment
                        across all PEs, rather than only counting cycles for which the current PE is active.

                  •     Although the architecture requires that direct reads of PMCCNTR_EL0 or PMCCNTR occur in program
                        order, there is no requirement that the count increments between two such reads. Even when the counter is
                        incrementing on every clock cycle, software might need check that the difference between two reads of the
                        counter is nonzero.
                        The architecture requires that an indirect write to the PMCCNTR_EL0 or PMCCNTR is observable to direct
                        reads of the register in finite time. The counter increments from the hardware processor clock are indirect
                        writes to these registers.

D5.1.2      Interaction with trace
                  It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the implementation exports counter events to a Trace macrocell, or other
                  external monitoring agent, to provide triggering information. The form of any exporting is also IMPLEMENTATION
                  DEFINED. If implemented, this exporting might be enabled as part of the performance monitoring control
                  functionality.

                  ARM recommends system designers include a mechanism for importing a set of external events to be counted, but
                  such a feature is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. When implemented, this feature enables the Trace macrocell to pass
                  in events to be counted.

D5.1.3      Interaction with power saving operations
                  All counters are subject to any changes in clock frequency, including clock stopping caused by the WFI and WFE
                  instructions.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      D5-2227
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.2 Accuracy of the Performance Monitors

D5.2         Accuracy of the Performance Monitors
                     The Performance Monitors:
                     •     Are a non-invasive debug component. See Non-invasive behavior.
                     •     Must provide broadly accurate and statistically useful count information.

                     However, the Performance Monitors allow for:

                     •     A reasonable degree of inaccuracy in the counts to keep the implementation and validation cost low. See A
                           reasonable degree of inaccuracy on page D5-2229.

                     •     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED controls, such as those in ACTLR registers, to put the PE in an operating state
                           that might do one or both of the following:
                           —      Change the level of non-invasiveness of the Performance Monitors so that enabling an event counter
                                  can impact the performance or behavior of the PE.
                           —      Allow inaccurate counts. This includes, but is not limited to, cycle counts.

D5.2.1        Non-invasive behavior
                     The Performance Monitors are a non-invasive debug feature. A non-invasive debug feature permits the observation
                     of data and program flow. Performance Monitors, PC Sample-based Profiling and Trace are non-invasive debug
                     features.

                     Non-invasive debug components do not guarantee that they do not make any changes to the behavior or
                     performance of the processor. Any changes that do occur must not be severe however, as this will reduce the
                     usefulness of event counters for performance measurement and profiling. This does not include any change to
                     program behavior that results from the same program being instrumented to use the Performance Monitors, or from
                     some other performance monitoring process being run concurrently with the process being profiled in a multitasking
                     operating system. As such, a reasonable variation in performance is permissible.

                             Note
                     Power consumption is one measure of performance. Therefore, a reasonable variation in power consumption is
                     permissible.

                     ARM does not define a reasonable variation in performance, but recommends that such a variation is kept
                     within 5% of normal operating performance, when averaged across a suite of code that is representative of the
                     application workload.

                             Note
                     For profiles other than A-profile, there is the potential for stronger requirements. Ultimately, performance
                     requirements are determined by end-users, and not set by the architecture.

                     For some common architectural events, this requirement to be non-invasive can conflict with the requirement to
                     present an accurate value of the count under normal operating conditions. Should an implementation require more
                     performance-invasive techniques to accurately count an event, there are the following options:

                     •     If the event is optional, define an alternative IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event that accurately counts the
                           event and document the impact on performance of enabling the event.

                     •     Provide an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED control that disables accurate counting of the event to restore broadly
                           accurate performance, and document the impact on performance of accurate counting.

D5-2228                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                           D5.2 Accuracy of the Performance Monitors

D5.2.2      A reasonable degree of inaccuracy
                  The Performance Monitors provide broadly accurate and statistically useful count information. To keep the
                  implementation and validation cost low, a reasonable degree of inaccuracy in the counts is acceptable. ARM does
                  not define a reasonable degree of inaccuracy but recommends the following guidelines:

                  •     Under normal operating conditions, the counters must present an accurate value of the count.

                  •     In exceptional circumstances, such as a change in Security state or other boundary condition, it is acceptable
                        for the count to be inaccurate.

                  •     Under very unusual, non-repeating pathological cases, the counts can be inaccurate. These cases are likely to
                        occur as a result of asynchronous exceptions, such as interrupts, where the chance of a systematic error in the
                        count is very unlikely.

                          Note
                  An implementation must not introduce inaccuracies that can be triggered systematically by the execution of normal
                  pieces of software. For example, it is not reasonable for the count of branch behavior to be inaccurate when caused
                  by a systematic error generated by the loop structure producing a dropping in branch count.

                  However, dropping a single branch count as the result of a rare interaction with an interrupt is acceptable.

                  The permitted inaccuracy limits the possible uses of the Performance Monitors. In particular, the architecture does
                  not define the point in a pipeline where the event counter is incremented, relative to the point where a read of the
                  event counters is made. This means that pipelining effects can cause some imprecision.

                  A change of Security state can also affect the accuracy of the Performance Monitors, see Interaction with EL3 on
                  page D5-2233.

                  In addition to this, entry to and exit from Debug state can disturb the normal running of the PE, causing further
                  inaccuracy in the Performance Monitors. Disabling the counters while in Debug state limits the extent of this
                  inaccuracy. An implementation can employ methods to limit this inaccuracy, for example by promptly disabling the
                  counters during the Debug state entry sequence.

                  An implementation must document any particular scenarios where significant inaccuracies are expected.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D5-2229
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.3 Behavior on overflow

D5.3         Behavior on overflow
                    All events are counted in 32-bit wrapping counters, that overflow when they wrap. The cycle counter, PMCCNTR,
                    is a 64-bit wrapping counter, that is configured by PMCR.LC to either:
                    •      Signal an overflow when bit PMCCNTR[63] overflows.
                    •      Signal an overflow when bit PMCCNTR[31] overflows into bit PMCCNTR[32].

                    On a Performance Monitors counter overflow:

                    •     An overflow status bit is set to 1. See PMOVSCLR.

                    •     An interrupt request is generated if the PE is configured to generate counter overflow interrupts. For more
                          information, see Generating overflow interrupt requests.

                    •     The counter continues counting events.

D5.3.1        Generating overflow interrupt requests
                    Software can program the Performance Monitors so that an overflow interrupt request is generated when a counter
                    overflows. See PMINTENSET and PMINTENCLR.

                            Note
                    •     The mechanism by which an interrupt request from the Performance Monitors generates an FIQ or IRQ
                          exception is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    •     ARM recommends that the overflow interrupt requests:
                          —      Translate into a PMUIRQ signal, so that they are observable to external devices.
                          —      Connect to inputs on an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED generic interrupt controller as a Private Peripheral
                                 Interrupt (PPI) for the originating processor. See the ARM Generic Interrupt Controller Architecture
                                 Specification for information about PPIs.
                          —      Connect to a Cross Trigger Interface (CTI), see Chapter H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface.

                    •     ARM strongly discourages implementations from connecting overflow interrupt requests from multiple PEs
                          to the same System Peripheral Interrupt (SPI) identifier.

                    •     From GICv3, the ARM® Generic Interrupt Controller Architecture Specification recommends that the Private
                          Peripheral Interrupt (PPI) with ID 23 is used for overflow interrupt requests.

                    Counter overflow when counting one or more events generates an unsigned carry out. Software can write to the
                    counters to control the frequency at which interrupt requests occur. For counters other than the cycle counter, the
                    counter is always a 32-bit unsigned wrapping value. For example, software might set a counter to 0xFFFF0000, to
                    generate another counter overflow after 65536 increments, and reset it to this value every time an overflow interrupt
                    occurs.

                            Note
                    If an event can occur multiple times in a single clock cycle, then counter overflow can occur without the counter
                    registering a value of zero.

                    The overflow interrupt request is a level-sensitive request. The PE signals a request for:

                    •     Any given PMNx counter, when the value of PMOVSSET[x] is 1, the value of PMINTENSET[x] is 1, and
                          one of the following is true:
                          —      EL2 is not implemented and the value of PMCR.E is 1.
                          —      EL2 is implemented, x is less than the value of HDCR.HPMN, and the value of PMCR.E is 1.
                          —      EL2 is implemented, x is greater than or equal to the value of HDCR.HPMN, and the value of
                                 HDCR.HPME is 1.

                    •     The cycle counter, when the values of PMOVSSET[31], PMINTENSET[31], and PMCR.E are all 1.

D5-2230                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                           D5.3 Behavior on overflow

                  The overflow interrupt request is active in both Secure and Non-secure states. In particular, if EL3 and EL2 are both
                  implemented, overflow events from PMNx where x is greater than or equal to the value of HDCR.HPMN can be
                  signaled from all modes and states but only if the value of HDCR.HPME is 1.

                  The interrupt handler for the counter overflow request must cancel the interrupt request, by writing to
                  PMOVSCLR[x] to clear the overflow bit to 0.

                  Pseudocode description of overflow interrupt requests
                  See Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode for a pseudocode description of overflow interrupt requests. The
                  AArch64.CheckForPMUOverflow() and AArch32.CheckForPMUOverflow() pseudocode functions signal PMU overflow
                  interrupt requests to an interrupt controller and PMU overflow trigger events to the cross-trigger interface.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        D5-2231
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.4 Attributability

D5.4         Attributability
                      An event caused by the PE counting the event is Attributable. If an agent other than the PE that is counting the events
                      causes an event, these events are Unattributable.

                      An event is defined as being either Attributable or Unattributable. If the event is Attributable, it is further defined
                      whether it is Attributable to:
                      •     The current Security state of the PE.
                      •     The current Exception level of the PE.
                      •     When the PE is in Debug state, operations issued to the PE by the debugger through the external debug
                            interface.

                      In a multithreaded implementation, an event might be Attributable either to the current Exception level alone, or to
                      both the Exception level and the Security state of another PE with the same values for affinity level 1 and higher.

                               Note
                      An implementation is described as multithreaded when the lowest level of affinity consists of logical PEs that are
                      implemented using a multithreading type approach. In this section, when referring to a multithreaded
                      implementation, thread is used to mean processing elements with different affinity level 0 values and the same
                      values for affinity level 1 and higher.

                      An event can be defined as the combination of multiple subevents, which can be either Attributable or
                      Unattributable.

                      All architecturally defined events are Attributable, unless otherwise stated.

                      Unattributable events might be counted when Attributable events are not counted. See:
                      •     Interaction with EL3 on page D5-2233.
                      •     Event filtering on page D5-2235.
                      •     Performance Monitors and Debug state on page D5-2237.

                      These sections are summarized by Table D5-1 for events Attributable to the processor, and Unattributable events.

                                                                                                             Table D5-1 Counting events

                                                                   Event type
 Counter and                     Allowed or
                  State                           Filtered
 PMU enabled                     prohibited
                                                                   If Attributable to:      Then                Else

 Yes              Non-           Allowed          Not filtered     X                        Count               Count
                  debug
                                                  Filtered         Current Exception        Do not count        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                                                   level

                                 Prohibited       X                Current Security         Do not count        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                                                   state

                  Debug          X                X                Debugger                 Do not count        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                                                   operations or raw
                                                                   cycles

 No               X              X                X                X                        Do not count        Do not count

D5-2232                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                          D5.5 Effect of EL3 and EL2

D5.5       Effect of EL3 and EL2
                  This section describes the effects of implementing EL3 and EL2 on the Performance Monitors. It contains the
                  following subsections:
                  •      Interaction with EL3.
                  •      Interaction with EL2 on page D5-2234.

D5.5.1      Interaction with EL3
                  While counting events is never prohibited in Non-secure state, there are some restrictions on counting events in
                  Secure state. From reset, counting events Attributable to Secure state is prohibited in Secure state. When executing
                  in AArch32 state, software can set SDCR.SPME to 1 to permit event counting in Secure state. In AArch64 state,
                  software can set MDCR_EL3.SPME to 1 to permit event counting in Secure state.

                          Note
                  This enables a Secure Monitor to permit profiling within Secure state without having to configure an
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED debug authentication interface.

                  The system can use the external authentication interface to override SPME.

                  If EL3 is not implemented, the behavior is as if the value of SDCR.SPME or MDCR_EL3.SPME is 1, as
                  appropriate.

                  Counting Attributable events in Secure state is prohibited unless any one of the following is true:

                  •     EL3 is not implemented.

                  •     EL3 is implemented, is using AArch64, and the value of MDCR_EL3.SPME is 1.

                  •     EL3 is implemented, is using AArch32, and the value of SDCR.SPME is 1.

                  •     EL3 is implemented, EL3 or EL1 is using AArch32, executing at EL0, and the value of
                        SDER32_EL3.SUNIDEN is 1.

                  •     In ARMv8.0 and ARMv8.1 implementations, EL3 is implemented, and counting is permitted by an
                        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface, ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() == TRUE.

                                 Note
                        Software can read the Authentication Status register, DBGAUTHSTATUS, to determine the state of an
                        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface.

                  Software executing at EL3 can trap attempts by lower Exception levels to access the PMU. This means that the
                  Secure monitor can identify any software which is using the PMU and switch contexts, if required.

                  The cycle counter, PMCCNTR, counts even when event counting is prohibited, unless PMCR.DP is set to 1 or the
                  PE is in Debug state.

                  The Performance Monitors registers are always accessible regardless of the values of the authentication signals and
                  the SDER.SUNIDEN bit. Authentication controls whether the counters count events, it does not control access to
                  the Performance Monitors registers.

                  For each Unattributable event, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether it is counted when counting Attributable
                  events is prohibited.

                          Note
                  •     Additional controls in PMCR, HDCR, PMCNTENSET, and PMCNTENCLR can also disable the event
                        counters and the cycle counter.

                  •     Controls in PMEVTYPER<n> and PMCCFILTR can also disable counting based on Exception level and
                        Security state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       D5-2233
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.5 Effect of EL3 and EL2

                    See AArch64.CountEvents() and AArch32.CountEvents() in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode for more information.
                    The CountEvents() functions return TRUE if PMNx counts events or the cycle counter counts cycles at the current
                    Exception level and state. However, these functions do not completely describe the behavior for Unattributable
                    events.

                    In AArch32 state, the Performance Monitors registers are Common registers, see Classification of System registers
                    on page G4-4972.

                    The Performance Monitors are intended to be broadly accurate and statistically useful, see Accuracy of the
                    Performance Monitors on page D5-2228. Some inaccuracy is permitted at the point of changing Security state,
                    however. To avoid the leaking of information from the Secure state, the permitted inaccuracy is that transactions
                    that are not prohibited can be uncounted. Where possible, prohibited transactions must not be counted, but if they
                    are counted, then that counting must not degrade security.

                    Multithreaded implementations
                    If an implementation is multithreaded and the value of PMEVTYPER<n>.MT ==1, then the PE does not count an
                    event that is Attributable to Secure state on another thread if counting events Attributable to Secure state is
                    prohibited in Secure state on the PE that is counting the events.

                                                               Example D5-1 The effect of having PMEVTYPER<n>.MT == 1

                    If the value of MDCR_EL3.SPME is 0 on one thread, then it does not count events Attributable to Secure state on
                    another thread, even if one or both of the following applies:
                    •       This thread is in Non-secure state.
                    •       MDCR_EL3.SPME==1 on the other thread.

                    Otherwise:

                    •     When the current configuration prohibits counting of events Attributable to Secure state in Secure state, it is
                          IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:

                          —      Counting events Attributable to Secure state on this PE in Non-secure state is permitted.
                          —      Counting Unattributable events related to other secure operations in the system is permitted.

                    •     Otherwise, counting events in Non-secure state is permitted.

D5.5.2        Interaction with EL2
                    In an implementation that includes EL2, Non-secure software executing at EL2 can:

                    •     Trap any attempt by the Guest OS to access the PMU. This means the hypervisor can identify which Guest
                          OSs are using the PMU and intelligently employ switching of the PMU state.

                    •     Trap accesses to the PMCR, so that it can fully virtualize the PMU identity registers, PMCR.IMP and
                          PMCR.IDCODE.

                    •     Reserve the highest-numbered counters for its own use by overriding the value of PMCR.N seen by the Guest
                          OS. The PE does not permit a Guest OS to access the reserved counters.

                    HDCR controls Performance Monitors virtualization.
                    •   Counter enables on page D5-2238.
                    •   Counter access on page D5-2239.

D5-2234                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                   D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                                      D5.6 Event filtering

D5.6       Event filtering
                  The PMU can filter events by various combinations of Exception level and Security state. This gives software the
                  flexibility to count events across multiple processes.

D5.6.1      Filtering by Exception level and PE state
                  In AArch64 state:

                  •     For each event counter PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0 specifies the Exception levels in which the counter counts
                        events Attributable to Exception levels.

                  •     PMCCFILTR_EL0 specifies the Exception levels in which the cycle counter counts.

                  In an implementation that supports multithreading:

                  •     When the value of PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT is 1, if an event is Attributable to another thread, then the
                        specified filtering applies to the current Exception level and PE state of the thread to which the event is
                        attributable, regardless of the Exception level and state of the counting thread.

                  •     When the value of PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT is 0. the event only counts events that are attributable to the
                        counting thread, and the filtering applies to the Exception level and PE state of the counting state, see
                        Example D5-2.

                                            Example D5-2 Example of the effect of the PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT control

                  If the value of PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.U is 0 on the current thread, then it does not count events Attributable to
                  EL0 on the other thread, even if this thread is not executing at EL0.

                  Otherwise, for each Unattributable event, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the filtering applies.
                  In AArch32 state, the filtering controls are provided by the PMEVTYPER<n> and PMCCFILTR registers.

                  For more information, see the individual register descriptions.

                  Reserved combinations of the filtering controls
                  The filtering controls are provided by the {P, U, NSK, NSU, NSH, M} fields of the controlling register,
                  PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0, PMCCFILTR_EL0, PMEVTYPER<n>, or PMCCFILTR.
                  Some combinations of these fields select filtering options that do not represent a meaningful use case, and therefore
                  these cases are reserved. Table D5-2 shows these reserved filtering encodings.

                                                                                               Table D5-2 Reserved filter encodings

                                   P    U     NSK       NSU       NSH        M     Exception level and state the filter applies to

                                   0    1     1         1         x          x     Secure EL1 and Non-secure EL0 a

                                   1    0     0         0         Not 0b00         EL0 and at least one of EL2 and EL3

                                   1    0     0         1         Not 0b00         Secure EL0 and at least one of EL2 and EL3

                                   1    0     1         1         x          x     Non-secure EL1 and Secure EL0 a

                                   1    1     0         0         0          0     None

                                   1    1     0         1         Not 0b00         Non-secure EL0 and at least one of EL2 and EL3

                                       a. Software must not program the counter to count at EL0 in one state and at EL1 in the other state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 D5-2235
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.6 Event filtering

                    The reserved filtering encodings shown in Table D5-2 on page D5-2235 are not UNPREDICTABLE and are not
                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. Implementations must implement the filtering controls as described in the
                    appropriate register descriptions.

D5.6.2        Accuracy of event filtering
                    The PMU architecture does not require event filtering to be accurate.

                    For most events, it is acceptable that, during a transition between states, events generated by instructions executed
                    in one state are counted in the other state. The following sections describe the cases where event counts must not be
                    counted in the wrong state:
                    •      Exception-related events.
                    •      Software increment events.

                    Exception-related events
                    The PMU must filter events related to exceptions and exception handling according to the Exception level in which
                    the event occurred. These events are:

                    •     EXC_TAKEN, Exception taken.

                    •     EXC_RETURN, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, exception return.

                    •     CID_WRITE_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, write to
                          CONTEXTIDR.

                    •     TTBR_WRITE_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, write to
                          translation table base.

                    The PMU must not count an exception after it has been taken because this could systematically report a result of
                    zero exceptions at EL0. Similarly, it is not acceptable for the PMU to count exception returns or writes to
                    CONTEXTIDR after the return from the exception.

                    Software increment events
                    The PMU must filter software increment events according to the Exception level in which the software increment
                    occurred. Software increment counting must also be precise, meaning the PMU must count every architecturally
                    executed software increment event, and must not count any Speculatively executed software increment.

                    Software increment events must also be counted without the need for explicit synchronization. For example, two
                    software increments executed without an intervening Context synchronization event must increment the event
                    counter twice.

                    For more information, see SW_INCR, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, software
                    increment.

                    Pseudocode description of event filtering
                    See AArch64.CountEvents() and AArch32.CountEvents() in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode for a pseudocode
                    description of event filtering. However, this function does not completely describe the behavior for Unattributable
                    events.

D5-2236                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                          D5.7 Performance Monitors and Debug state

D5.7       Performance Monitors and Debug state
                  Events that count cycles are not counted in Debug state.

                  Events Attributable to the operations issued by the debugger through the external debug interface are not counted
                  in Debug state.

                  In an implementation that supports multithreading, when the value of PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT is 1, if an event
                  is Attributable to an operation issued by the debugger through the external debug interface to another thread that is
                  in Debug state, then the event is not counted, and it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the event is counted when
                  the counting thread is in Debug state.

                  For each Unattributable event, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether it is counted when the counting PE is in
                  Debug state. If the event might be counted, then the rules in Filtering by Exception level and PE state on
                  page D5-2235 apply for the current Security state in Debug state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        D5-2237
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.8 Counter enables

D5.8         Counter enables
                    Table D5-3 shows an implementation that does not include EL2, and where the PMCR.E bit is a global counter
                    enable bit, and PMCNTENSET provides an enable bit for each counter.

                                        Table D5-3 Event counter enables when an implementation does not include EL2

                                                                   PMCR.E      PMCNTENSET[x] == 0            PMCNTENSET[x] == 1

                                                                   0           PMNx disabled                 PMNx disabled

                                                                   1           PMNx disabled                 PMNx enabled

                    If the implementation includes EL2, then in addition to the PMCR.E and PMCNTENSET enable bits:
                    •       HDCR.HPME overrides the value of PMCR.E for counters configured for access in Hyp mode.
                    •       HDCR.HPMN specifies the number of performance counters that the Guest OS can access. The minimum
                            permitted value of HDCR.HPMN is 1, meaning there must be at least one counter that the Guest OS can
                            access.

                    Table D5-4 shows the combined effect of all the counter enable controls.

                                                     Table D5-4 Event counter enables when an implementation includes EL2

                                                                                             PMCNTENSET[x] == 1
                            HDCR.HPME            PMCR.E       PMCNTENSET[x] == 0
                                                                                             x < HDCR.HPMN        x ≥ HDCR.HPMN

                            0                    0            PMNx disabled                  PMNx disabled        PMNx disabled

                            0                    1            PMNx disabled                  PMNx enabled         PMNx disabled

                            1                    0            PMNx disabled                  PMNx disabled        PMNx enabled

                            1                    1            PMNx disabled                  PMNx enabled         PMNx enabled

                            Note
                    The effect of HDCR.{HPME, HPMN} on the counter enables applies in both Security states. However, in Secure
                    state the value returned for PMCR.N is not affected by HDCR.HPMN.

                    EL2 does not affect the enabling of PMCCNTR. Table D5-5 shows the PMCCNTR enables, for all
                    implementations.

                                                                                                  Table D5-5 Cycle counter enables

                                                               PMCR.E        PMCNTENSET[31] == 0            PMCNTENSET[31] == 1

                                                               0             PMCCNTR disabled               PMCCNTR disabled

                                                               1             PMCCNTR disabled               PMCCNTR enabled

D5-2238                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                              D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                               D5.9 Counter access

D5.9       Counter access
                  All implemented counters are accessible in EL3, Secure EL1 and EL2. If EL2 is implemented the hypervisor uses
                  HDCR.HPMN to reserve an event counter, with the effect that software cannot access that counter and its associated
                  state from Non-secure EL1 or from Non-secure EL0.

                          Note
                  This section describes a counter as being accessible from a particular Exception level and state. However, access to
                  the registers is subject to the access permissions described in Access permissions on page D5-2268. In particular,
                  accesses from EL0 might be UNDEFINED and accesses might be trapped to EL1 or EL2.

D5.9.1      PMNx event counters
                  For an implementation that includes EL2 and EL3, Table D5-6 shows how the values of the HDCR.HPMN field
                  control the behavior of accesses to the PMNx event counter registers.

                                                                         Table D5-6 Result of PMNx event counter accesses

                                                        Secure state                            Non-secure state
                                 Condition
                                                        EL3           EL1          EL0          EL2         EL1           EL0

                                 x < HDCR.HPMN          Succeeds      Succeeds     Succeeds     Succeeds    Succeeds      Succeeds

                                 x ≥ HDCR.HPMN          Succeeds      Succeeds     Succeeds     Succeeds    No access     No access

                  Where Table D5-6 shows no access:

                  •     If PMSELR.SEL is x then:
                        —     A direct read of PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.
                        —     A direct write to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.

                  •     A direct read of PMEVTYPER<n> or PMEVCNTR<n> is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.

                  •     A direct write of PMEVTYPER<n> or PMEVCNTR<n> is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.

                  •     For direct reads and direct writes, PMOVSCLR[x], PMOVSSET[x], PMCNTENSET[x],
                        PMCNTENCLR[x], PMINTENSET[x], and PMINTENCLR[x] are RAZ/WI.

                  •     Direct writes to PMSWINC[x] are ignored.

                  •     A direct write of 1 to PMCR.P does not reset PMNx.

                  For more information on the CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior of the Performance Monitor Extension, see:
                  •     For AArch32, The Performance Monitors Extension on page K1-6397.
                  •     For AArch64, The Performance Monitors Extension on page K1-6415.

                          Note
                  In Secure state, and in the Non-secure EL2 mode, the value of HDCR.HPMN does not affect the value returned for
                  PMCR.N.

D5.9.2      Cycle counter
                  The PMU does not provide any control that a hypervisor can use to reserve the cycle counter for its own use. The
                  only control over the cycle counter is an access permission control for EL0. See Access permissions on
                  page D5-2268.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       D5-2239
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

D5.10        PMU events and event numbers
                    The following sections describe the events that can be counted and their associated event numbers, and the
                    mnemonics for the events:
                    •     Definitions.
                    •     The PMU event number space and common events on page D5-2244.
                    •     Common event numbers on page D5-2245.
                    •     Statistical Profiling Extension microarchitectural events on page D5-2263.
                    •     Cycle event counting on multithreaded implementations on page D5-2264.
                    •     Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.
                    •     Required events on page D5-2266.
                    •     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event numbers on page D5-2266.

D5.10.1       Definitions
                    The following subsections give more information about terms used in the event definitions:
                    •     Definition of terms.
                    •     Levels of caches and TLBs on page D5-2243.
                    •     Shared caches and buses on page D5-2243.

                    Definition of terms
                    Speculatively executed
                                   Many events relate to speculatively executed operations. Here, speculatively executed means the PE
                                   did some work associated with one or more instructions but the instructions were not necessarily
                                   architecturally executed.
                                   An instruction might create one or more microarchitectural operations (micro-ops) at any point in
                                   the execution pipeline. For the purpose of event counting, the micro-ops are counted. The definition
                                   of a micro-op is implementation specific. An architecture instruction might create more than one
                                   micro-op for each instruction. micro-ops might also be removed or merged in the execution stream,
                                   so an architecture instruction might create no micro-ops for an instruction. Any arbitrary translation
                                   of instructions to an equivalent sequence of micro-ops is permitted.
                                   This means there is no architecturally guaranteed relationship between a speculatively executed
                                   micro-op and an architecturally executed instruction. The results of such an operation can also be
                                   discarded, if it transpires that the operation was not required, such as a mispredicted branch.
                                   Therefore, ARMv8-A defines these events as operation speculatively executed, where appropriate.

                                             Note
                                   The definition of speculatively executed does not mean only those operations that are executed
                                   speculatively and later abandoned, for example due to a branch misprediction or fault. That is,
                                   speculatively executed operations must count operations on both false and correct execution paths.

                                   The counting of operations can indicate the workload on the PE. However, there is no requirement
                                   for operations to represent similar amounts of work, and direct comparisons between different
                                   microarchitectures are not meaningful.
                                   For example, an implementation might split an A32 or T32 LDM instruction of six registers into six
                                   micro-ops, one for each load, and a seventh address-generation operation to determine the base
                                   address or writeback address. Also, for doubleword alignment, the six load micro-ops might
                                   combine into four operations, that is, a word load, two doubleword loads, and a second word load.
                                   This single instruction can then be counted as five, or possibly six, events:
                                   •      Four (Operation speculatively executed - Load) events.
                                   •      One (Operation speculatively executed - Integer data processing) event.
                                   •      One (Operation speculatively executed - Software change of the PC) event if the PC was one
                                          of the six registers in the LDM instruction.

D5-2240                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                             D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                Different groups of events can have different IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED definitions of
                                speculatively executed. Such groups share a common base type, which the event name denotes.
                                Each of the events in the previous example is of the base type, operation speculatively executed.
                                For groups of events with a common base type, speculatively executed operations are all counted
                                on the same basis, which normally means at the same point in the pipeline. It is possible to compare
                                the counts and make meaningful observations about the program being profiled.
                                Within these groups, events are commonly defined with reference to a particular architecture
                                instruction or group of instructions. In the case of speculatively executed operations this means
                                operations with semantics that map to that type of instruction.

                  Instruction memory access
                                A PE acquires instructions for execution through instruction fetches. Instruction fetches might be
                                due to:
                                •      Fetching instructions that are architecturally executed.
                                •      The result of the execution of an instruction preload instruction, PLI.
                                •      Speculation that a particular instruction might be executed in the future.
                                The relationship between the fetch of an individual instruction and an instruction memory access is
                                IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. For example, an implementation might fetch many instructions
                                including a non-integer number of instructions in a single instruction memory access.

                  Memory-read operations
                                A PE accesses memory through memory-read operations and Memory-write operations. A
                                memory-read operation might be due to:
                                •     The result of an architecturally executed memory-reading instructions.
                                •     The result of a Speculatively executed memory-reading instructions.
                                •     A translation table walk.
                                For levels of cache hierarchy beyond the Level 1 caches, memory-read operations also include
                                accesses made as part of a refill of another cache closer to the PE. Such refills might be due to:
                                •      Memory-read operations or Memory-write operations that miss in the cache
                                •      The execution of a data preload instruction.
                                •      The execution of an instruction preload instruction on a unified cache.
                                •      The execution of a cache maintenance instruction.
                                                Note
                                       A preload instruction or cache maintenance instruction is not, in itself, an access to that
                                       cache. However, it might generate cache refills which are then treated as memory-read
                                       operations beyond that cache.

                                •      Speculation that a future instruction might access the memory location.
                                This list is not exhaustive.
                                The relationship between memory-read instructions and memory-read operations is
                                IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. For example, for some implementations an LDP instruction that reads
                                two 64-bit registers might generate one memory-read operation if the address is quadword-aligned,
                                but for other addresses it generates two or more memory-read operations.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2241
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                    Memory-write operations
                                   Memory-write operations might be due to:
                                   •   The result of an architecturally executed memory-writing instructions.
                                   •   The result of a Speculatively executed memory-writing instructions.

                                            Note
                                   Speculatively executed memory-writing instructions that do not become architecturally executed
                                   must not alter the architecturally defined view of memory. They can, however, generate a
                                   memory-write operation that is later undone in some implementation specific way.

                                   For levels of cache hierarchy beyond the Level 1 caches, memory-write operations also include
                                   accesses made as part of a write-back from another cache closer to the PE. Such write-backs might
                                   be due to:
                                   •      Evicting a dirty line from the cache, to allocate a cache line for a cache refill, see
                                          Memory-read operations.
                                   •      The execution of a cache maintenance instruction.
                                                   Note
                                          A cache maintenance instruction is not in itself an access to that cache. However, it might
                                          generate write-backs which are then treated as memory-write operations beyond that cache.

                                   •      The result of a coherency request from another PE.
                                   This list is not exhaustive.
                                   The relationship between memory-writing instructions and memory-write operations is
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. For example, for some implementations an STP instruction that writes
                                   two 64-bit registers might generate one memory-write operation if the address is quadword-aligned,
                                   but for other addresses it generates two or more memory-write operations. In some
                                   implementations, the result of two STR instructions that write to adjacent memory might be merged
                                   into a single memory-write operation.

                                            Note
                                   The data written back from a cache that is shared with other PEs might not be data that was written
                                   by the PE that performs the operation that leads to the write-back. Nevertheless, the event is counted
                                   as a write-back event for that PE.

                    Instruction architecturally executed
                                   Instruction architecturally executed is a class of event that counts for each instruction of the
                                   specified type. Architecturally executed means that the program flow is such that the counted
                                   instruction would be executed in a Simple sequential execution of the program. Therefore an
                                   instruction that has been executed and retired is defined to be architecturally executed. When a PE
                                   can perform speculative execution, an instruction is not architecturally executed if the PE discards
                                   the results of the speculative execution.
                                   If an instruction that would be executed in a Simple sequential execution of the program generates
                                   a synchronous exception, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the instruction is counted.
                                   Each architecturally executed instruction is counted once, even if the implementation splits the
                                   instruction into multiple operations. Instructions that have no visible effect on the architectural state
                                   of the PE are architecturally executed if they form part of the architecturally executed program flow.
                                   The point where such instructions are retired is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                                   Examples of instructions that have no visible effect are:
                                   •    A NOP.
                                   •    A conditional instruction that fails its Condition code check.
                                   •    A Compare and Branch on Zero, CBZ, instruction that does not branch.
                                   •    A Compare and Branch on Nonzero, CBNZ, instruction that does not branch.
                                   The point at which an event causes an event counter to be updated is not defined.

D5-2242                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                               D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                 Unless otherwise stated, all instructions of the specified type are counted even if they have no visible
                                 effect on the architectural state of the PE. This includes a conditional instruction that fails its
                                 Condition code check.
                                 For events that count only the execution of instructions that update context state, such as writes to
                                 the CONTEXTIDR, if such an instruction is executed twice without an intervening Context
                                 synchronization event, it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether the first instruction is counted.

                  Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass
                                 Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass is a class of events that explicitly
                                 do not occur for:
                                 •      A conditional instruction that fails its Condition code check.
                                 •      A Compare and Branch on Zero, CBZ, instruction that does not branch.
                                 •      A Compare and Branch on Nonzero, CBNZ, instruction that does not branch.
                                 •      A Test and Branch on Zero, TBZ, instruction that does not branch.
                                 •      A Test and Branch on Nonzero, TBNZ, instruction that does not branch.
                                 •      A Store-Exclusive instruction that does not write to memory.
                                 Otherwise, the definition of architecturally executed is the same as for Instruction architecturally
                                 executed.

                  Levels of caches and TLBs
                  The mapping of different levels of cache or TLB to the PMU events is determined by the implementation. Although
                  the CLIDR_EL1, or the AArch32 CLIDR, defines the implemented levels of cache, the architecture does provide
                  any way of determining implemented levels of TLB. Also, many implementations include structures that provide
                  some caching at a higher level than the level 1 caches or TLBs. Typically, these structures, that might be called
                  Level 0 caches, or mini caches, or microcaches, are invisible to software. The implementation-specific nature of
                  cache and TLB implementations mean that, in general, PMU event counts cannot be used reliably to make direct
                  comparisons between different implementations.

                  Shared caches and buses
                  There is no architectural concept of a shared component. However, when a cache, a bus, or any other system
                  component that might generate countable events is implemented, and:

                  •     The extent of the first-order effects due to an event from that component are only applicable to a single PE,
                        then the event is not shared.

                  •     Otherwise, the event is shared.

                  Second-order effects are not considered when determining if an event is shared.

                      Example D5-3 First and second order effects of a cache miss in a multiple-PE implementation

                  In an implementation that consists of two PEs, each with its own L1 cache, a cache miss by one of the PEs is a
                  first-order effect of an access to its cache. Any snoop that is performed on the L1 cache of the other PE in the
                  implementation as a result of that cache miss is a second order effect.

                          Note
                  Shared events are inherently linked to microarchitectures and so the implementer must make an informed decision
                  about how such events are implemented.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D5-2243
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

D5.10.2       The PMU event number space and common events
                    In ARMv8.0, the event number space is 10 bits. ARMv8.1 extends the event number space, and therefore the
                    PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.evtCount field to 16 bits, and is allocated as Table D5-7 shows. For more information
                    about the entries in the Allocation column see the text that follows this table:

                                                                       Table D5-7 Allocation of the PMU event number space

                                  Event numbers        Allocation

                               In all versions of ARMv8

                                  0x0000 - 0x003F      Common architectural and microarchitectural events.

                                  0x0040 - 0x00BF      ARM-recommended common architectural and microarchitectural events.

                                  0x00C0 - 0x03FF      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events.

                               From ARMv8.1

                                  0x0400 - 0x3FFF      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events.

                                  0x4000 - 0x403F      Common architectural and microarchitectural events.

                                  0x4040 - 0x40BF      ARM-recommended common architectural and microarchitectural events.

                                  0x40C0 - 0x7FFF      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events.

                                  0x8000 -0xBFFF       Reserved.

                                  0xC000 - 0xC0BF      Reserved.

                                  0xC0C0 - 0xFFFF      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events.

                    The meaning of the entries in the Allocation column of Table D5-7 is as follows:

                    Common architectural and microarchitectural events
                                   ARM defines the use of these event numbers. For more information see Common event numbers on
                                   page D5-2245.

                    ARM-recommended common architectural and microarchitectural events
                                   The use of these event numbers is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. For more information see:
                                   •      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event numbers on page D5-2266.
                                   •      Appendix K3 Recommendations for Performance Monitors Event Numbers for
                                          IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED Events.

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event numbers

                                   For more information about the use of these event numbers see IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                   event numbers on page D5-2266.

D5-2244                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.       ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                              ID121917
                                                                                                 D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                  D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

D5.10.3     Common event numbers
                   The event numbers of the common architectural and microarchitectural events are reserved for the specified events.
                   Each of these event numbers must either:
                   •     Be used for its assigned event.
                   •     Not be used.

                   However, see Required events on page D5-2266.

                   When an implementation supports monitoring of an event that is assigned a common architectural or
                   microarchitectural event number, ARM strongly recommends that it uses that number for the event. However,
                   software might encounter implementations where an event assigned a number in this range is monitored using an
                   event number from an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED range.

                           Note
                   ARM might define other common architectural and microarchitectural event numbers. This is one reason why
                   software must not assume that an event with an assigned common architectural or microarchitectural event number
                   is never monitored using an event number from the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED range.

                   Table D5-8 lists the PMU common architectural and microarchitectural event numbers in event number order. The
                   entries in the Event mnemonic column link to the event description in Common architectural events on
                   page D5-2248 or Common microarchitectural events on page D5-2252.

                                            Table D5-8 PMU common architectural and microarchitectural event numbers

 Event
           Event type             Event mnemonic                         Description
 number

 0x0000    Architectural          SW_INCR                                Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                         pass, software increment

 0x0001    Microarchitectural     L1I_CACHE_REFILL a                     Attributable Level 1 instruction cache refill

 0x0002    Microarchitectural     L1I_TLB_REFILL a                       Attributable Level 1 instruction TLB refill

 0x0003    Microarchitectural     L1D_CACHE_REFILL a                     Attributable Level 1 data cache refill

 0x0004    Microarchitectural     L1D_CACHE                              Attributable Level 1 data cache access

 0x0005    Microarchitectural     L1D_TLB_REFILL a                       Attributable Level 1 data TLB refill

 0x0006    Architectural          LD_RETIRED                             Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                         pass, load

 0x0007    Architectural          ST_RETIRED                             Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                         pass, store

 0x0008    Architectural          INST_RETIRED                           Instruction architecturally executed

 0x0009    Architectural          EXC_TAKEN                              Exception taken

 0x000A    Architectural          EXC_RETURN                             Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                         pass, exception return

 0x000B    Architectural          CID_WRITE_RETIRED                      Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                         pass, write to CONTEXTIDR

 0x000C    Architectural          PC_WRITE_RETIRED                       Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                         pass, software change of the PC

 0x000D    Architectural          BR_IMMED_RETIRED                       Instruction architecturally executed, immediate branch

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      D5-2245
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                            Table D5-8 PMU common architectural and microarchitectural event numbers (continued)

 Event
            Event type             Event mnemonic                         Description
 number

 0x000E     Architectural          BR_RETURN_RETIRED                      Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                          pass, procedure return

 0x000F     Architectural          UNALIGNED_LDST_RETIRED                 Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                          pass, unaligned load or store

 0x0010     Microarchitectural     BR_MIS_PRED                            Mispredicted or not predicted branch Speculatively executed

 0x0011     Microarchitectural     CPU_CYCLES                             Cycle

 0x0012     Microarchitectural     BR_PRED                                Predictable branch Speculatively executed

 0x0013     Microarchitectural     MEM_ACCESS                             Data memory access

 0x0014     Microarchitectural     L1I_CACHE                              Attributable Level 1 instruction cache access

 0x0015     Microarchitectural     L1D_CACHE_WB                           Attributable Level 1 data cache write-back

 0x0016     Microarchitectural     L2D_CACHE                              Attributable Level 2 data cache access

 0x0017     Microarchitectural     L2D_CACHE_REFILL a                     Attributable Level 2 data cache refill

 0x0018     Microarchitectural     L2D_CACHE_WB                           Attributable Level 2 data cache write-back

 0x0019     Microarchitectural     BUS_ACCESS                             Bus access

 0x001A     Microarchitectural     MEMORY_ERROR                           Local memory error

 0x001B     Microarchitectural     INST_SPEC                              Operation Speculatively executed

 0x001C     Architectural          TTBR_WRITE_RETIRED                     Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check
                                                                          pass, write to TTBR

 0x001D     Microarchitectural     BUS_CYCLES                             Bus cycle

 0x001E     Architectural          CHAIN                                  For odd-numbered counters, increments the count by one for
                                                                          each overflow of the preceding even-numbered counter. For
                                                                          even-numbered counters, there is no increment.

 0x001F     Microarchitectural     L1D_CACHE_ALLOCATE                     Attributable Level 1 data cache allocation without refill

 0x0020     Microarchitectural     L2D_CACHE_ALLOCATE                     Attributable Level 2 data cache allocation without refill

 0x0021     Architectural          BR_RETIRED                             Instruction architecturally executed, branch

 0x0022     Microarchitectural     BR_MIS_PRED_RETIRED                    Instruction architecturally executed, mispredicted branch

 0x0023     Microarchitectural     STALL_FRONTEND                         No operation issued due to the frontend

 0x0024     Microarchitectural     STALL_BACKEND                          No operation issued due to backend

 0x0025     Microarchitectural     L1D_TLB                                Attributable Level 1 data or unified TLB access

 0x0026     Microarchitectural     L1I_TLB                                Attributable Level 1 instruction TLB access

 0x0027     Microarchitectural     L2I_CACHE                              Attributable Level 2 instruction cache access

 0x0028     Microarchitectural     L2I_CACHE_REFILL a                     Attributable Level 2 instruction cache refill

 0x0029     Microarchitectural     L3D_CACHE_ALLOCATE                     Attributable Level 3 data or unified cache allocation without
                                                                          refill

D5-2246                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                    D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                     D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                               Table D5-8 PMU common architectural and microarchitectural event numbers (continued)

 Event
             Event type             Event mnemonic                          Description
 number

 0x002A      Microarchitectural     L3D_CACHE_REFILL a                      Attributable Level 3 data or unified cache refill

 0x002B      Microarchitectural     L3D_CACHE                               Attributable Level 3 data or unified cache access

 0x002C      Microarchitectural     L3D_CACHE_WB                            Attributable Level 3 data or unified cache write-back

 0x002D      Microarchitectural     L2D_TLB_REFILL a                        Attributable Level 2 data or unified TLB refill

 0x002E      Microarchitectural     L2I_TLB_REFILL a                        Attributable Level 2 instruction TLB refill

 0x002F      Microarchitectural     L2D_TLB                                 Attributable Level 2 data or unified TLB access

 0x0030      Microarchitectural     L2I_TLB                                 Attributable Level 2 instruction TLB access

 0x0031      Microarchitectural     REMOTE_ACCESS                           Attributable access to another socket in a multi-socket system

 0x0032      Microarchitectural     LL_CACHE                                Attributable Last Level data or unified cache access

 0x0033      Microarchitectural     LL_CACHE_MISSa                          Attributable Last level data or unified cache miss

 0x0034      Microarchitectural     DTLB_WALKa                              Attributable data or unified TLB access with at least one
                                                                            translation table walk

 0x0035      Microarchitectural     ITLB_WALKa                              Attributable instruction TLB access with at least one
                                                                            translation table walk

 0x0036      Microarchitectural     LL_CACHE_RD                             Attributable Last Level cache memory read

 0x0037      Microarchitectural     LL_CACHE_MISS_RD a                      Attributable Last Level cache memory read miss

 0x0038      Microarchitectural     REMOTE_ACCESS_RD a                      Attributable memory read access to another socket in a
                                                                            multi-socket system

    a. For more information, see Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                      The supported common architectural and microarchitectural events are identified by:
                      •     The PMCEID0_EL0 and PMCEID1_EL0 registers in AArch64 state.
                      •     The PMCEID0, PMCEID1, PMCEID2, and PMCEID3 registers in AArch32 state.

                      ARM recommends that the value of 0 is used for the PMCEID0_EL0 or PMCEID1_EL0 bit corresponding to any
                      event that an implementation never generates, even if the implementation is considered to support but never count
                      the event.

                               Note
                      •      For example, if an implementation never generates the L1D_CACHE_ALLOCATE event, event 31, ARM
                             recommends that PMCEID0_EL0[31] is RAZ.

                      •      In an implementation that supports both Execution states, each bit in the AArch64 PMCEID0_EL0 and
                             PMCEID1_EL0 registers corresponds to a single bit in the AArch32 PMCEID0, PMCEID1, PMCEID2, and
                             PMCEID3 registers, and corresponding bits must have the same behavior.

                      However, for some implementations, an event in the common events range might be generated by the system,
                      meaning behavior can vary between systems. In such a case, the corresponding PMCEIDn_EL0 bit might be RAO.

                      Event numbers that Table D5-7 on page D5-2244 shows as allocated for common architectural and
                      microarchitectural events that are not shown in Table D5-8 on page D5-2245 are reserved. Future revisions of this
                      manual, or of the architecture, might assign these reserved values to additional common events. Events that do not

ARM DDI 0487C.a                   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2247
ID121917                                                  Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                    require additional features in the PMU can be implemented retrospectively, meaning an implementation of a
                    particular version of the PMU specification might support common events that are first defined in a later version of
                    the PMU specification.

                            Note
                    •     The requirement that an event that is implemented retrospectively does not require additional features in the
                          PMU means that it must be possible to represent the event n the PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.evtCount field. This
                          means, for example, that an implementation with a 12-bit PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.evtCount field can only
                          implement events with event numbers 0x000 - 0xFFF.

                    •     This means that, for example, an ARMv7 PMUv2 implementation, for which the evtCount field is 8 bits, can
                          include support for any of the event numbers that Table D5-8 on page D5-2245 defines in the range
                          0x00 - 0xFF.

                    Common architectural events
                    This section describes the use of the defined common architectural event numbers.

                    For the common features, normally the counters must increment only once for each event. The event descriptions
                    include any exceptions to this rule.

                    In these definitions, the term architecturally executed means that the instruction flow is such that the counted
                    instruction would have been executed in a Simple sequential execution model.

                    The events corresponding to the common architectural event numbers are:

                    0x0000, SW_INCR, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, software increment
                                    The counter increments on writes to the PMSWINC register.
                                    If the PE performs two architecturally executed writes to the PMSWINC register without an
                                    intervening Context synchronization event, then the counter is incremented twice.
                                    If PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.evtCount is set to 0x000, then in AArch64 state, counts MSR writes to
                                    PMSWINC_EL0 with bit [n] set to 1.
                                    If the value of PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT is 1 then, in a multithreaded implementation, this counts
                                    writes by all PEs that have the same affinity at level 1 and above.

                    0x0006, LD_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, load
                                    The counter increments for every executed memory-reading instruction.

                                             Note
                                    This event 0x006 does not count the return status value of a Store-Exclusive instruction.

                                    Whether the preload instructions PRFM, PLD, PLDW, PLI, count as memory-reading instructions is
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. ARM recommends that if the instruction is not implemented as a NOP
                                    then it is counted as a memory-reading instruction.

                    0x0007, ST_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, store
                                    The counter increments for every executed memory-writing instruction.
                                    DC ZVA is counted as a store.
                                    The counter does not increment for a Store-Exclusive instruction that fails.

                    0x0008, INST_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed
                                    The counter increments for every architecturally executed instruction.

                    0x0009, EXC_TAKEN, Exception taken
                                    The counter increments for each exception taken. See Exception-related events on page D5-2236.

D5-2248                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                            D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                             D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                         Note
                                The counter counts the PE exceptions described in:
                                •      For exceptions taken to an Exception level using AArch64, Exception entry on
                                       page D1-1874.
                                •      For exceptions taken to an Exception level using AArch32, AArch32 state exception
                                       descriptions on page G1-4661.

                  0x000A, EXC_RETURN, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, exception return
                                The counter increments for each executed exception return instruction. See also Exception-related
                                events on page D5-2236. The following sections define the counted instructions:
                                •      For an exception return from an Exception level using AArch64, Exception return on
                                       page D1-1883.
                                •      For an exception return from an Exception level using AArch32, Exception return
                                       instructions on page G1-4645.
                                However, is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether this event counts the execution of an exception
                                return instruction if either:
                                •      Execution of the instruction is, itself, CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.
                                                Note
                                       Examples of when an exception return instruction is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE are if the
                                       instruction is executed at EL0, or in AArch32 state in System mode.

                                •      Execution of the instruction sets PSTATE.IL and does not generate an exception return.

                                         Note
                                A particular consequence of this CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior is that an implementation
                                that does not support AArch32 state at EL1 or higher does not have to treat AArch32 MOVS PC, LR
                                instructions, and related instructions, as exception return instructions.

                  0x000B, CID_WRITE_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, write to
                  CONTEXTIDR
                                The counter increments for every write to CONTEXTIDR. See Exception-related events on
                                page D5-2236.
                                If the PE performs two architecturally-executed writes to CONTEXTIDR without an intervening
                                Context synchronization event, it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether the first write is
                                counted.
                                When ARMv8.1-VHE is implemented, the counter is:
                                •      Incremented as a result of the retirement of an instruction accessing the named register
                                       CONTEXTIDR_EL1, even when executing at EL2.
                                •      Not incremented as a result of the retirement of an instruction accessing the named
                                       CONTEXTIDR_EL12.

                                         Note
                                The event is defined by the name used to access the register. The counter does not count writes to
                                the named register CONTEXTIDR_EL2.

                  0x000C, PC_WRITE_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, software
                  change of the PC
                                The counter increments for every software change of the PC. This includes all:
                                •     Branch instructions.
                                •     Memory-reading instructions that explicitly write to the PC.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2249
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                   •      Data-processing instructions that explicitly write to the PC.
                                   •      Exception return instructions, ERET and RET.
                                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the counter increments for any or all of:
                                   •       BRK and BKPT instructions.
                                   •       An exception generated because an instruction is UNDEFINED.
                                   •       The exception-generating instructions, SVC, HVC, and SMC.
                                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether an ISB is counted as a software change of the PC.
                                   The counter does not increment for exceptions other than those explicitly identified in these lists.

                                            Note
                                   Conditional branches are only counted if the branch is taken.

                    0x000D, BR_IMMED_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, immediate branch
                                   The counter counts all immediate branch instructions that are architecturally executed.
                                   In AArch32 state, the counter increments each time the PE executes one of the following
                                   instructions:
                                   •      B{<c>} <label>.
                                   •      BL{<c>} <label>.
                                   •      BLX{<c>} <label>.
                                   •      CBZ <Rn>, <label>.
                                   •      CBNZ <label>.
                                   In AArch64 state, the counter increments each time the PE executes an immediate branch
                                   instructions:
                                   •      B <label>.
                                   •      B.cond <label>.
                                   •      BL <label>.
                                   •      CBZ <Rn>, <label>.
                                   •      CBNZ <Rn>, <label>.
                                   •      TBZ <Rn>, <label>.
                                   •      TBNZ <Rn>, <label>.

                                            Note
                                   Conditional branches are always counted, regardless of whether the branch is taken.

                                   If an ISB is counted as a software change of the PC instruction, then it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                   whether an ISB is counted as an immediate branch instruction.

                    0x000E, BR_RETURN_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass,
                    procedure return
                                   In AArch32 state, the counter counts the following procedure return instructions:
                                   •    BX R14.
                                   •    MOV PC, LR.
                                   •    POP {…, PC}.
                                   •    LDR PC, [SP], #offset.

                                            Note
                                   The counter counts only the listed instructions as procedure returns. For example, it does not count
                                   the following as procedure return instructions:
                                   •      BX R0, because Rm != R14.
                                   •      MOV PC, R0, because Rm != R14.
                                   •      LDM SP, {…, PC}, because writeback is not specified.

D5-2250                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                              D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                 •      LDR PC, [SP, #offset], because this specifies the wrong addressing mode.

                                 In AArch64 state, the counter counts all architecturally executed RET instructions.

                  0x000F, UNALIGNED_LDST_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass,
                  unaligned load or store
                                 The counter counts each memory-reading instruction or memory-writing instruction access that
                                 would generate an Alignment fault when Alignment fault checking is enabled.
                                 This event does not count accesses that would generate an SP alignment fault exception if the
                                 applicable stack pointer alignment check is enabled, unless that access would also generate an
                                 Alignment fault Data Abort exception if Alignment fault checking is enabled.
                                 It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this event counts accesses that generate an exception,
                                 including accesses that do generate Alignment fault Data Abort exceptions.
                                 See SP alignment checking on page D1-1868 for more information.
                                 See Unaligned data access on page E2-3027 for more information.

                  0x001C, TTBR_WRITE_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, write to
                  TTBR
                                 The counter counts writes to TTBR0_EL1 and TTBR1_EL1 in AArch64 state and TTBR0 and
                                 TTBR1 in AArch32 state. When EL3 is implemented and using AArch32, this includes counting
                                 writes to both banked copies of TTBR0 and TTBR1. See Exception-related events on
                                 page D5-2236.
                                 If the PE executes two writes to the same TTBR, without an intervening Context synchronization
                                 event, it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether the first write to the TTBR, is counted.
                                 If EL3 is implemented and using AArch64, the counter does not count writes to TTBR0_EL3.
                                 If EL2 is implemented and using AArch64, the counter does not count writes to TTBR0_EL2 and
                                 to VTTBR_EL2.
                                 If EL2 is implemented and using AArch32, the counter does not count writes to HTTBR and to
                                 VTTBR.
                                 When ARMv8.1-VHE is implemented, the counter is:
                                 •      Incremented as a result of the retirement of an instruction accessing the named registers
                                        TTBR0_EL1 and TTBR1_EL1.
                                 •      Not incremented as a result of the retirement of an instruction accessing the named registers
                                        TTBR0_EL12 and TTBR1_EL12.

                  0x001E, CHAIN
                                 For an odd-numbered counter, increments when an overflow occurs on the preceding
                                 even-numbered counter on the same PE. Even-numbered counters never increment as a result of this
                                 event. This means the CHAIN event links the odd-numbered counter with the preceding
                                 even-numbered counter to provide a 64-bit counter.

                                          Note
                                 •      The CHAIN event means a system can provide N 32-bit counters, N/2 64-bit counters, or a
                                        mixture of 32-bit counters and 64-bit counters.
                                 •      The CHAIN event only counts overflows from the preceding even-numbered counter on the
                                        same PE. This means it is unaffected by the value of PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT.

                                 To filter the Exception levels and Security states in which the event is counted, software must:
                                 •      Program PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0 to count the event in the required conditions.
                                 •      Program PMEVTYPER<n+1>_EL0 to count the CHAIN event in all Exception levels and
                                        states.
                                 This allows, (but does not require) hardware to ignore the filter settings for the CHAIN event and
                                 behave as if they are set to count in all Exception levels and states.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       D5-2251
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                    If software does not program the event in this way, the count becomes UNPREDICTABLE.
                                    There is no atomic access to a pair of counters, so if software reads a counter-pair that is enabled, it
                                    must use a high-low-high read sequence, or employ reasonable heuristics, to avoid tearing.
                                    Similarly, if using CHAIN events, when disabling the counters software must take care that the
                                    result is not torn by the low counter overflowing at the same time as the counters are disabled
                                    Example D5-4 shows suitable sequences for disabling and enabling CHAIN counters.

                                                                             Example D5-4 Usage examples for 64-bit counters

                    An example high-low-high read sequence for a 64-bit counter is:
                        MRS W2,PMEVCNTR1_EL0      ;; read high counter, must be odd-numbered
                    retry:
                        ISB                       ;; force ordering
                        MRS W0,PMEVCNTR0_EL0      ;; read low counter
                                                  ;; must return the previous counter to PMEVCNTR1_EL0
                         ISB                      ;; force ordering
                         MRS W1,PMEVCNTR1_EL0     ;; read high counter
                         CMP W1,W2
                         BNE retry                ;; if the high counter has changed, then retry
                    When disabling a pair of counters that are paired by a CHAIN event, software must:
                    1.     Disable the low counter, by setting PMCNTENCLR_EL0[n] to 1.
                           Typically, software uses a read-modify-write sequence to update PMCNTENCLR_EL0.
                    2.     Execute an ISB instruction, or perform another Context synchronization event.
                    3.     Disable the high counter, by setting PMCNTENCLR_EL0[n+1] to 1, or setting PMCR_EL0.E to 0.
                    When enabling a pair of counters that are paired by a CHAIN event, software must:
                    1.     Enable the high counter, by setting PMCNTENCLR_EL0[n+1] to 0 and, if necessary, setting PMCR_EL0.E
                           to 1.
                    2.     Execute an ISB instruction, or perform another Context synchronization event.
                    3.     Enable the low counter by setting PMCNTENCLR_EL0[n] to 0.

                                    When using 64-bit counters, the architecture does not define the latency between the first counter
                                    overflowing and the second counter incrementing the CHAIN event. There is no requirement for
                                    updates to occur synchronously, but software reading or enabling the counter pair using a
                                    low-ISB-high sequence, as shown in Example D5-4, must not observe the low counter incrementing
                                    and overflowing for the event and the high counter not incrementing for the resulting CHAIN event.
                                    This means that the ISB executed after reading the low counter must ensure the completion of the
                                    update of the high counter by the CHAIN event.

                    0x0021, BR_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, branch. The counter counts all branches on the
                                    architecturally executed path that would incur cost if mispredicted.
                                    •      Counts all branch instructions, memory-reading and data-processing instructions that
                                           explicitly write to the PC, at retirement.
                                    •      Counts both taken and not-taken branches.
                                    •      It is implementation defined whether this includes each of:
                                           —       Unconditional direct branch instructions.
                                           —       Exception-generating instructions.
                                           —       Exception return instructions.
                                           —       Context synchronization instructions.

                    Common microarchitectural events
                    This section describes the use of the defined common microarchitectural event numbers.

D5-2252                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                 D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                  The common microarchitectural events are features that are likely to be implemented across a wide range of
                  implementations. Unlike the common architectural events, there can be some IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED variation
                  between definitions on different implementations.

                  Unless otherwise stated, the common microarchitectural features relate only to events resulting from the operation
                  of the PE counting the events. Events resulting from the operation of other PEs that might share a resource must not
                  be counted. Where a resource can be subject to events that do not result from the operation of any of the PEs that
                  share it, ARM recommends that the resource implements its own event counters. An example of a resource that
                  might require its own event counters is a shared Level 2 cache that is subject to accesses from a system coherency
                  port on that cache.

                  The event definitions relating to Level 2 caches generally assume the Level 2 cache is shared. The event definitions
                  relating to Level 1 caches generally assume the Level 1 cache is not shared.

                  The events corresponding to the common microarchitectural event numbers are:

                  0x0001, L1I_CACHE_REFILL, Attributable Level 1 instruction cache refill
                                  The counter counts Attributable instruction memory accesses that cause a refill of at least the
                                  Level 1 instruction or unified cache. This includes each Instruction memory access that causes a
                                  refill from outside the cache. It excludes accesses that do not cause a new cache refill but are
                                  satisfied from refilling data of a previous miss.
                                  A refill includes any access that causes data to be fetched from outside the cache, even if the data is
                                  ultimately not allocated into the cache. For example, data might be fetched into a buffer but then
                                  discarded, rather than being allocated into a cache. These buffers are treated as part of the cache.
                                  The counter does not count cache maintenance instructions.
                                  See also:
                                  •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                  •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                  0x0002, L1I_TLB_REFILL, Attributable Level 1 instruction TLB refill
                                  The counter counts Attributable instruction memory accesses that cause a TLB refill of at least the
                                  Level 1 instruction TLB. This includes each Instruction memory access that causes an access to a
                                  level of memory system due to a translation table walk or an access to another level of TLB caching.
                                  It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the count increments when:
                                  •       A refill results in a Translation fault.
                                  •       A refill is not allocated in the TLB.
                                  The counter does not count:
                                  •     A TLB miss that does not cause a refill but does generate a translation table walk.
                                  •     TLB maintenance instructions.
                                  See also:
                                  •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                  •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                  0x0003, L1D_CACHE_REFILL, Attributable Level 1 data cache refill
                                  The counter counts each Attributable Memory-read operation or Attributable Memory-write
                                  operation that causes a refill of at least the Level 1 data or unified cache from outside the Level 1
                                  cache. Each access to a cache line that causes a new linefill is counted, including those from
                                  instructions that generate multiple accesses, such as load or store multiples, and PUSH and POP
                                  instructions. In particular, the counter counts accesses to the Level 1 cache that cause a refill that is
                                  satisfied by another Level 1 data or unified cache, or a Level 2 cache, or memory.
                                  A refill includes any access that causes data to be fetched from outside the cache, even if the data is
                                  ultimately not allocated into the cache. For example, data might be fetched into a buffer but then
                                  discarded, rather than being allocated into a cache. These buffers are treated as part of the cache.
                                  The counter does not count:
                                  •      Accesses that do not cause a new Level 1 cache refill but are satisfied from refilling data of
                                         a previous miss.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            D5-2253
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                   •      Accesses to a cache line that generate a memory access but not a new linefill, such as
                                          write-through writes that hit in the cache.
                                   •      Cache maintenance instructions.
                                   •      A write that writes an entire line to the cache and does not fetch any data from outside the
                                          Level 1 cache, for example:
                                          —     A write of a full cache line from a coalescing buffer.
                                          —     A DC ZVA operation.
                                   •      A write that misses in the cache, and writes through the cache without allocating a line.
                                   See also:
                                   •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                   •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                    0x0004, L1D_CACHE, Attributable Level 1 data cache access
                                   The counter counts each Attributable Memory-read operation or Attributable Memory-write
                                   operation that causes a cache access to at least the Level 1 data or unified cache. Each access to a
                                   cache line is counted including the multiple accesses of instructions, such as LDM or STM. Each access
                                   to other Level 1 data or unified memory structures, for example refill buffers, write buffers, and
                                   write-back buffers, is also counted.
                                   The counter does not count cache maintenance instructions.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x0005, L1D_TLB_REFILL, Attributable Level 1 data TLB refill
                                   The counter counts each Attributable Memory-read operation or Attributable Memory-write
                                   operation that causes a TLB refill of at least the Level 1 data or unified TLB. It counts each read or
                                   write that causes a refill, in the form of a translation table walk or an access to another level of TLB
                                   caching. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the count increments when:
                                   •      A refill results in a Translation fault.
                                   •      A refill is not allocated in the TLB.
                                   The counter does not count:
                                   •     A TLB miss that does not cause a refill but does generate a translation table walk.
                                   •     TLB maintenance instructions.
                                   See also:
                                   •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                   •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                    0x0010, BR_MIS_PRED, Mispredicted or not predicted branch Speculatively executed
                                   The counter counts each correction to the predicted program flow that occurs because of a
                                   misprediction from, or no prediction from, the branch prediction resources and that relates to
                                   instructions that the branch prediction resources are capable of predicting.
                                   If no program-flow prediction resources are implemented, ARM recommends that the counter
                                   counts all branches that are not taken.

                    0x0011, CPU_CYCLES, Cycle
                                   The counter increments on every cycle.
                                   All counters are subject to changes in clock frequency, including when a WFI or WFE instruction stops
                                   the clock. This means that it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether or not CPU_CYCLES
                                   continues to increment when the clocks are stopped by WFI and WFE instructions.

                                            Note
                                   Unlike PMCCNTR, this count is not affected by PMCR.DP, PMCR.D, or PMCR.C:
                                   •     The counter is not incremented in prohibited regions, so is not affected by PMCR.DP.
                                   •     The counter increments on every cycle, regardless of the setting of PMCR.D.

D5-2254                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                             D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                •      The counter is reset when event counters are reset by PMCR.P, never by PMCR.C.

                                In a multithreaded implementation, CPU_CYCLES counts each cycle for the processor for which
                                this PE thread was active and could issue an instruction. For more information, see Cycle event
                                counting on multithreaded implementations on page D5-2264.

                  0x0012, BR_PRED, Predictable branch Speculatively executed
                                The counter counts every branch or other change in the program flow that the branch prediction
                                resources are capable of predicting.
                                If all branches are subject to prediction, for example a BTB or BTAC, then all branches are
                                predictable branches.
                                If branches are decoded before the predictor, so that the branch prediction logic dynamically
                                predicts only some branches, for example conditional and indirect branches, then it is
                                IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether other branches are counted as predictable branches. ARM
                                recommends that all branches are counted.
                                An implementation might include other structures that predict branches, such as a loop buffer that
                                predicts short backwards direct branches as taken. Each execution of such a branch is a predictable
                                branch. Terminating the loop might generate a misprediction event that is counted by
                                BR_MIS_PRED.
                                If no program-flow prediction resources are implemented, this event is optional, but ARM
                                recommends that BR_PRED counts all branches.

                  0x0013, MEM_ACCESS, Data memory access
                                The counter counts Memory-read operations and Memory-write operations that the PE made. The
                                counter increments whether the access results in an access to a Level 1 data or unified cache, a
                                Level 2 data or unified cache, or neither of these.
                                The counter does not increment as a result of:
                                •     Instruction memory accesses, see Definition of terms on page D5-2240.
                                •     Translation table walks.
                                •     Cache maintenance instructions.
                                •     Write-back from any cache.
                                •     Refilling of any cache.

                  0x0014, L1I_CACHE, Attributable Level 1 instruction cache access
                                The counter counts Attributable instruction memory accesses that access at least the Level 1
                                instruction or unified cache. Each access to other Level 1 instruction memory structures, such as
                                refill buffers, is also counted.
                                See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                  0x0015, L1D_CACHE_WB, Attributable Level 1 data cache write-back
                                The counter counts every write-back of data from the Level 1 data or unified cache. The counter
                                counts each write-back that causes data to be written from the Level 1 cache to outside of the
                                Level 1 cache. For example, the counter counts the following cases:
                                •      A write-back that causes data to be written to a Level 2 cache or memory.
                                •      A write-back of a recently fetched cache line that has not been allocated to the Level 1 cache.
                                •      Transfer of data from the Level 1 cache to outside of this cache made as a result of a
                                       coherency request. The conditions determining which of these are counted for transfers to
                                       other Level 1 caches within the same multiprocessor cluster are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                                Each write-back is counted once, even if multiple accesses are required to complete the write-back.
                                Whether write-backs made as a result of cache maintenance instructions are counted is
                                IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                                The counter does not count:
                                •     The invalidation of a cache line without any write-back to a Level 2 cache or memory.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2255
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                   •      Writes from the PE that write through the Level 1 cache to outside of the Level 1 cache.
                                   An Unattributable write-back event occurs when a requestor outside the PE makes a coherency
                                   request that results in write-back. If the cache is shared, then an Unattributable write-back event is
                                   not counted. If the cache is not shared, then the event is counted. See Attributability on
                                   page D5-2232.
                                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a write of a whole cache line that is not the result of the
                                   eviction of a line from the cache, is counted. For example, this applies when the PE determines
                                   streaming writes to memory and does not allocate lines to the cache, or by a DC ZVA operation.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x0016, L2D_CACHE, Attributable Level 2 data cache access
                                   The counter counts Attributable Memory-read operations and Attributable Memory-write
                                   operations, that the PE made, that access at least the Level 2 data or unified cache. Each access to a
                                   cache line is counted including refills of and write-backs from the Level 1 data, instruction, or
                                   unified caches. Each access to other Level 2 data or unified memory structures, such as refill
                                   buffers, write buffers, and write-back buffers, is also counted.
                                   The counter does not count:
                                   •     Operations made by other PEs that share this cache.
                                   •     Cache maintenance instructions.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x0017, L2D_CACHE_REFILL, Attributable Level 2 data cache refill
                                   The counter counts Attributable Memory-read operations and Attributable Memory-write
                                   operations, that the PE made, that access at least the Level 2 data or unified cache and cause a refill
                                   of a Level 1 data, instruction, or unified cache or of the Level 2 data or unified cache. Each read
                                   from or write to the cache that causes a refill from outside the Level 1 and Level 2 caches is counted.
                                   A refill includes any access that causes data to be fetched from outside the cache, even if the data is
                                   ultimately not allocated into the cache. For example, data might be fetched into a buffer but then
                                   discarded, rather than being allocated into a cache. These buffers are treated as part of the cache.
                                   For example, the counter counts:
                                   •      Accesses to the Level 2 cache that cause a refill that is satisfied by another Level 2 cache, a
                                          Level 3 cache, or memory.
                                   •      Refills of and write-backs from any Level 1 data, instruction or unified cache that cause a
                                          refill from outside the Level 1 and Level 2 caches.
                                   •      Accesses to the Level 2 cache that cause a refill of a Level 1 cache from outside of the
                                          Level 1 and Level 2 caches, even if there is no refill of the Level 2 cache.
                                   The counter does not count, as events on this PE:
                                   •      Accesses that do not cause a new cache refill but are satisfied from refilling data of a previous
                                          miss.
                                   •      Accesses to the Level 2 cache that generate a memory access but not a new linefill, such as
                                          write-through writes that hit in the Level 2 cache.
                                   •      Accesses to the Level 2 cache that are part of a Level 1 cache refill or write-back that hit in
                                          the Level 2 cache so do not cause a refill from outside of the Level 1 and Level 2 caches.
                                   •      Operations made by other PEs that share this cache.
                                   •      Cache maintenance instructions.
                                   •      A write that writes an entire line to the cache and does not fetch any data from outside the
                                          Level 1 and Level 2 caches, for example:
                                          —     A write-back from a Level 1 cache to a Level 2 cache.
                                          —     A write from a coalescing buffer of a full cache line.
                                          —     A DC ZVA operation.
                                   •      A write that misses in the cache, and writes through the cache without allocating a line.

D5-2256                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                             D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                See also:
                                •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                  0x0018, L2D_CACHE_WB, Attributable Level 2 data cache write-back
                                The counter counts every write-back of data from the Level 2 data or unified cache that occurs as a
                                result of an operation by this PE. It counts each write-back that causes data to be written from the
                                Level 2 cache to outside the Level 1 and Level 2 caches. For example, the counter counts:
                                •      A write-back that causes data to be written to a Level 3 cache or memory.
                                •      A write-back of a recently fetched cache line that has not been allocated to the Level 2 cache.
                                Each write-back is counted once, even if it requires multiple accesses to complete the write-back.
                                It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the counter counts:
                                •      A transfer of data from the Level 2 cache to outside the Level 1 and Level 2 cache made as a
                                       result of a coherency request.
                                •      Write-backs made as a result of Cache maintenance instructions.
                                The counter does not count:
                                •      The invalidation of a cache line without any write-back to a Level 3 cache or memory.
                                •      Writes from the PE or Level 1 data or unified cache that write through the Level 2 cache to
                                       outside the Level 1 and Level 2 caches.
                                •      Transfers of data from the Level 2 cache to a Level 1 cache, to satisfy a Level 1 cache refill.
                                An Unattributable write-back event occurs when a requestor outside the PE makes a coherency
                                request that results in write-back. If the cache is shared, then an Unattributable write-back event is
                                not counted. If the cache is not shared, then the event is counted.
                                It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a write of a whole cache line that is not the result of the
                                eviction of a line from the cache, is counted. For example, this applies when the PE determines
                                streaming writes to memory and does not allocate lines to the cache, or by a DC ZVA operation.
                                See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                  0x0019, BUS_ACCESS, Attributable Bus access
                                The counter counts Memory-read operations and Memory-write operations that access outside of
                                the boundary of the PE and its closely-coupled caches. Where this boundary lies with respect to any
                                implemented caches is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                                The definition of a bus access is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED but physically is a single beat rather
                                than a burst. That is, for each bus cycle for which the bus is active.
                                Bus accesses include refills of and write-backs from data, instruction, and unified caches. Whether
                                bus accesses include operations that do use the bus but not explicitly transfer data is
                                IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                                An Unattributable bus access occurs when a requestor outside the PE makes a request that results in
                                a bus access, for example, a coherency request. If the bus is shared, then an Unattributable bus
                                access is not counted. If the bus is not shared, then the event is counted.
                                If the bus is shared, then only Attributable bus accesses are counted. If the bus is not shared, then
                                all bus accesses are counted.
                                Where an implementation has multiple buses at this boundary, this event counts the sum of accesses
                                across all buses.
                                If a bus supports multiple accesses per cycle, for example through multiple channels, the counter
                                increments once for each channel that is active on a cycle, and so it might increment by more than
                                one in any given cycle.
                                The maximum increment in any given cycle is implementation defined.
                                See also:
                                •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2257
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                      0x001A, MEMORY_ERROR, Local memory error
                                    The counter counts every occurrence of a memory error signaled by a memory closely coupled to
                                    this PE. The definition of local memories is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED but includes caches,
                                    tightly-coupled memories, and TLB arrays.
                                    Memory error refers to a physical error detected by the hardware, such as a parity or ECC error. It
                                    includes errors that are correctable and those that are not. It does not include errors as defined in the
                                    architecture, such as MMU faults.

                      0x001B, INST_SPEC, Operation Speculatively executed
                                    The counter counts instructions that are Speculatively executed by the PE. This includes instructions
                                    that are subsequently not architecturally executed. As a result, this event counts a larger number of
                                    instructions than the number of instructions architecturally executed. The definition of
                                    Speculatively executed is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                      0x001D, BUS_CYCLES, Bus cycle
                                    The counter increments on every cycle of the interface at the boundary of the PE and its
                                    closely-coupled caches. Where this boundary lies with respect to any implemented caches is
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                                             Note
                  .                 If the implementation clocks the external memory interface at the same rate as the processor
                                    hardware, the counter counts every cycle.

                                    See also Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                      0x001F, L1D_CACHE_ALLOCATE, Attributable Level 1 data cache allocation without refill
                                    The counter increments on every Attributable write that writes an entire line into the Level 1 cache
                                    without fetching from outside the Level 1 cache, for example:
                                    •     A write from a coalescing buffer of a full cache line.
                                    •     A DC ZVA operation.
                                    See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                      0x0020, L2D_CACHE_ALLOCATE, Attributable Level 2 data cache allocation without refill
                                    The counter increments on every Attributable write that writes an entire line into the Level 2 cache
                                    without fetching from outside the Level 1 or Level 2 caches, for example:
                                    •     A write-back from a Level 1 to Level 2 cache.
                                    •     A write from a coalescing buffer of a full cache line.
                                    •     A DC ZVA operation.
                                    See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                      0x0022, BR_MIS_PRED_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed, mispredicted branch
                                    The counter counts all instructions counted by BR_RETIRED that were not correctly predicted.
                                    If no program-flow prediction resources are implemented, this event counts all retired not-taken
                                    branches.

                      0x0023, STALL_FRONTEND, No operation issued due to the frontend
                                    The counter counts every cycle counted by the CPU_CYCLES event on which no operation was
                                    issued because there are no operations available to issue for this PE from the frontend.
                                    The division between frontend and backend is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Frontend and backend
                                    events must count at the same point in the pipeline.

                                             Note
                                    •      For a simplified pipeline model of Fetch → Decode → Issue → Execute → Retire,
                                           ARM recommends that the events are counted when instructions are dispatched from Decode
                                           to Issue.

D5-2258                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                             D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                              D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                •      On a given cycle, both events might be counted if the backend is unable to accept any
                                       operations and there are no operations available to issue from the frontend.

                                For more information, see Cycle event counting on multithreaded implementations on
                                page D5-2264.

                  0x0024, STALL_BACKEND, No operation issued due to the backend
                                The counter counts every cycle counted by the CPU_CYCLES event on which no operation was
                                issued because either:
                                •      The backend is unable to accept any of the operations available for issue for this PE.
                                •      The backend is unable to accept any operations.
                                For example, the back end might be unable to accept operations because of a resource conflict or
                                non-availability.
                                The division between frontend and backend is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Frontend and backend
                                events must count at the same point in the pipeline. See STALL_FRONTEND for more information.
                                For more information, see Cycle event counting on multithreaded implementations on
                                page D5-2264.

                  0x0025, L1D_TLB, Attributable Level 1 data or unified TLB access
                                The counter counts each Attributable Memory-read operation or Attributable Memory-write
                                operation that causes a TLB access to at least the Level 1 data or unified TLB. Each access to a TLB
                                record is counted including the multiple accesses of instructions, such as LDM or STM.
                                The counter does not count TLB maintenance instructions.
                                See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                  0x0026, L1I_TLB, Attributable Level 1 instruction TLB access
                                The counter counts each Attributable Instruction memory access that causes a TLB access to at least
                                the Level 1 instruction or unified TLB.
                                The counter does not count TLB maintenance instructions.
                                See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                  0x0027, L2I_CACHE, Attributable Level 2 instruction cache access
                                The counter counts Attributable instruction memory accesses that access at least the Level 2
                                instruction or unified cache. Each Attributable access to other Level 2 instruction memory
                                structures, such as refill buffers, is also counted.
                                See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                  0x0028, L2I_CACHE_REFILL, Attributable Level 2 instruction cache refill
                                The counter counts Attributable instruction memory accesses that cause a refill of at least the Level
                                2 instruction or unified cache. This includes each Attributable memory access that causes a refill
                                from outside the cache. It excludes accesses that do not cause a new cache refill but are satisfied
                                from refilling data of a previous miss.
                                A refill includes any Attributable access that causes data to be fetched from outside the cache, even
                                if the data is ultimately not allocated into the cache. For example, data might be fetched into a buffer
                                but then discarded, rather than being allocated into a cache. These buffers are treated as part of the
                                cache.
                                The counter does not count cache maintenance instructions.
                                See also:
                                •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D5-2259
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                    0x0029, L3D_CACHE_ALLOCATE, Attributable Level 3 data cache allocation without refill
                                   The counter increments on every Attributable write that writes an entire line into the Level 3 cache
                                   without fetching from outside the Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3 cache, for example:
                                   •     A write-back from a Level 2 to Level 3 cache.
                                   •     A write from a coalescing buffer of a full cache line.
                                   •     A DC ZVA operation.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x002A, L3D_CACHE_REFILL, Attributable Level 3 data cache refill
                                   The counter counts each Attributable Memory-read operation or Attributable Memory-write
                                   operation that the PE makes that accesses at least the Level 3 data or unified cache and causes a refill
                                   of a Level 1 or Level 2 instruction, data, or unified cache or of the Level 3 data or unified cache.
                                   Each read from or write to the cache that causes a refill from outside the Level 1, Level 2, and Level
                                   3 caches is counted.
                                   A refill includes any access that causes data to be fetched from outside the cache, even if the data is
                                   ultimately not allocated into the cache. For example, data might be fetched into a buffer but then
                                   discarded, rather than being allocated into a cache. These buffers are treated as part of the cache.
                                   The counter does not count as events on this PE:
                                   •      Accesses that do not cause a new cache refill but are satisfied from refilling data of a previous
                                          miss.
                                   •      Accesses to the Level 3 cache that generate a memory access but not a new linefill, such as
                                          write-through writes that hit in the Level 3 cache.
                                   •      Accesses to the Level 3 cache that are part of a Level 1 or Level 2 cache refill or write-back
                                          that hit in the Level 3 cache so do not cause a refill from outside of the Level 1, Level 2, and
                                          Level 3 caches.
                                   •      Operations made by other PEs that share this cache.
                                   •      Cache maintenance instructions.
                                   •      A write that writes an entire line to the cache and does not fetch any data from outside the
                                          Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 cache, for example:
                                          —     A write-back from a Level 2 to Level 3 cache.
                                          —     A write of a full cache line from a coalescing buffer.
                                          —     A DC ZVA operation.
                                   •      A write that misses in the cache, and writes through the cache without allocating a line.
                                   See also:
                                   •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                   •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                    0x002B, L3D_CACHE, Attributable Level 3 data cache access
                                   The counter counts Attributable Memory-read operations and Attributable Memory-write
                                   operations, that the PE made, that access at least the Level 3 data or unified cache. Each access to a
                                   cache line is counted including refills of and write-backs from the Level 1 or Level 2 data,
                                   instruction, or unified caches. Each access to other Level 3 data or unified memory structures, such
                                   as refill buffers, write buffers, and write-back buffers, is also counted.
                                   The counter does not count:
                                   •     Operations made by other PEs that share the Level 3 data or unified cache.
                                   •     Cache maintenance instructions.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

D5-2260                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                              D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                  0x002C, L3D_CACHE_WB, Attributable Level 3 data cache write-back
                                The counter counts every write-back of data from the Level 3 data or unified cache that occurs as a
                                result of an operation by this PE. It counts each write-back that causes data to be written from the
                                Level 3 cache to outside of the Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 caches. For example, the counter
                                counts the following cases:
                                •      A write-back that causes data to be written to a Level 4 cache, or to memory.
                                •      A write-back of a recently fetched cache line that has not been allocated to the Level 3 cache.
                                Each write-back is counted once, even if multiple accesses are required to complete the write-back.
                                It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the counter counts:
                                •      A transfer of data from the Level 3 cache to outside the Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 caches
                                       made as a result of a coherency request.
                                •      A write-back made as a result of a Cache maintenance instruction.
                                The counter does not count:
                                •     The invalidation of a cache line without any write-back to a Level 4 cache or memory.
                                •     Writes from the PE, Level 1, or Level 2 data or unified cache, that write through the Level 3
                                      cache to outside of the Level 3 cache.
                                •     Transfers of data from the Level 3 cache to a Level 1 or Level 2 cache, to satisfy a Level 1 or
                                      Level 2 cache refill.
                                An Unattributable write-back event occurs when a requestor outside the PE makes a coherency
                                request that results in write-back. If the cache is shared, then Unattributable write-back events are
                                not counted. If the cache is not shared, then Unattributable write-back events are counted.
                                It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a write of a whole cache line that is not the result of the
                                eviction of a line from the cache, is counted. For example, this applies when the PE determines
                                streaming writes to memory and does not allocate lines to the cache, or by a DC ZVA operation.
                                See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                  0x002D, L2D_TLB_REFILL, Attributable Level 2 data TLB refill
                                The counter counts each Attributable Memory-read operation or Attributable Memory-write
                                operation that causes a TLB refill of at least the Level 2 data or unified TLB. It counts each
                                Attributable read or Attributable write that causes a refill, in the form of a translation table walk or
                                an access to another level of TLB caching. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the count
                                increments when:
                                •      A refill results in a Translation fault.
                                •      A refill is not allocated in the TLB.
                                The counter does not count:
                                •     A TLB miss that does not cause a refill but does generate a translation table walk.
                                •     TLB maintenance instructions.
                                See also:
                                •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                  0x002E, L2I_TLB_REFILL, Attributable Level 2 instruction TLB refill
                                The counter counts Attributable instruction memory accesses that cause a TLB refill of at least the
                                Level 2 instruction TLB. This includes each Attributable Instruction memory access that causes an
                                access to a level of memory system due to a translation table walk or an access to another level of
                                TLB caching. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the count increments when:
                                •     A refill results in a Translation fault.
                                •     A refill is not allocated in the TLB.
                                The counter does not count:
                                •     A TLB miss that does not cause a refill but does generate a translation table walk.
                                •     TLB maintenance instructions.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D5-2261
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                   See also:
                                   •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                   •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                    0x002F, L2D_TLB, Attributable Level 2 data or unified TLB access
                                   The counter counts each Attributable memory read operation or Attributable memory write
                                   operation that causes a TLB access to at least the Level 2 data or unified TLB. Each access to a TLB
                                   record is counted, including the multiple accesses of instructions such as LDM or STM.
                                   The counter does not count TLB maintenance instructions.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x0030, L2I_TLB, Attributable Level 2 instruction TLB access
                                   The counter counts each Attributable memory read operation or Attributable memory write
                                   operation that causes a TLB access to at least the Level 2 instruction or unified TLB.
                                   The counter does not count TLB maintenance instructions.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x0031, REMOTE_ACCESS, Access to another socket in a multi-socket system
                                   The counter counts each Attributable memory read operation or memory write operation that causes
                                   an access to another socket in a multi-socket system.
                                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether an access that causes a snoop into another socket but does
                                   not return data from or pass data to the remote socket is counted.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x0032, LL_CACHE, Last Level cache access
                                   The counter counts each Attributable memory read operation or write operation that causes a cache
                                   access to at least the Last Level data or unified cache.
                                   Cache maintenance instructions do not count as events.
                                   See also Attributability on page D5-2232.

                    0x0033, LL_CACHE_MISS, Last Level cache miss
                                   The Counter counts each Attributable Memory-read operation or Memory-write operation that
                                   causes a cache access to at least the Last Level data or unified cache, but is not completed by the
                                   Last Level cache. That is, either of the following:
                                   •      A memory read operation that does not return data from the Last Level cache.
                                   •      A memory write operation that does not update the Last Level cache.
                                   The counter does not count operations that are completed by a cache above the Last Level cache.
                                   Cache maintenance instructions do not count as events.
                                   See also:
                                   •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                   •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                    0x0034, DTLB_WALK, Access to data TLB causes a translation table walk
                                   The counter counts each Attributable memory read or memory write operation that causes a refill of
                                   a data or unified TLB involving at least one translation table walk access. This includes each
                                   complete or partial translation table walk that causes an access to memory, including to data or
                                   translation table walk caches.
                                   The counter does not count TLB maintenance instructions.
                                   See also:
                                   •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                   •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

D5-2262                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                               D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                  0x0035, ITLB_WALK, Access to instruction TLB that causes a translation table walk
                                  The counter counts each Attributable Instruction memory access that causes a refill of an instruction
                                  TLB, involving at least one translation table walk access. This includes each complete or partial
                                  translation table walk that causes an access to memory, including to data or translation table walk
                                  caches.
                                  The counter does not count TLB maintenance instructions.
                                  See also:
                                  •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                  •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                  0X0036, LL_CACHE_RD, Last level cache access, read
                                  As LL_CACHE, but counts only memory read operations.
                                  Cache maintenance instructions do not count as events.
                                  See also:
                                  •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                  •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                  0x0037, LL_CACHE_MISS_RD, Last level cache miss, read
                                  As LL_CACHE_MISS, but counts only memory read operations.
                                  Cache maintenance instructions do not count as events.
                                  See also:
                                  •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                  •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

                  0x0038, REMOTE_ACCESS_RD, Access to another socket in a multi-socket system, read
                                  As REMOTE_ACCESS, but counts only memory read operations.
                                  See also:
                                  •      Attributability on page D5-2232.
                                  •      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events on page D5-2265.

D5.10.4     Statistical Profiling Extension microarchitectural events
                  The event numbers of the Statistical Profiling Extension microarchitectural events are reserved for the specified
                  events. If the Statistical Profiling Extension is implemented these events must be implemented.
                  Table D5-9 lists the PMU microarchitectural event numbers required by the Statistical Profiling Extension event
                  number order.

                           Note
                  As Table D5-9 shows, event numbers for Statistical Profiling microarchitectural events are allocated from a single
                  range of event numbers. Table D5-7 on page D5-2244 shows the unallocated numbers from this range.

                                     Table D5-9 Statistical Profiling Extension PMU microarchitectural event numbers

                  Event number       Event type             Event mnemonic              Description

                  0x4000             Microarchitectural     SAMPLE_POP                  Sample Population

                  0x4001             Microarchitectural     SAMPLE_FEED                 Sample Taken

                  0x4002             Microarchitectural     SAMPLE_FILTRATE             Sample Taken and not removed by filtering

                  0x4003             Microarchitectural     SAMPLE_COLLISION            Sample collided with previous sample

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2263
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                    The events corresponding to the Statistical Profiling Extension microarchitectural event numbers are:

                    0x4000, SAMPLE_POP, Sample Population
                                    The counter increments for each operation that might be sampled, whether or not the operation was
                                    sampled. Operations that are executed at an Exception level or Security state in which the Statistical
                                    Profiling Extension is disabled are not counted.

                    0x4001, SAMPLE_FEED, Sample Taken
                                    The counter increments each time the sample interval counter reaches zero and is reloaded, and the
                                    sample does not collide with the a previous sample. Samples that are removed by filtering, or
                                    discarded, and not written to the Profiling Buffer are counted.

                    0x4002, SAMPLE_FILTRATE, Sample taken and not removed by filtering
                                    The counter increments each time that a completed sample record is checked against the filters and
                                    not removed. Sample records that are not removed by filtering, but are discarded before being
                                    written to the Profiling Buffer because of a Profiling Buffer management event, are counted.

                    0x4003, SAMPLE_COLLISION, Sample collided with a previous sample
                                    The counter increments for each sample record that is taken when the previous sampled operation
                                    has not completed generating its sample record.

                             Note
                    These events are discoverable through a read of PMCEID0_EL0[35:32] in AArch64 state.

                    Meaningful ratios between Statistical Profiling Extension PMU microarchitectural
                    events
                    The architecture highlights some meaningful ratios that can be derived from the common microarchitectural events.
                    Table D5-10 lists the ratios.

                                        Table D5-10 Meaningful ratios between Statistical Profiling Extension PMU events

                        Numerator                         Denominator                          Ratio

                        0x4001 SAMPLE_FEED                0x4000 SAMPLE_POP                    Attributable sampling ratio

                        0x4002 SAMPLE_FILTRATE            0x4001,SAMPLE_FEED                   Attributable ratio of samples that met the
                                                                                               filtering criteria

                             Note
                    The number of operations that are sampled is counted by SAMPLE_FEED meaning that if all filtering is disabled
                    then SAMPLE_FILTRATE counts the same as SAMPLE_FEED.

                    For more information see Chapter D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension.

D5.10.5       Cycle event counting on multithreaded implementations
                    For most events, the event is only counted when it is attributable to the counting PE or thread, see Attributability on
                    page D5-2232.

                    Multithreaded implementations can have various forms, some examples of these are:

                    •      Simultaneous Multithreading (SMT), where every PE thread is active on every cycle.

                    •      Fine-grained Multithreading (FGMT), also known as a Barrel processor, where one PE thread is active on
                           each cycle, and this changes regularly.

D5-2264                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                               D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                  •      Switch on Event Multithreading (SoEMT), also known as Coarse-grained Multithreading (CGMT), where
                         high latency events cause the processor to switch the active PE thread.

                  In the above examples, active means that the PE might execute the instructions. A PE can be active but not executing
                  instructions when no instruction is available or because of limited execution resources.

                  When the PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT bit is set to 0, the CPU_CYCLES event only counts cycles on which the
                  thread was active. For the example multithreaded implementations, this means that:

                  •      For an SMT implementation, the CPU_CYCLES event counts every cycle.

                  •      For a particular FGMT implementation, that alternates between two threads on each cycle, the
                         CPU_CYCLES event counts every other cycle.

                  •      For a particular SoEMT implementation, that is waiting for a long latency operation, the CPU_CYCLES
                         event does not count cycles, as the PE thread is not active.

                  If the PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT bit is set to 1, the processor counts each cycle, and can only count a maximum
                  of one cycle each cycle.

                  In addition, the STALL_FRONTEND and STALL_BACKEND events only count cycles that are counted by the
                  CPU_CYCLES event, and so have the same limitation. For example, in an SMT implementation, if a PE thread
                  cannot issue an instruction because of contention with other PE threads, these are counted as STALL_BACKEND
                  cycles.

                  If the PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.MT bit is set to 1, the PE only counts cycles on which no operation is issued from
                  any thread.

                          Note
                  The PMCCNTR register counts every processor cycle.

D5.10.6      Meaningful ratios between common microarchitectural events
                  The architecture highlights some meaningful ratios that can be derived from the common microarchitectural events.
                  Table D5-11 lists the highlighted ratios.

                                                                 Table D5-11 REFILL events and associated access events

 Numerator                        Denominator                      Ratio

 0x0001 L1I_CACHE_REFILL          0x0014 L1I_CACHE                 Attributable Level 1 instruction cache refill rate

 0x0002 L1I_TLB_REFILL            0x0026 L1I_TLB                   Attributable Level 1 instruction TLB refill rate

 0x0003 L1D_CACHE_REFILL          0x0004 L1D_CACHE                 Attributable Level 1 data or unified cache refill rate

 0x0005 L1D_TLB_REFILL            0x0025 L1D_TLB                   Attributable Level 1 data or unified TLB refill rate

 0x0017 L2D_CACHE_REFILL          0x0016 L2D_CACHE                 Attributable Level 2 data or unified cache refill rate

 0x0028 L2I_CACHE_REFILL          0x0027 L2I_CACHE                 Attributable Level 2 instruction cache refill rate

 0x002A L3D_CACHE_REFILL          0x002B L3D_CACHE                 Attributable Level 3 data or unified cache refill rate

 0x002D L2D_TLB_REFILL            0x002F L2D_TLB                   Attributable Level 2 data or unified TLB refill rate

 0x002E L2I_TLB_REFILL            0x0030 L2I_TLB                   Attributable Level 2 instruction TLB refill rate

 0x0019 BUS_ACCESS                0x001D BUS_CYCLES                Attributable Bus accesses per cycle

 0x0033 LL_CACHE_MISS             0x0032 LL_CACHE                  Attributable Last Level data or unified cache refill rate

 0x0034 DTLB_WALK                 0x0025 L1D_TLB                   Attributable data TLB miss rate

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2265
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                                                    Table D5-11 REFILL events and associated access events (continued)

 Numerator                         Denominator                      Ratio

 0x0035 ITLB_WALK                  0x0026 L1I_TLB                   Attributable instruction TLB miss rate

 0x0037 LL_CACHE_MISS_RD           0x0036 LL_CACHE_RD               Attributable memory read operation miss rate

 0x0038 REMOTE_ACCESS_RD           0x0031 REMOTE_ACCESS             Attributable read accesses to another socket in a multi-socket
                                                                    system

D5.10.7       Required events
                    PMUv3 requires that an implementation includes the following common events:
                    •   0x0000, SW_INCR, Instruction architecturally executed, Condition code check pass, software increment.
                    •   0x0003, L1D_CACHE_REFILL, Attributable Level 1 data cache refill.

                                  Note
                          Event 0x0003 is only required if the implementation includes a Level 1 data or unified cache.

                    •     0x0004, L1D_CACHE, Attributable Level 1 data cache access.

                                  Note
                          Event 0x0004 is only required if the implementation includes a Level 1 data or unified cache.

                    •     0x0010, BR_MIS_PRED, Mispredicted or not predicted branch Speculatively executed.

                                  Note
                          Event 0x0010 is only required if the implementation includes program-flow prediction. However, ARM
                          recommends that the event is implemented as described in Common microarchitectural events on
                          page D5-2252.

                    •     0x0011, CPU_CYCLES, Cycle.
                    •     0x0012, BR_PRED, Predictable branch Speculatively executed.

                                  Note
                          Event 0x0012 is only required if the implementation includes program-flow prediction. However, ARM
                          recommends that the event is implemented as described in Common microarchitectural events on
                          page D5-2252.

                    •     At least one of:
                          —      0x0008, INST_RETIRED, Instruction architecturally executed.
                          —      0x001B, INST_SPEC, Operation Speculatively executed.

                                  Note
                          ARM strongly recommends that event 0x008 is implemented.

                    •     When ARMv8.1-PMU is implemented:
                          —    0x0023, STALL_FRONTEND, No operation issued due to the frontend.
                          —    0x0024, STALL_BACKEND, No operation issued due to the backend.

D5.10.8       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event numbers
                    For IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event numbers, each counter is defined, independently, to either:
                    •     Increment only once for each event.
                    •     Count the duration for which an event occurs.

D5-2266                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                               D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                                D5.10 PMU events and event numbers

                  ARM recommends that implementers establish a standardized numbering scheme for their IMPLEMENTATION
                  DEFINED events, with common definitions, and common count numbers, applied to all of their implementations. In
                  general, the recommended approach is for standardization across implementations with common features. However,
                  ARM recognizes that attempting to standardize the encoding of microarchitectural features across too wide a range
                  of implementations is not productive.

                  ARM strongly recommends that at least the following classes of event are identified in the IMPLEMENTATION
                  DEFINED events:

                  •     Cumulative duration of stalls resulting from the holes in the instruction availability, separating out counts for
                        key buffering points that might exist.

                  •     Cumulative duration of data-dependent stalls, separating out counts for key dependency classes that might
                        exist.

                  •     Cumulative duration of stalls due to unavailability of execution resources, including, for example, write
                        buffers, separating out counts for key resources that might exist.

                  •     Missed superscalar issue opportunities, if relevant, separating out counts for key classes of issue that might
                        exist.

                  •     Miss rates for different levels of caches and TLBs.

                  •     Any external events passed to the PE through an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED mechanism.

                  •     Cumulative duration of a PSTATE.{A, I, F} interrupt mask set to 1.

                  •     Cumulative occupancy for resource queues, such as data access queues, and entry/exit counts, so that
                        average latencies can be determined, separating out counts for key resources that might exist.
                        An implementation might also provide registers in the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED space to further
                        extend such counts, for example by specifying a minimum latency for an event to be counted.

                  •     Any other microarchitectural features that the implementer considers are valuable to count.

                  The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event numbers are 0x040 to 0x3FF. Appendix K3 Recommendations for Performance
                  Monitors Event Numbers for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED Events lists the ARM recommended standardized
                  numbering scheme for these events.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           D5-2267
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.11 Performance Monitors Extension registers

D5.11        Performance Monitors Extension registers
                     The following section describes the Performance Monitors Extension registers.

                     The following subsections give general information about the Performance Monitors Extension registers, that apply
                     for both Execution states:
                     •      Relationship between AArch32 and AArch64 Performance Monitors registers.
                     •      Access permissions.

                     Performance monitors registers on page K13-6610 summarizes the Performance Monitors Extension registers in
                     AArch64 state.

                     Performance monitors registers on page K13-6629 summarizes the Performance Monitors Extension registers in
                     AArch32 state.

D5.11.1        Relationship between AArch32 and AArch64 Performance Monitors registers
                     Table K13-2 on page K13-6594 lists the Performance Monitors register names for AArch32 and AArch64 states.

D5.11.2        Access permissions
                     Each Exception level is able to control Performance Monitors System register accesses at lower Exception levels.
                     The access control flow is:

                     1.    At EL0:
                           •      Writes to PMUSERENR are UNDEFINED.
                           •      Reads and writes of PMINTENSET and PMINTENCLR are UNDEFINED.
                           •      If PMUSERENR.EN == 0:
                                  —      If PMUSERENR.SW == 0 then writes to PMSWINC are trapped to EL1.
                                  —      If PMUSERENR.CR == 0 then reads of PMCCNTR are trapped to EL1.
                                  —      If PMUSERENR.ER == 0 then reads of PMEVCNTR<n> and PMXEVCNTR, and reads and
                                         writes of PMSELR, are trapped to EL1.
                                  —      Otherwise, for all other Performance Monitors registers, other than reads of PMUSERENR,
                                         reads and writes are trapped to EL1.

                                      Note
                           If HCR.TGE==1, then all exceptions that would be taken to EL1 are instead taken to EL2.

                     2.    Otherwise, at EL1 and EL0 in Non-secure state, if EL2 is implemented:
                           •      If HDCR.TPMCR == 1 then accesses to PMCR are trapped to EL2.
                           •      If HDCR.TPM == 1 then accesses to all Performance Monitors registers, including PMCR, are trapped
                                  to EL2.

                     3.    Otherwise, at EL2, EL1 and EL0, if EL3 is implemented and using AArch64, and if MDCR_EL3.TPM == 1
                           then accesses to all Performance Monitors registers are trapped to EL3.

                                      Note
                           These traps are not possible if EL3 is using AArch32.

                     4.    Otherwise, the access is permitted.

                               Note
                     These traps and enables only apply to System register accesses using System register access instructions. For
                     accesses through the optional memory-mapped or external debug interfaces, see Access permissions for external
                     views of the Performance Monitors on page I3-6007.

D5-2268                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                              D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
                                                                                       D5.11 Performance Monitors Extension registers

                  For details of the headings used in Table D5-12, see Configurable instruction enables and disables, and trap
                  controls on page D1-1910. In addition, the following terms are used:

                  Instruction      This shows the access instruction, read (MRS), write (MSR), or both (-). In AArch32 state, the
                                   equivalent instructions are MRC and MCR.

                  Default access
                                   If the Default access is - then the access is trapped from EL0 to EL1 unless the PMUSERENR
                                   enables are set to 1.

                  Resultant access permission
                                   This indicates the resulting access permission provided the enables at EL0 are enabled and the traps
                                   to EL2 or EL3 are disabled.

                  Table D5-12 shows the access permissions for System register accesses to the Performance Monitors registers.

                                      Table D5-12 Access permissions for the Performance Monitors System registers

                                        At EL0:                                        Traps from below to:
                                                                                                                       Resultant
  Register            Instruction                                                                                      access
                                        Default              PMUSERENR
                                                                                       EL2                   EL3 a     permission
                                        access               enables

  PMCR                -                 -                    EN                        TPMCR or TPM          TPM       RW

  PMCNTENSET          -                 -                    EN                        TPM                   TPM       RW

  PMCNTENCLR          -                 -                    EN                        TPM                   TPM       RW

  PMOVSCLR            -                 -                    EN                        TPM                   TPM       RW

  PMSWINC             -                 -                    EN or SW                  TPM                   TPM       WO

  PMSELR              -                 -                    EN or ER                  TPM                   TPM       RW

  PMCEID0             -                 -                    EN                        TPM                   TPM       RO

  PMCEID1             -                 -                    EN                        TPM                   TPM       RO

                      Read              -                    EN or CR
  PMCCNTR                                                                              TPM                   TPM       RW
                      Write             -                    EN

  PMXEVTYPER          -                 -                    EN                        TPM                   TPM       RW

                      Read              -                    EN or ER
  PMXEVCNTR                                                                            TPM                   TPM       RW
                      Write             -                    EN

                      Read              RO
  PMUSERENR                                                  -                         TPM                   TPM       RW
                      Write             UND

  PMINTENSET          -                 UND                  -                         TPM                   TPM       RW

  PMINTENCLR          -                 UND                  -                         TPM                   TPM       RW

  PMOVSSET            -                 -                    EN                        TPM                   TPM       RW

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D5-2269
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
D5 The Performance Monitors Extension
D5.11 Performance Monitors Extension registers

                           Table D5-12 Access permissions for the Performance Monitors System registers (continued)

                                            At EL0:                                        Traps from below to:
                                                                                                                       Resultant
   Register               Instruction                                                                                  access
                                            Default              PMUSERENR
                                                                                           EL2                EL3 a    permission
                                            access               enables

                          Read              -                    EN or ER
   PMEVCNTR<n>                                                                             TPM                TPM      RW
                          Write             -                    EN

   PMEVTYPER<n>           -                 -                    EN                        TPM                TPM      RW

   PMCCFILTR              -                 -                    EN                        TPM                TPM      RW

      a. Only if EL3 is using AArch64.

D5-2270                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
