Chapter D6
The Statistical Profiling Extension

                  This chapter describes the Statistical Profiling Extension. It contains the following sections:
                  •     Statistical Profiling on page D6-2272.
                  •     Programmers’ Model on page D6-2280.
                  •     Enable and Filtering controls on page D6-2283.
                  •     Profiling Buffer management interrupt on page D6-2289.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              D6-2271
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.1 Statistical Profiling

D6.1          Statistical Profiling
                       Statistical profiling is a four stage process.
                       1.      An operation is chosen from a sample population, at a programmable interval that might have some random,
                               or pseudorandom, perturbation.
                       2.      A trace of the sampled operation is taken. This includes the PC, events, timings, and data addresses, related
                               to the sampled operation. This is the profiling operation.
                       3.      Before a sample record is created, it is possible to filter out potential sample records generated by the
                               profiling operation by reference to, any or all of the following:
                               a.      The type of operation.
                               b.      The Exception level.
                               c.      Event and latency.
                       4.      A sample record is created that contains the traced information. Sample records that meet the criteria of the
                               filter are written to and stored in a memory buffer. These sample records can be processed by software when
                               the memory buffer is full.

D6.1.1          ARMv8.2 Statistical Profiling Extension
                       This section gives an overview of the Statistical Profiling Extension.

                       Non-invasive behavior
                       Statistical Profiling is a non-invasive debug operation:
                       •       While profiling is enabled, the operation and performance of the processing element (PE) must not be
                               significantly impacted between sampled operations, that is, other than for writing out sample records and
                               processing Profiling Buffer management interrupts.
                       •       The performance of the sampled operation and the performance of the PE in general must not be significantly
                               impacted. The sample records are not written to memory until after the sampled operation has completed.
                               However, this does not apply when the user selects a collection of physical addresses for data access
                               operations. In this case, the impact is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                       •       The profiling operation to write sample records must not be excessively impactful on the performance of the
                               sampled operation or the performance of the PE generally.

                       Defining the sample population
                       All samples are taken from a population of operations. The population is dynamic rather than static. That is, if a
                       program executes the same operation multiple times (for example, because of loops and subroutines) then that
                       operation appears multiple times in the population.

                       The operations are an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED choice between:
                       •     Architecture instructions.
                       •     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED microarchitectural operations (micro-ops).

                       Architecture instruction means a single instruction that is defined by the ARMv8 instruction set architecture in
                       AArch64 state.

                       An architecture instruction might create one or more micro-ops at any point in the execution pipeline. The definition
                       of a micro-op is implementation specific. An architecture instruction might create more than one micro-op for each
                       instruction. A micro-op might also be removed or merged with another micro-op in the execution stream, so an
                       architecture instruction might create no micro-ops for an instruction.

                       Any arbitrary translation of architecture instructions to an equivalent sequence of micro-ops is permitted. In some
                       implementations, the relationship between architecture instructions and micro-ops might vary over time.

                                Note
                       Sampling from architecture instructions does not require that the instruction is architecturally executed.

D6-2272                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                 D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                              D6.1 Statistical Profiling

                  Operation sampling
                  A sample operation is as follows:
                  1.   A sampling interval is written to a sample interval counter by software. The interval is measured in
                       operations.
                  2.   The sample interval counter is decremented by hardware for each operation when sampling is enabled.
                  3.   When the sample interval counter reaches zero, then:
                       a.     If random perturbation is enabled, the PE continues to count for a random number of further operations
                              while sampling is enabled.
                       b.     An operation is chosen for profiling.
                                        Note
                               The choice of operation around the sampling point is arbitrary. The chosen operation might be the
                               operation for which the sample interval counter reached 0, or the next operation. The choice must be
                               applied consistently so as not to introduce sampling bias.

                  4.    The sample interval counter is reloaded and the process loops to step 2. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                        whether the sample interval counter is reloaded before step 3.a) or at step 3.b). That is, before or after
                        counting the random number of further operations. See Controlling when an operation is sampled on
                        page D6-2280.
                  5.    The chosen operation is marked as the sampled operation. The PE collects information about the sampled
                        operation as it executes by a profiling operation.
                  6.    When the sampled operation is completed, the sample record is captured.

                  The sampled lifespan of an operation:
                  •     Starts with the decoded architectural instruction or micro-op is dispatched for issue.
                  •     Completes when one of:
                        —      The instruction or micro-op is committed to the architectural state of the PE (including completion by
                               generating a synchronous exception).
                        —      The speculative instruction or micro-op is discarded because of misspeculation. For more information
                               see Misspeculation and non-architectural operations on page D6-2278.
                        —      The instruction or micro-op is replayed, on some microarchitectures. For more information see
                               Non-architectural exceptions on page D6-2279.

                  Random number generation
                  The random number generator is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Implementations might use a pseudorandom number.
                  The random number generator must be reset into a useable state. An implementation might include
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED registers to further configure the random number generator.

                  It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the PE adds the random number to the sample interval counter prior to
                  counting down the interval, or after the counter reaches zero and the counter has been reloaded.

                  Defining where operations are sampled
                  The exact point in the sampled lifetime of operations at which sampled operations are chosen for profiling is
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                          Note
                  ARM recommends that the point at which operations are sampled is linked to the definition of the Performance
                  Monitoring Extension (PMU) STALL_FRONTEND and STALL_BACKEND events, so that sampling records
                  information for STALL_BACKEND stalls.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D6-2273
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.1 Statistical Profiling

                       Sample collisions
                       The maximum number of sampled operations that a PE can support simultaneously in flight is IMPLEMENTATION
                       DEFINED. If the maximum number of sampled operations is in flight at the point when a new sample operation must
                       be taken, the new sample is said to have collided with a previous sampled operation.

                       The PE records the fact that a sampled operation has collided with another sampled operation. Software can also
                       count the number of collisions and gauge the impact of the collisions.

                       See Sample collision behavior on page D6-2281.

                       Operations that might be excluded from the sample population
                       It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether each of the following operations is part of the sample population:
                       •       Operations on misspeculated paths.
                       •       Operations (specifically micro-ops) that do not relate to any architecture instruction.
                       •       Operations that generate non-architectural exceptions.

                       If the operation is not part of the sample population, the operation does not cause the sample interval counter to
                       decrement, is not counted by the SAMPLE_POP event and therefore is never sampled.

                       If the operation is part of the sample population, the operation causes the sample interval counter to decrement, is
                       counted by the SAMPLE_POP event, and might be sampled and counted by the SAMPLE_FEED event.

                       See also Misspeculation and non-architectural operations on page D6-2278.

D6.1.2          Collected data
                       Unless otherwise stated all sample records that are generated by a profiling operation contain:
                       •     A timestamp, if enabled. This is one of:
                             —       CNTPCT_EL0.
                             —       CNTVCT_EL0.
                             It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED how this timestamp relates to the sampled operation. It might be the time
                             when the sampled operation was taken or any later time during the lifetime of the sampled operation, that is,
                             up to the time when the sampled operation is completed.
                             If the Generic Timer system counter is disabled and timestamps are enabled, then it is IMPLEMENTATION
                             DEFINED whether:
                             —       The Statistical Profiling Extension behaves as if timestamps are disabled.
                             —       The timestamp that is collected in the sample record is UNKNOWN.
                                         Note
                              This behavior describes when CNTEN.EN is cleared to 0. This behavior does not apply when the Generic
                              Timer system counter is enabled but not accessible at the current Exception level.

                       •      The context, if enabled, which is one or more of:
                              —     CONTEXTIDR_EL1.
                              —     CONTEXTIDR_EL2.
                              —     The Exception level.
                              —     The Security state.
                       •      Information about whether the sampled operation generated an exception:
                              —     The target address for an exception generating operation is not collected.
                       •      Information about whether the sampled operation completed execution.

                       If the sampled operation completes execution and does not generate an exception, the sample record also contains:
                       •       The PC virtual address for the sampled operation.
                       •       Information about whether the sampled operation is a branch, a load, a load atomic, a store, or other.
                       •       Information about whether the sampled operation is conditional, conditional select, or not.
                       •       The total latency, a cycle count of the lifetime of the sampled operation.

D6-2274                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                   D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                                D6.1 Statistical Profiling

                  •     The issue latency, a cycle count from the start of the lifetime of the sampled operation up to the point when
                        the sampled operation starts executing. A sampled operation might be delayed, for example because the input
                        operands were not available.

                  If the sampled operation does not complete execution or generates an exception it is UNPREDICTABLE whether the
                  record contains all or any of this information and the other information about the operation listed in this section and
                  the following subsections.

                  Where an operation generates an exception and the type of exception means a particular item is not computed by
                  the operation, that information is not collected and written to a sample record.

                  The architecture defines a set of additional data that is collected in the sample record for each sampled operation.
                  This is described in the following subsections, and comprises:
                  •      Events.
                  •      Cycle counters. Cycle count values as described in this architecture, which, for a particular implementation,
                         are fixed with an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED value, might be omitted from the sample record.
                  •      Addresses.

                  In addition, the architecture permits IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events, counters, and addresses to be collected.

                  Additional information for each profiled branch or exception return
                  For a completed branch or exception return sampled operation, the profiling operation must record:
                  •      The sampled operation type as an unconditional branch or a conditional branch. Sampled exception returns
                         are treated as unconditional branches by the Statistical Profiling Extension.
                  •      The target virtual address of the branch. The target virtual address includes the Exception level and Security
                         state of the target.
                                  Note
                        If the sampled operation is an illegal exception return, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the context
                        information recorded in the target virtual address is the actual target context, or the target context that is
                        described by the SPSR.

                  •     If the PE implements branch prediction, whether the branch was correctly predicted or mispredicted.
                  •     Whether the branch was taken or not taken.
                  •     Whether the branch was direct or indirect.

                  See also Additional information for each profiled branch or exception return.

                           Note
                  A sampled operation that generates an exception is not treated as a branch.

                  Additional information for each profiled memory access operation
                  For a completed load, store, or atomic sampled operation that does not generate an exception, the profiling operation
                  must record:
                  •      The data virtual and, if enabled, physical addresses being accessed.
                         —      If the applicable Top Byte Ignore (TBI) bit is set to one, the virtual address includes any top-byte tag.
                         —      The physical address is the address the PE accesses in the physical address space, and so includes the
                                Secure Address Space Identifier.
                  •      The sampled operation type, which includes:
                         —      Whether the sampled operation is a load, store, or atomic.
                         —      Whether the sampled operation is Load-Exclusive, Store-Exclusive or Load-acquire, Store-release.
                         —      Whether the sampled operation accesses the general-purpose or SIMD&FP registers.
                  •      The translation latency, a cycle count from the virtual address being generated to the physical address being
                         returned by the MMU.
                  •      Whether the sampled operation accessed the Level 1 data cache and resulted in a hit.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D6-2275
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.1 Statistical Profiling

                       •      Whether the sampled operation accessed the data TLB and resulted in a hit.
                       •      An optional, IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, record of whether the sampled operation accessed Last Level data
                              cache and resulted in a hit.
                       •      An optional, IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, record of whether the sampled operation accessed another socket
                              in a multi-socket system.
                       •      An optional, IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, indicator of the data source for a load.
                       For each of the Last level cache and another socket indicators, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this
                       information is present only for load accesses, only for store accesses, for neither, or for both.

                                Note
                       A store might be marked as not accessing a cache or another socket because it completed before doing so. For
                       example, the write was held in a write buffer. This behavior is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and such events must be
                       interpreted with care.

                       If architecture instructions are sampled, then, for a sampled load/store operation that is not single-copy atomic, the
                       data addresses are the lowest address that is accessed by the sampled operation.

                       Otherwise the information is for the micro-op that is sampled.

                                                                                               Example D6-1 Sampling of micro-ops

                       If an architectural load instruction is split into an address generation micro-op and a load micro-op, then when
                       generating the sample record and filtering based on operation type:
                       •      If the address generation micro-op is sampled, the sampled operation is treated as other.
                       •      If the load micro-op is sampled, the sampled operation is treated as a load.

                       For more information see Filtering sample records on page D6-2284 and Operation Type packet on page D7-2315.

                       Additional information for each profiled conditional instruction (including conditional
                       branches)
                       For a completed conditional branch, conditional select, conditional move, or conditional increment sampled
                       operation, the profiling operation must record:
                       •      That the sampled operation was conditional.
                       •      Whether the condition passed or failed.
                       If a conditional instruction fails its condition code test, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether any of the
                       information for the sampled operation that is generated by executing the sampled operation is recorded. Any value
                       that is recorded and is the result of executing the sampled operation is UNKNOWN.

                                                                                                 Example D6-2 Conditional branches

                       A conditional branch operation fails its condition code test. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the sample
                       record contains a branch target Address packet. If the sample record contains a branch target Address packet, the
                       value in the packet is UNKNOWN.

                       Additional information for other operations
                       For cache maintenance operations by virtual address, cache prefetch, or address translation instructions, the
                       profiling operation:
                       •      Captures an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED subset of the information captured for a load instruction.
                       •      Treats the operation type as other when generating the sample record and filtering based on operation type.

D6-2276                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                  D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                               D6.1 Statistical Profiling

                  See Filtering sample records on page D6-2284 and Operation Type packet.

D6.1.3      Enabling sampling and filtering sample records
                  Profiling can be disabled at individual Exception levels, and is always disabled at EL3.

                  When profiling is disabled, no sample records are collected and the sample interval counters retain their values and
                  do not decrement.

                  Collected sample records can also be filtered by type, by event, and by latency:
                  •     By type, a combination of any or all of:
                        —      Branches.
                        —      Loads.
                        —      Load Atomic.
                        —      Stores.
                  •     By event, a combination of any or all of:
                        —      Mispredicted branches.
                        —      TLB missing accesses.
                        —      Level 1 cache refilling accesses.
                        —      Architecturally retired instructions.
                  •     By latency:
                        —      Whether the total latency of the operation exceeds a programmable threshold.

                  When filtering is enabled, sample records that do not meet the filtering criteria are discarded and are not written to
                  the Profiling Buffer. The pseudocode functions OpType(), OpType_Branch(), OpType_Load(), OpType_Store(),
                  OpType_Other(), OpType_Atomic(), describe the operation types.

D6.1.4      Capturing records of sampled operations
                  Sample records are written by hardware in a packetized format to a buffer in memory:
                  •    The start and end pointers for this buffer are specified in System registers.
                  •    The pointers are virtual address pointers.
                  •    The PE generates a Profiling Buffer management interrupt when the Profiling Buffer is full.

                  For more information see The Profiling Buffer on page D6-2285 and Profiling Buffer management interrupt on
                  page D6-2289.

D6.1.5      PMU Extensions
                  Two sets of additional events are defined for the PMU. If the Statistical Profiling and Performance Monitoring
                  Extensions are implemented, then the following events must be implemented:
                  •     SAMPLE_POP.
                  •     SAMPLE_FEED.
                  •     SAMPLE_FILTRATE.
                  •     SAMPLE_COLLISION.

                           Note
                  These events are discoverable through a read of PMCEID0_EL0[35:32].

                  The Statistical Profiling Extension also introduces the events the following events:
                  •     REMOTE_ACCESS.
                  •     LL_CACHE.
                  •     LL_CACHE_MISS.
                  •     DTLB_WALK.
                  •     ITLB_WALK.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D6-2277
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.1 Statistical Profiling

                       •      LL_CACHE_RD.
                       •      LL_CACHE_MISS_RD.
                       •      REMOTE_ACCESS_RD.

                       These events can be included in any implementation of the PMU Extension, even if the Statistical Profiling
                       Extension is not implemented.

                                Note
                       These events are discoverable through a read of PMCEID1_EL0[24:17] and PMCEID1[24:17].

D6.1.6          Misspeculation and non-architectural operations
                       It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the sample record for a misspeculated operation or an operation generating
                       a non-architectural exception, if sampled, is written to the Profiling Buffer:
                       •       If a sample record of a misspeculated operation or an operation generating a non-architectural exception is
                               written to the Profiling Buffer, then neither event 0 (generated exception) nor event 1 (architecturally retired)
                               are set in the record Events packet.
                       •       If a sample record of a misspeculated operation or an operation generating a non-architectural exception is
                               not captured into the Profiling Buffer, then no event packets are output and the sample is not counted by the
                               SAMPLE_FILTRATE event.

                                Note
                       It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether such operations can be sampled. See Operations that might be excluded
                       from the sample population on page D6-2274.

                       It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether each of the following operations are part of the sample population:
                       •       Operations on misspeculated paths.
                       •       Operations (specifically micro-ops) that do not relate to any architecture instruction.

                       If such an operation is not part of the sample population
                       The operation does not cause the sample counter to decrement, is no counted by the SAMPLE_POP event, and
                       hence is never sampled.

                       If such an operation is part of the sample population
                       The operation causes the sample counter to decrement, is counted by the SAMPLE_POP event, and might be
                       sampled and counted by the SAMPLE_FEED event.

                       It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the sample record for such an operation, if sampled, is captured in the
                       Profiling Buffer:
                       •       If such a sample record is captured in the Profiling Buffer then some information for the operation might not
                               be present. However, the Events packet and either the End packet or theTimestamp packet is always output.
                               Neither event 0 (generated exception) nor event 1 (architecturally retired) will be set in the Events packet.
                       •       If such a sample record is not captured into the Profiling Buffer then no packets are output and the sample is
                               not counted by the SAMPLE_FILTRATE event.

                       If the sample record for an operation on a misspeculated path is captured into the Profiling Buffer, then the record
                       must not contain information that cannot be accessed by privileged software of the owning Exception level.

                                Note
                       If the Owning Exception level passes this data to less privileged software for processing, it can set
                       PMSFCR_EL1.FE to 1 and PMSEVFR_EL1[1] to 1 to prevent speculative instructions from being recorded in the
                       Profiling Buffer.

D6-2278                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                  D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                               D6.1 Statistical Profiling

                  All sample records written to the Profiling Buffer contain the Events packet and either the End packet or the
                  Timestamp packet.

                  If the sampled operation generates an exception, it is UNPREDICTABLE whether the sample record contains any other
                  information.

                  Where a sampled operation generates an exception and the type of exception means that a particular item is not
                  computed by the sampled operation, that information is not collected by the profiling operation. For more
                  information see Synchronization and Statistical Profiling on page D6-2292.

                                                                                                Example D6-3 Translation Faults

                  If a sampled operation generates a Translation Fault, the physical address for the sampled operation was not
                  generated by the MMU and cannot be recorded.

D6.1.7      Non-architectural exceptions
                  An implementation might include exceptions that are not architectural exceptions. That is, in executing an
                  operation, the PE performs some exceptional behavior that does not take an exception as defined by the architecture.
                  These non-architectural exceptions are usually not visible to software.

                  The use on non-architectural exceptions are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                  If a sampled operations generates a non-architectural exception, the sample might include handling of the
                  non-architectural exception. If the sample does not include handling of the non-architectural exception, then the
                  sampled operation does not complete because of the non-architectural exception and it is recorded using E[1] == 0
                  (operation did not retire) in the Events packet. Bit E[0] (operation generated an exception) might be used to indicate
                  the operation did not complete because of the non-architectural exception.

D6.1.8      Interaction with the Embedded Cross Trigger
                  When a sample completes and is written out, CTI input trigger 2 is asserted. This trigger might also be directly
                  connected to other IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED debug features.

D6.1.9      Multithreaded implementations
                  In a multithreaded implementation, Statistical Profiling is implemented per-thread.

                  The sample interval counter counts only operations for the thread that is being profiled.
                  Latency and other cycle counters count each cycle for the PE for which the thread was active and could issue an
                  operation.

                  The architecture does not define features for inter-thread profiling and does not support sharing the Profiling Buffer
                  between threads.

                          Note
                  An implementation is described as multithreaded when the lowest level of affinity consists of logical processors that
                  are implemented using a multi-threading type approach. That is, the performance of processors at the lowest affinity
                  level is very interdependent. On such an implementation, the value of MPIDR_EL1.MT, when read at the highest
                  implemented Exception level, is 1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D6-2279
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.2 Programmers’ Model

D6.2          Programmers’ Model
                       Profiling is controlled by System registers. There is no direct EL0 access to the control registers and by default
                       profiling is disabled. The programmers’ model is divided into the following parts:
                       •      Sampling controls:
                              —       Controlling when an operation is sampled.
                              —       Enable and Filtering controls.
                              —       Controlling the data that is collected.
                       •      Profiling Buffer controls:
                              —       The Profiling Buffer on page D6-2285.
                              —       Profiling Buffer management interrupt on page D6-2289.
                       •      Synchronization and Statistical Profiling on page D6-2292.

D6.2.1          Controlling when an operation is sampled
                       The sample interval counter, PMSICR_EL1.COUNT controls when an operation is selected for sampling. In some
                       implementations, a secondary sample interval counter, PMSICR_EL1.ECOUNT, is also used.

                       The following sections describe the operation of the sample interval counters.

                       Details of the random or pseudorandom number generator used when PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 1 are
                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. See Random number generation on page D6-2273.

                       Initializing one or more sample interval counters
                       When the PE moves from a state where profiling is disabled to a state where profiling is enabled:
                       •    If PMSICR_EL1 is nonzero, then sampling restarts from the current values in PMSICR_EL1.
                       •    If PMSICR_EL1 is zero, then it is loaded with an initial value. The behavior depends on PMSIRR_EL1.RND
                            and an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED choice discoverable by a read of PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd.
                       •    If PMSIRR_EL1.RND is cleared to 0:
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[31:8] is set to PMSIRR_EL1.INTERVAL.
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[7:0] is set to 0x00.
                       •    If PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 1 and PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd is 0:
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[31:8] is set to PMSIRR_EL1.INTERVAL.
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[7:0] is set to a random or pseudorandom value in the range 0x00 to 0xFF.
                       •    If PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 1 and PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd is 1:
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[[31:8] is set to PMSIRR_EL1.INTERVAL.
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[7:0] is set to a random or pseudorandom value in the range 0x00 to 0xFF.
                       •    If PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 1 and PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd is 1:
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[31:8] is set to PMSIRR_EL1.INTERVAL.
                            —     PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[7:0] is set to 0x00.

D6.2.2          Behavior of the sample interval counter while profiling is enabled
                       While profiling is enabled, the counters control when an operation is selected for sampling. The behavior depends
                       on PMSIRR_EL1.RND and an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED choice discoverable in PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd.

                       If PMSIRR_EL1.RND is cleared to 0:

                       While nonzero, the sample interval counter decrements by 1 for each member of the sample population. When the
                       counter reaches zero:
                       •     A member of the sampling population is selected for sampling.
                       •     The counter is set as follows:
                             —      PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[31:8] is set to PMSIRR_EL1.INTERVAL.
                             —      PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[7:0] is set to 0x00.

D6-2280                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                  D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                            D6.2 Programmers’ Model

                                 Note
                        Because the counter counts down to zero, when PMSIRR_EL1.RND is cleared to 0 the interval between
                        operations being selected for sampling is (INTERVAL×256+1).

                  If PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 1 and PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd is 0:

                  While nonzero, the sample interval counter decrements by 1 for each member of the sample population. When the
                  counter reaches zero:
                  •     A member of the sampling population is selected for sampling.
                  •     The counter is set as follows:
                        —      PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[31:8] is set to PMSIRR_EL1.INTERVAL.
                        —      PMSICR_EL1.COUNT[7:0] is set to a random or pseudorandom value in the range 0x00 to 0xFF.
                                        Note
                               When PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 0 and PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd is 1, the mean interval between
                               operations being selected for sampling is (INTERVAL×256+128), if the random number generator is
                               uniform.

                  If PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 1 and PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd is 1:

                  While nonzero, the primary sample interval counter decrements by 1 for each member of the sample population.
                  When the primary counter reaches zero:
                  •     The primary sample interval counter is reloaded.
                  •     A secondary sample interval counter, PMSICR_EL1.ECOUNT, is set to a random or pseudorandom value in
                        the range 0x00 to 0xFF.
                  While the secondary sample interval counter is nonzero, the secondary sample interval counter decrements by 1 for
                  each member of the sample population. The primary sample interval counter also continues to decrement because
                  it is also nonzero.

                  When the secondary sample interval counter reaches zero, an operation is selected for sampling.

                          Note
                  When PMSIRR_EL1.RND is set to 1 and PMSIDR_EL1.ERnd is 1, the mean interval between operations being
                  selected for sampling is (INTERVAL×256+1), if the random number generator is uniform.

D6.2.3      Behavior of the sample interval counter while profiling is disabled
                  When profiling is disabled:
                  •    No operations are selected for sampling.
                  •    No sample records are collected.
                  •    The sample interval counters retain their values and do not decrement.

D6.2.4      Sample collision behavior
                  On a sample collision:
                  •     The PMU event SAMPLE_COLLISION is generated.
                  •     PMBSR_EL1.COLL is set to 1.

                  Following a context synchronization event an indirect write to PMBSR_EL1.COLL is guaranteed to be visible to
                  instructions in program order after the sampled operation that collided. There is no guarantee of visibility without
                  a context synchronization event. For more information see Synchronization and Statistical Profiling on
                  page D6-2292.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D6-2281
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.2 Programmers’ Model

                                Note
                       This means that following a context synchronization event PMBSR_EL1.COLL will not change on entry to a state
                       where profiling is disabled.

D6-2282                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.       ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                              ID121917
                                                                                                   D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                     D6.3 Enable and Filtering controls

D6.3       Enable and Filtering controls

D6.3.1      Enabling Profiling
                   Profiling is disabled if the Profiling Buffer is disabled, including when:
                   •      PMBLIMITR_EL1.E is cleared to 0 or PMBSR_EL1.S is set to 1.
                   •      Executing at a higher Exception level than the Profiling Buffer owning Exception level.
                   •      Executing in the Security state that is not the Security state of the owning Exception level.
                   •      The PE is in Debug state.

                            Note
                   The owning Exception level is controlled by MDCR_EL3.NSPB and MDCR_EL2.E2PB.

                   PMSCR_EL1.{E1SPE, E0SPE} and PMSCR_EL2.{E2SPE, E0HSPE} enable sampling by Exception level:
                   •   In a guest operating system or Secure state, PMSCR_EL1.E1SPE enables profiling at EL1 and
                       PMSCR_EL1.E0SPE at EL0.
                   •   In a hypervisor or host operating system, PMSCR_EL2.E 2SPE enables profiling at EL2 and
                       PMSCR_EL2.E0HSPE at EL0.

                   Table D6-1 shows the valid combinations of the values of PMBSR_EL1.S, PMBLIMITR_EL1.E, SCR_EL3.NS,
                   MDCR_EL3.NSPB, MDCR_EL2.E2PB and HCR_EL2.TGE that define when sampling is enabled.

                   In Table D6-1:

                   D                 Disabled.

                   E2SPE             Enabled if PMSCR_EL2.E2SPE == 1, disabled otherwise.

                   E1SPE             Enabled if PMSCR_EL1.E1SPE == 1, disabled otherwise.

                   E0HSPE            Enabled if PMSCR_EL2.E0HSPE == 1, disabled otherwise.

                   E0SPE             Enabled if PMSCR_EL1.E0SPE == 1, disabled otherwise.

                  Table D6-1 Enabling by Exception level and Security state (for all Exception levels using AArch64)

                             Controls                                                  Sampling enabled at

             S    E    NS     NSPB        E2PB     TGE         EL3               EL2                 EL1                   EL0

             1    X     X        X          X        X           D                 D                      D                 D

             0    0     X        X          X        X           D                 D                      D                 D

                  1     1      0b1x        0b1x      0           D                 D                E1SPE                 E0SPE

                                                     1           D                 D                  n/a                   D

                                           0b00      0           D              E2SPE               E1SPE                 E0SPE

                                                     1           D              E2SPE                 n/a                 E0HSPE

                               0b0x         X        X           D                 D                      D                 D

                        0      0b1x         X        X           D                n/a                     D                 D

                               0b0x         X        X           D                n/a               E1SPE                 E0SPE

                   This is described in the pseudocode functions ProfilingBufferEnabled() and CheckStatisticalProfilingAccess().

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D6-2283
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.3 Enable and Filtering controls

D6.3.2          Filtering sample records
                       PMSFCR_EL1.FT enables filtering by operation type. When enabled PMSFCR_EL1.{ST, LD, B} define the
                       collected types:
                       •      ST enables collection of store sampled operations, including all atomic operations.
                       •      LD enables collection of load sampled operations, including atomic operations that return a value to a
                              register.
                       •      B enables collection of branch sampled operations, including direct and indirect branches and exception
                              returns.

                                Note
                       When micro-op sampling is implemented, filtering is based on the micro-op type.

                       Table D6-2 summarizes the controls for filtering by operation type. In this table:
                       Load Atomic Refers to atomic operations which return a value to a general-purpose register. Other atomic
                                     operations are classed as Store.
                       D             Indicates that the operation is discarded.
                       C             Indicates that the operation is collected.

                                                                                              Table D6-2 Filtering by Operation type

                                                            PMSFCR_EL1
                                                                                                      Operation type
                                                               field

                                                       FT     LD    ST     B     Load      Load Atomic        Store    Branch   Other

                                                        0     X      X     X       C              C            C         C        C

                                                        1     0      0      0      D             D             D         D        D

                                                                            1      D             D             D         C        D

                                                                     1      0      D              C            C         D        D

                                                                            1      D              C            C         C        D

                                                              1      0      0      C              C            D         D        D

                                                                            1      C              C            D         C        D

                                                                     1      0      C              C            C         D        D

                                                                            1      C              C            C         C        D

                       PMSFCR_EL1.FE enables filtering by a set of events that are defined by PMSEVFR_EL1. When enabled, only
                       sampled operations with all the events in the filter set are recorded and written to the Profiling Buffer.

                       PMSFCR_EL1.FL enables filtering by total latency. PMSLATFR_EL1.MINLAT defines the minimum latency.
                       When enabled, only sampled operations with a total latency greater than or equal to the minimum latency are
                       recorded and written to the Profiling Buffer.

                       These controls combine together as a logical AND.

                                                                                  Example D6-4 Collection of sampled operations

                       If PMSFCR_EL1.FE is set to 1, PMSFCR_EL1.FT is set to 1, and PMSFCR_EL1.FL is set to 1, then only sampled
                       operations that meet all of the following criteria are recorded and written to the Profiling Buffer:
                       •      The sampled operation is one of the selected operation types.
                       •      The operation has all of the events in the filter set.

D6-2284                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                  D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                    D6.3 Enable and Filtering controls

                  •     The total latency is equal to or greater than the minimum latency.

                  This is described in the pseudocode function CollectRecord().

D6.3.3      Controlling the data that is collected
                  Certain data in sample records is only collected if permitted by one or both of EL1 and EL2. This is to restrict
                  exposure of data to a lower Exception level or to Non-secure state.

                  CONTEXTIDR_EL1 is collected only if PMSCR_EL1.CX is set to 1 and one of the following is true:
                  •   The PE is executing at EL1 or EL0.
                  •   The PE is executing in Secure state or the Effective value of HCR_EL2.TGE is 0.

                  CONTEXTIDR_EL2 is collected only if the Effective value of PMSCR_EL2.CX is 1 and all of the following are
                  true:
                  •     EL2 is implemented.
                  •     The PE is executing in Non-secure state.

                  This is described in the pseudocode functions CollectContextIDR1() and CollectContextIDR2().

                  Timestamps are collected only if one of the following is true:
                  •     PMSCR_EL1.TS is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by EL1.
                  •     PMSCR_EL2.TS is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by EL2.

                  The timestamp is a choice between:
                  •     Physical time, which is defined by the value of CNTPCT_EL0.
                  •     Virtual time, as defined by the value of CNTVCT_EL0. That is, the physical time minus the virtual offset,
                        CNTVOFF_EL2. However, the virtual offset is treated as zero if a read of CNTVCT_EL0 at the current
                        Exception level would treat the virtual offset as zero.

                  Physical time is collected if any of the following is true:
                  •     PMSCR_EL1.PCT is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by Secure EL1.
                  •     PMSCR_EL2.PCT is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by EL2.
                  •     PMSCR_EL1.PCT is set to 1 and PMSCR_EL2.PCT is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by
                        Non-secure EL1.

                  Virtual time is collected otherwise. If EL2 is not implemented, PMSCR_EL1.PCT is RES1. This is described by the
                  pseudocode function CollectTimeStamp().
                  Physical data addresses are collected only if one of the following is true:
                  •     PMSCR_EL1.PA is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by Secure EL1.
                  •     PMSCR_EL2.PA is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by EL2.
                  •     PMSCR_EL1.PA is set to 1 and PMSCR_EL2.PA is set to 1 and the Profiling Buffer is owned by Non-secure
                        EL1.

                  If EL2 is not implemented, the PE behaves as if PMSCR_EL2.PA is set to 1, other than for a direct read of the
                  register.

                  Enabling collection of the physical data addresses has an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED impact on the sampled
                  operation. This is described by the pseudocode function CollectPhysicalAddress().

D6.3.4      The Profiling Buffer
                  The profile data is collected in a memory Profiling Buffer. The Profiling Buffer is defined by:
                  •     PMBPTR_EL1, the current write pointer.
                  •     PMBLIMITR_EL1, the write limit pointer.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D6-2285
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.3 Enable and Filtering controls

                       The Profiling Buffer starts at the current write pointer and extends to the current limit pointer minus one. The write
                       limit pointer must be aligned to the smallest implemented translation granule size. The alignment of the current
                       write pointer is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                       PMBLIMITR_EL1 and PMBPTR_EL1 are virtual addresses in the stage 1 translation regime of the owning
                       Exception level. This is called the owning translation regime.

                                Note
                       The translation of virtual addresses to physical addresses is identical to that for any other virtual address in the
                       owning Exception level. For example, PMBPTR_EL1[63:56] are ignored by address translation if the respective
                       TBI bit is set to 1.

D6.3.5          Restrictions on the current write pointer
                       This section describes the software rules on setting the current write pointer, PMBPTR_EL1. If these rules are not
                       followed, the value returned for a direct read of PMBPTR_EL1 is UNKNOWN, the behavior is UNPREDICTABLE, and
                       the PE might do any of the following at any point after profiling is enabled:
                       •      Write sample records to any writeable address in memory that is writable at the owning Exception level.
                       •      Generate a Profiling Buffer management interrupt, with or without indicating data loss, for one of the
                              following reasons:
                              —     The Profiling Buffer is full.
                              —     Any MMU Fault.

                       When profiling becomes enabled, all the following must be true:
                       •    The current write pointer must be at least one sample record below the write limit pointer. That is:
                              UInt(PMBPTR_EL1.PTR) <= UInt(PMBLIMITR_EL1.LIMIT :Zeros(12)) - 2PMSIDR_EL1.MaxSize.
                       •      PMBPTR_EL1.PTR[63:56] must equal PMBLIMITR_EL1.LIMIT[63:56].

                       When the Profiling Buffer is first configured, PMBPTR_EL1.PTR must be aligned to PMBIDR_EL1.Align. That
                       is, if PMBIDR_EL1.Align is nonzero, PMBPTR_EL1.PTR [UInt(PMBIDR_EL1.Align)-1:0] must be all zeros.
                       However, the current write pointer can usually be restored to the saved write pointer value it had when profiling was
                       disabled, providing a PSB CSYNC and a context synchronization event were executed before reading PMBPTR_EL1:
                       •      If no Profiling Buffer management interrupt was signaled then profiling can be restarted from the saved write
                              pointer. In this case, the saved write pointer points within one sample record of the write limit pointer.
                       •      If a Profiling Buffer management interrupt was signaled then:
                              —      If PMBSR_EL1.S is restored to 1, then profiling is not being enabled, and there are no constraints on
                                     the value written to PMBPTR_EL1.
                              —      If PMBSR_EL1.S is restored to 0, and the Profiling Buffer management interrupt was caused by an
                                     MMU fault, profiling can be restarted from the saved write pointer; if PMBSR_EL1.{EA, DL} did not
                                     also indicate an external abort or data loss, and the saved write pointer is at least one sample record
                                     below the write limit pointer.
                                             Note
                                     If a signaled MMU fault has not been corrected, the Statistical Profiling Extension generates a new
                                     MMU fault Profiling Buffer management interrupt when it next tries to write a sample record.

                              —      If PMBSR_EL1.S is restored to 0, and the Profiling Buffer management interrupt was caused by a
                                     buffer full event, the Profiling Buffer can be extended and profiling restarted from the saved write
                                     pointer; if PMBSR_EL1.{EA, DL} did not also indicate an external abort or data loss and the saved
                                     write pointer is at least one sample record below the extended write limit pointer.

                       The current write pointer must not be restored from the saved write pointer following a Profiling Buffer
                       management interrupt if PMBSR_EL1.DL was set to 1.

                       The saved write pointer might not be aligned to 2PMBIDR_EL1.Align and might point to within one sample record of
                       the write limit pointer.

                       For more information see Synchronization and Statistical Profiling on page D6-2292.

D6-2286                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                   D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                                     D6.3 Enable and Filtering controls

D6.3.6      The owning Exception level
                  The owning Exception level is:
                  •     Non-secure EL1, if all of the following are true:
                        —      Either EL3 is not implemented and the PE executes in Non-secure state, or MDCR_EL3.NSPB is set
                               to either 0b10 or 0b11.
                        —      Either EL2 is not implemented or MDCR_EL2.E2PB is set to either 0b10 or 0b11.
                  •     EL2, if all of the following are true:
                        —      EL2 is implemented.
                        —      Either EL3 is not implemented or MDCR_EL3.NSPB is set to either 0b10 or 0b11.
                        —      MDCR_EL2.E2PB is set to 0b00.
                  •     Secure EL1, if any of the following are true:
                        —      EL3 is not implemented and the PE executes in Secure state.
                        —      MDCR_EL3.NSPB is set to either 0b00 or 0b01.

                  When the owning Exception level is Non-secure EL1
                  The Profiling Buffer addresses are in the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime using the current ASID from
                  TTBRx_EL1. This is a two-stage translation using the current VMID if EL2 is implemented and HCR_EL2.VM is
                  set to 1.

                  If EL3 is implemented, then the Profiling Buffer is disabled in Secure state.

                  If EL2 is implemented, then profiling is disabled at EL2 and at Non-secure EL0 when HCR_EL2.TGE is set to 1.

                  When the owning Exception level is EL2
                  The Profiling Buffer addresses are in the EL2 translation regime. If both HCR_EL2.E2H is set to 1 and
                  HCR_EL2.TGE is set to 1, this is an EL2&0 translation regime using the current EL2&0 translation regime ASID
                  from TTBRx_EL2.

                  If EL3 is implemented, then the Profiling Buffer is disabled in Secure state.

                           Note
                  If either HCR_EL2.E2H is cleared to 0 or HCR_EL2.TGE is cleared to 0, and the PE is executing at EL1 or EL0,
                  the EL2 translation regime is not the current stage 1 translation regime because the current stage 1 translation regime
                  is EL1&0.

                  When the owning Exception level is Secure EL1
                  The Profiling Buffer addresses are in the Secure EL1&0 translation regime using the current ASID from
                  TTBRx_EL1.

                  If EL3 is implemented, then the buffer is disabled in Non-secure state.

                  The Profiling Buffer is disabled if any of the following are true:
                  •     SCR_EL3.NS indicates the other Security state to the owning Exception level.
                  •     The owning Exception level is using AArch32 state.
                  •     PMBLIMITR_EL1.E is cleared to 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D6-2287
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.3 Enable and Filtering controls

                       Table D6-3 summarizes the owning translation regime.

                        Table D6-3 Summary of owning translation regime (for all Exception levels using AArch64 state)

          PMBLIMITR_EL1.E            SCR_EL3.NS         MDCR_EL3.NSPB            MDCR_EL2.E2PB            Owning translation regime

          0                          X                  X                        X                        Disabled

          1                          1                  0b1x                     0b1x                     Non-secure EL1&0

                                                                                 0b00                     Non-secure EL2 or EL2&0 a

                                                        0b0x                     X                        Disabled

                                     0                  0b1x                     X                        Disabled

                                                        0b0x                     X                        Secure EL1&0

              a. Depending on the values of HCR_EL2.{E2H,TGE}.

D6.3.7          Memory access types and coherency
                       The Statistical Profiling Extension acts as a separate observer in the system and is subject to the rules regarding
                       coherency.

                       The memory type that is used for a write by the Statistical Profiling Extension to the Profiling Buffer is taken from
                       the translation table entries for the virtual address being written to. That is:
                       •      The writes are treated as coming from an observer that is coherent with all observers in the Shareability
                              domain that is defined by the translation tables.
                       •      There is no requirement to manage coherency for observers in the same Shareability domain but coherency
                              for other observers in the system might require explicit management.

                       For more information see Synchronization and Statistical Profiling on page D6-2292.

D6.3.8          TLB operations
                       Translations might be cached in a TLB. TLB maintenance operations (including TLB maintenance operations that
                       are broadcast from other PEs) operate on these cached translations.

                       Any TLB maintenance operation followed by a DSB (including an operation broadcast from another PE and a
                       following DSB on that other PE):
                       •     Does not complete until all sample records previously translated using an invalidated translation have been
                             written to the Profiling Buffer.
                       •     Any remaining sample records are guaranteed not to use an invalidated translation.

                       For such operations, the DSB must apply to both loads and stores. Although the Statistical Profiling Extension acts
                       as another observer in the system, for determining the Shareability domain of this DSB or TLB maintenance
                       operation, the writes of sample records are treated as coming from the PE that is being profiled.

                                Note
                       Completion of the DSB does not guarantee that all buffered profiling data has written out. See Synchronization and
                       Statistical Profiling on page D6-2292.

D6.3.9          Effect on the exclusive monitors
                       If an operation between Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions is sampled, then the Store-Exclusive must
                       be guaranteed not to fail, even though the sample record is written to an unrelated address.

D6-2288                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                 D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                            D6.4 Profiling Buffer management interrupt

D6.4       Profiling Buffer management interrupt
                  A Profiling Buffer management interrupt occurs:
                  •     On a fault, see Faults and watchpoints on page D6-2290.
                  •     On an external abort, see External aborts on page D6-2291.
                  •     When the Profiling Buffer fills, see Buffer full event on page D6-2290.

                  On a Profiling Buffer management interrupt:
                  •     The service bit, PMBSR_EL1.S, is set to 1.
                  •     The data loss bit, PMBSR_EL1.DL, is set as described in the event description.
                  •     The Profiling Buffer management interrupt signal, PMBIRQ, is asserted:
                        —      PMBIRQ is a level interrupt driven by PMBSR_EL1.S. This means that:
                               A direct write that sets PMBSR_EL1.S to 1 causes the interrupt to be asserted.
                               PMBIRQ remains asserted until software clears PMBSR_EL1.S to 0.
                        —      If a Generic Interrupt Controller (GIC) is implemented, PMBIRQ must be configured as a Private
                               Peripheral Interrupt (PPI) in a multiprocessor system. PMBIRQ is signaled by the PE that implements
                               the Statistical Profiling Extension.
                                        Note
                               A standard PPI number is allocated by the ARM®Server Base System Architecture (SBSA).

                  •     Additional syndrome for the event is written to PMBSR_EL1.MSS. Unless otherwise stated in the event
                        description, other PMBSR_EL1 fields are unchanged.

                  While PMBSR_EL1.S is set to 1:
                  •     The buffer is disabled and profiling is disabled.
                  •     All remaining buffered sample records are discarded.
                  •     The values in PMBPTR_EL1 are retained and PMSICR_EL1does not decrement.

                  Buffer full events and MMU faults leading to Profiling Buffer management interrupts are synchronous.

                  It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether external aborts are reported to the Statistical Profiling Extension
                  synchronously or asynchronously. If external aborts are reported as asynchronous:
                  •       The external abort might not be received until after a first Profiling Buffer management interrupt has set
                          PMBSR_EL1.S to 1.
                  •       Writes to the buffer might generate a second Profiling Buffer management interrupt after the external abort
                          has set PMBSR_EL1.S to 1.

                  The architecture does not require that a sample record is written sequentially by the Statistical Profiling Extension,
                  only that:
                  •      The Statistical Profiling Extension never writes past the PMBLIMITR_EL1 limit pointer.
                  •      On a Profiling Buffer management interrupt, PMBSR_EL1.DL indicates whether PMBPTR_EL1 points to
                         the first byte after the last complete sample record.
                  •      On an MMU fault or synchronous external abort, PMBPTR_EL1 serves as a Fault Address Register.

                          Note
                  •     This means that it must not be assumed that:
                        —     There is ever any valid data beyond the current PMBPTR_EL1 write pointer.
                        —     The PE has not written a valid sample record between the current PMBPTR_EL1 write pointer and the
                              PMBLIMITR_EL1 limit pointer.
                        —     If PMBSR_EL1.DL is set to 1 on a Profiling Buffer management interrupt, that there is any valid data
                              between the end of the last complete sample record and the current PMBPTR_EL1 write pointer.
                        —     Any valid data has been written to the Profiling Buffer if an external abort is reported asynchronously
                              to the Statistical Profiling Extension.

                  •     The last complete sample record must end at most 2(PMSIDR_EL1.MaxSize) bytes below PMBPTR_EL1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         D6-2289
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.4 Profiling Buffer management interrupt

D6.4.1         Prioritization of Profiling Buffer management interrupts
                      Where multiple synchronous Profiling Buffer management interrupts occur on writing a sample record, the PE
                      prioritizes them as follows (from highest to lowest priority):
                      1.      Synchronous fault.
                      2.      Synchronous external abort.
                      3.      Buffer full event.

                      Asynchronous external aborts are not prioritized with respect to other events.

D6.4.2         Buffer full event
                      If, after writing a sample record, there is not sufficient space in the Profiling Buffer for a sample record of the size
                      indicated by PMSIDR_EL1.MaxSize, and PMBSR_EL1.S is 0, a Profiling Buffer management interrupt is
                      generated:
                      •       PMBSR_EL1.EC is set to 0b000000, other buffer management event.
                      •       The BSC field of PMBSR_EL1.MSS is set as follows:
                              —      PMBSR_EL1.BSC is set to 0b000001, buffer filled.
                      •       PMBPTR_EL1 is set to the first byte after the last complete sample record. PMBSR_EL1.DL is unchanged.
                      •       The other PMBSR_EL1 fields are unchanged.

                      That is, the Profiling Buffer management interrupt is generated when the PE writes past the write limit pointer minus
                      2(PMSIDR_EL1.MaxSize). The Statistical Profiling Extension never writes beyond the write limit pointer.
                      For more information see Restrictions on the current write pointer on page D6-2286.

D6.4.3         Faults and watchpoints
                      Table D6-4 lists the faults that might be generated by a write to the Profiling Buffer by the Statistical Profiling
                      Extension.

                      Writes to the Profiling Buffer never generate watchpoints.

                                                                                                                        Table D6-4 Faults

              Fault                     Conditions

              Translation               The translation of a virtual address to a physical address might generate a Translation fault.

              Address Size              The translation of a virtual address to a physical address might generate an Address Size fault.

              Alignment                 If PMBPTR_EL1 is not aligned to an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED minimum alignment, the
                                        behavior is UNPREDICTABLE and a write to the Profiling Buffer by the Statistical Profiling
                                        Extension might generate an Alignment fault. For more information see Restrictions on the
                                        current write pointer on page D6-2286.

              Permission                Writes to the Profiling Buffer are made as privileged writes. If the write does not have write
                                        permission, a Permission fault is generated. The value of PSTATE.PAN is ignored and treated as
                                        zero.

              Unsupported Access        If hardware management of the Dirty Bit is enabled and the Dirty Bit is not set, it is
                                        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether an Unsupported Access fault is generated or the write sets the
                                        Dirty Bit in the translation table. For more information see Hardware management of dirty state
                                        on page D4-2167.

              Access Flag               If hardware management of the Access Flag is enabled and the Access Flag is not set, it is
                                        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether an Access Flag fault is generated or the write sets the Access
                                        Flag in the translation table. For more information see Hardware management of the Access flag
                                        on page D4-2166.

              TLB Conflict fault        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

D6-2290                            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                           Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                  D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                             D6.4 Profiling Buffer management interrupt

                  If a write to the Profiling Buffer generates a fault and PMBSR_EL1.S is 0, then a Profiling Buffer management
                  interrupt is generated:
                  •      PMBSR_EL1.S is set to 1.
                  •      PMBSR_EL1.EC is set to one of:
                         —       0b100100, stage 1 Data Abort on write to the Profiling Buffer.
                         —       0b100101, stage 2 Data Abort on write to the Profiling Buffer.
                  •      The FSC field of PMBSR_EL1.MSS is set as follows:
                         —       PMBSR_EL1.FSC is set to indicate the type of the fault.
                  •      PMBPTR_EL1 is set to the address that generated the fault.
                  •      If PMBPTR_EL1] is not the address of the first byte after the last complete sample record written by the
                         Statistical Profiling Extension, then PMBSR_EL1.DL is set to 1. Otherwise, PMBSR_EL1.DL is unchanged.
                  •      The other PMBSR_EL1 fields are unchanged.

                           Note
                  Each of these faults gives rise to a Profiling Buffer management interrupt, not an actual MMU fault exception. The
                  ESR and FAR registers are unchanged.

                  For more information see The MMU fault-checking sequence on page D4-2194.

D6.4.4      External aborts
                  A write to the Profiling Buffer might generate an external abort, including an external abort on a translation table
                  walk or translation table update. It is an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED choice whether such an external abort:
                  •     Is reported to the Statistical Profiling Extension and treated as a Profiling Buffer management interrupt.
                  •     Generates an SError interrupt exception.

                  If a write to the Profiling Buffer generates an external abort that is reported to the Statistical Profiling Extension:
                  •      The external abort bit, PMBSR_EL1.EA, is set to 1.
                  •      The Statistical Profiling Extension stops writing sample records to the Profiling Buffer. It is
                         IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether an external abort on a write to the Profiling Buffer is reported as
                         synchronous or asynchronous:
                         —       The external abort is reported as synchronous if PMBPTR_EL1 is set to the address that was externally
                                 aborted.
                         —       The external abort is reported as asynchronous if PMBPTR_EL1 is not guaranteed to be set to the
                                 address that was externally aborted.
                  •      If the external abort is reported as asynchronous or PMBPTR_EL1 is not the address of the first byte of the
                         sample record being written by the Statistical Profiling Extension, then PMBSR_EL1.DL is set to 1.
                         Otherwise PMBSR_EL1.DL is unchanged.
                                  Note
                        Following an external abort reported asynchronously to the Statistical Profiling Extension, software must not
                        assume that any valid data has been written to the Profiling Buffer.

                  •     The other PMBSR_EL1 fields are unchanged.

                  If a write to the Profiling Buffer generates an external abort that is taken as an SError interrupt exception, the PE
                  takes the SError interrupt exception as normal, and PMBSR_EL1 fields are unchanged.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D6-2291
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.4 Profiling Buffer management interrupt

                              Note
                      Treating the external abort as a Profiling Buffer management interrupt:
                      •      Sets PMBSR_EL1.S to 1 and so disables the Statistical Profiling Extension.
                      •      Allows error recovery software to isolate the event to the actions of the Statistical Profiling Extension.

                      Taking an SError interrupt:
                      •     Means that the Statistical Profiling Extension will only be disabled if the SError interrupt is taken to an
                            Exception level where the Statistical Profiling Extension is disabled.
                      •     Might not allow error recovery software to isolate the event and error containment.

D6.4.5         Synchronization and Statistical Profiling
                      The profiling operation of the Statistical Profiling Extension:
                      •     Makes indirect reads and indirect writes of System registers.
                      •     Writes to memory.
                      •     Makes further indirect writes to PMBPTR_EL1 as a result of an external abort on a write to memory.

                      The indirect reads of the PMSCR_EL1.{E1SPE, E0SPE} and PMSCR_EL2.{E2SPE, E0HSPE} controls when
                      determining whether to select an operation for profiling are treated as indirect reads made by the instruction being
                      executed, and subject to the standard requirements for synchronization.

                      Otherwise, although the profiling operation is generated by a sampled operation, the profiling operation executes
                      independently of the instructions that are executed on the PE, and acts as a separate memory observer from the PE
                      in the system.

                      A DSB instruction guarantees that all memory transactions that are made by the PE are observable by writes made
                      by a profiling operation relating to a sampled operation in program order after the DSB instruction.
                      A Context synchronization event guarantees that a direct write to a System register made by the PE in program order
                      before the context synchronization event are observable by indirect reads and indirect writes of the same System
                      register made by a profiling operation relating to a sampled operation in program order after the context
                      synchronization event.

                      To synchronize previous profiling operations, software must execute a PSB CSYNC Buffer Synchronization
                      instruction.

                              Note
                      The PSB CSYNC instruction is not defined in the AArch32 instruction set architecture.

                      Following a context synchronization event, a PSB CSYNC instruction is guaranteed to synchronize the profiling
                      operations for all instructions that are executed in program order before the context synchronization event.

                      Synchronized by the PSB CSYNC instruction means:
                      •    A direct read of a System register in program order following a PSB CSYNC instruction requires explicit
                           synchronization to observe an indirect write to the same System register made by a profiling operation
                           synchronized by the PSB CSYNC instruction.
                      •    An indirect write to a System register made by a profiling operation synchronized by a PSB CSYNC instruction
                           does not affect a direct write to the same System register made in program order following the PSB CSYNC
                           instruction.
                      •    A direct write to a System register in program order following a PSB CSYNC instruction is not allowed to affect
                           an indirect read of the same System register made by a profiling operation synchronized by the PSB CSYNC
                           instruction.
                      •    A DSB instruction in program order following a PSB CSYNC instruction does not complete before the writes to
                           the Profiling Buffer of sample records for profiling operations synchronized by the PSB CSYNC instruction have
                           completed. The DSB instruction must apply to both loads and stores.
                      For the indirect write to PMBSR_EL1 that is made as a result of an external abort on a write of a sample record to
                      memory, the synchronization rules apply only after the write has completed.

D6-2292                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                  D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
                                                                                             D6.4 Profiling Buffer management interrupt

                  Although the Statistical Profiling Extension acts as another observer in the system, for determining the Shareability
                  domain of the DSB instructions, the writes of sample records are treated as coming from the PE that is being profiled.

                           Note
                  If the Statistical Profiling Extension is not disabled when the context synchronization event occurs, further profiling
                  operations might be generated that are not guaranteed to be synchronized by the PSB CSYNC instruction.
                  If the PE takes an exception to an Exception level where the Statistical Profiling Extension is disabled, no new
                  operations are selected for sampling. The Statistical Profiling Extension is always disabled if the owning Exception
                  level is a lower Exception level than the current Exception level.

                  In the absence of a context synchronization event, a PSB CSYNC instruction is not required to execute in program order
                  with respect to sampled operations.

D6.4.6      UNPREDICTABLE behavior

                  In the absence of correct context synchronization events, it is UNPREDICTABLE whether an indirect read of a System
                  register made by a profiling operation will return the old or the new values.

                  If the indirect reads mean that ProfilingBufferEnabled() returns FALSE when a sample record or records are about
                  to be written to the physical address, then it is further UNPREDICTABLE whether the sample record or records:
                  •       Are written to memory.
                  •       Are silently discarded and not written to memory.
                  •       Are discarded and not written to memory, and a Profiling Buffer management interrupt is generated:
                          —      PMBSR_EL1.DL is set to 1.
                          —      PMBSR_EL1.EC is set to 0x00.
                          —      PMBSR_EL1.BSC is set to 0x00 to indicate that the buffer is not full.
                  This means that software must execute a PSB CSYNC instruction to force any sample records to be written to the
                  Profiling Buffer before changing context.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          D6-2293
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
D6 The Statistical Profiling Extension
D6.4 Profiling Buffer management interrupt

D6-2294                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
