Chapter E2
The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model

                  This chapter gives an application level description of the memory model for software executing in AArch32 state.
                  This means it describes the memory model for execution in EL0 when EL0 is using AArch32 in the following
                  sections:
                  •      About the ARM memory model on page E2-3004.
                  •      Atomicity in the ARM architecture on page E2-3006.
                  •      Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page E2-3011.
                  •      Caches and memory hierarchy on page E2-3022.
                  •      Alignment support on page E2-3027.
                  •      Endian support on page E2-3029.
                  •      Memory types and attributes on page E2-3032.
                  •      Mismatched memory attributes on page E2-3042.
                  •      Synchronization and semaphores on page E2-3045

                          Note
                  In this chapter, System register names usually link to the description of the register in Chapter G7 AArch32 System
                  Register Descriptions, for example SCTLR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3003
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.1 About the ARM memory model

E2.1         About the ARM memory model
                    The ARM architecture is a weakly ordered memory architecture that permits the observation and completion of
                    memory accesses in a different order from the program order. The following sections of this chapter provide the
                    complete definition of the ARMv8 memory model, this introduction is not intended to contradict the definition
                    found in those sections. In general, the basic principles of the ARMv8 memory model are:

                    •     To provide a memory model that has similar weaknesses to those found in the memory models used by
                          high-level programming languages such as C or Java. For example, by permitting independent memory
                          accesses to be re-ordered as seen by other observers.

                    •     To avoid the requirement for multi-copy atomicity in the majority of memory types.

                    •     The provision of instructions and memory barriers to compensate for the lack of multi-copy atomicity in the
                          cases where it would be needed.

                    •     The use of address, data, and control dependencies in the creation of order so as to avoid having excessive
                          numbers of barriers or other explicit instructions in common situations where some order is required by the
                          programmer or the compiler.

                    This section contains:
                    •      Address space.
                    •      Memory type overview on page E2-3005.

E2.1.1        Address space
                    Address calculations are performed using 32-bit registers. Supervisory software determines the valid address range.

                    Attempting to access an address that is not valid generates an MMU fault.

                    Address calculations are performed modulo 232.
                    The result of an address calculation is UNKNOWN if it overflows or underflows the 32-bit address range A[31:0].

                    Memory accesses use the MemA[], MemO[], MemU[], and MemU_unpriv[] pseudocode functions:
                    •   The MemA[] function makes an aligned access of the required type.
                    •   The MemO[] function makes an ordered access of the required type.
                    •   The MemU[] function makes an unaligned access of the required type
                    •   The MemU_unpriv[] function makes an unaligned, unprivileged access of the required type.

                    Each of these functions calls Mem_with_type[] function, that specifies the required access. This calls
                    AArch32.MemSingle[], which performs an atomic, little-endian read of size bytes.

                    The AccType enumeration defines the different access types.

                            Note
                    •     Chapter G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model and Chapter G4 The AArch32 Virtual Memory System
                          Architecture include descriptions of memory system features that are transparent to the application, including
                          memory access, address translation, memory maintenance instructions, and alignment checking and the
                          associated fault handling. These chapters also reference pseudocode descriptions of these operations.

                    •     For references to the pseudocode that relates to memory accesses, see Basic memory access on
                          page G3-4838, Unaligned memory access on page G3-4839, and Aligned memory access on page G3-4839.

E2-3004                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                    E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                E2.1 About the ARM memory model

E2.1.2      Memory type overview
                  ARMv8 provides the following mutually-exclusive memory types:

                  Normal          This is generally used for bulk memory operations, both read-write and read-only operations.

                  Device          The ARM architecture forbids speculative reads of any type of Device memory. This means Device
                                  memory types are suitable attributes for read-sensitive locations.
                                  Locations of the memory map that are assigned to peripherals are usually assigned the Device
                                  memory attribute.
                                  Device memory has additional attributes that have the following effects:
                                  •     They prevent aggregation of reads and writes, maintaining the number and size of the
                                        specified memory accesses. See Gathering on page E2-3038.
                                  •     They preserve the access order and synchronization requirements, both for accesses to a
                                        single peripheral and where there is a synchronization requirement on the observability of
                                        one or more memory write and read accesses. See Reordering on page E2-3039
                                  •     They indicate whether a write can be acknowledged other than at the end point. See Early
                                        Write Acknowledgement on page E2-3040.

                  For more information on Normal memory and Device memory, see Memory types and attributes on page E2-3032.

                           Note
                  Earlier versions of the ARM architecture defined a single Device memory type and a Strongly-Ordered memory
                  type. A Note in Device memory on page E2-3036 describes how these memory types map onto the ARMv8 memory
                  types.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      E2-3005
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

E2.2         Atomicity in the ARM architecture
                    Atomicity is a feature of memory accesses, described as atomic accesses. The ARM architecture description refers
                    to two types of atomicity, single-copy atomicity and multi-copy atomicity. In the ARMv8 architecture, the atomicity
                    requirements for memory accesses depend on the memory type, and whether the access is explicit or implicit. For
                    more information see:
                    •      Requirements for single-copy atomicity.
                    •      Properties of single-copy atomic accesses on page E2-3007.
                    •      Multi-copy atomicity on page E2-3008.
                    •      Requirements for multi-copy atomicity on page E2-3008.
                    •      Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on page E2-3008.

                    For more information about the memory types, see Memory type overview on page E2-3005.

E2.2.1        Requirements for single-copy atomicity
                    In AArch32 state, the single-copy atomic PE accesses are:
                    •    All byte accesses.
                    •    All halfword accesses to halfword-aligned locations.
                    •    All word accesses to word-aligned locations.
                    •    Memory accesses caused by LDREXD and STREXD instructions to doubleword-aligned locations.
                    LDM, LDC, LDRD, STM, STC, STRD, PUSH, POP, RFE, SRS, VLDM, VLDR, VSTM, and VSTR instructions are executed as a sequence
                    of word-aligned word accesses. Each 32-bit word access is guaranteed to be single-copy atomic. The architecture
                    does not require subsequences of two or more word accesses from the sequence to be single-copy atomic.
                    LDRD and STRD accesses to 64-bit aligned locations are 64-bit single-copy atomic as seen by translation table walks
                    and accesses to translation tables.

                             Note
                    This requirement has been added to avoid the need for complex measures to avoid atomicity issues when changing
                    translation table entries, without creating a requirement that all locations in the memory system are 64-bit
                    single-copy atomic. This addition means:

                    •      The system designer must ensure that all writable memory locations that might be used to hold translations,
                           such as bulk SDRAM, can be accessed with 64-bit single-copy atomicity.

                    •      Software must ensure that translation tables are not held in memory locations that cannot meet this atomicity
                           requirement, such as peripherals that are typically accessed using a narrow bus.

                    This requirement places no burden on read-only memory locations for which reads have no side effects, since it is
                    impossible to detect the size of memory accesses to such locations.

                    Advanced SIMD element and structure loads and stores are executed as a sequence of accesses of the element or
                    structure size. The architecture requires the element accesses to be single-copy atomic if and only if both:
                    •      The element size is 32 bits, or smaller.
                    •      The elements are naturally aligned.

                    Accesses to 64-bit elements or structures that are 32-bit aligned are executed as a sequence of 32-bit accesses, each
                    of which is single-copy atomic. The architecture does not require subsequences of two or more 32-bit accesses from
                    the sequence to be single-copy atomic.

                    When an access is not single-copy atomic by the rules described in this section, it is executed as a sequence of one
                    or more accesses that aggregate to the size of the original access. Each of the accesses in this sequence is single-copy
                    atomic, at least at the byte level.

E2-3006                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                     E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                               E2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

                          Note
                  In this section, the terms before the write operation and after the write operation mean before or after the write
                  operation has had its effect on the coherence order of the bytes of the memory location accessed by the write
                  operation.

                  If, according to these rules, an instruction is executed as a sequence of accesses, a synchronous Data Abort exception
                  or Debug state entry can be taken during that sequence. This causes execution of the instruction to be abandoned.
                  See Data Abort exception on page G1-4672 and, when ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented, Taking an interrupt
                  or other exception during a multiple-register load or store on page G1-4660.

                  If the synchronous Data Abort exception is returned from using the preferred return address, the instruction that
                  generated the sequence of accesses is re-executed and so any access that was performed before the exception was
                  taken is repeated. This also applies to an exit from Debug state.

                          Note
                  The exception behavior for these multiple access instructions means they are not suitable for use for writes to
                  memory for the purpose of software synchronization.

                  For implicit accesses:

                  •     Cache linefills and evictions have no effect on the single-copy atomicity of explicit transactions or instruction
                        fetches.

                  •     Instruction fetches are single-copy atomic:
                        —      At 32-bit granularity in A32 state.
                        —      At 16-bit granularity in T32 state.

                  •     Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on page E2-3008 describes additional constraints on
                        the behavior of instruction fetches.

                  •     Translation table walks are performed using accesses that are single-copy atomic:
                        —     At 32-bit granularity when using Short-descriptor format translation tables.
                        —     At 64-bit granularity when using Long-descriptor format translation tables.

E2.2.2      Properties of single-copy atomic accesses
                  A memory access instruction that is single-copy atomic has the following properties:

                  1.    For a pair of overlapping single-copy atomic store instructions, all of the overlapping writes generated by one
                        of the stores are Coherence-after the corresponding overlapping writes generated by the other store.

                  2.    For a single-copy atomic load instruction L1 that overlaps a single-copy atomic store instruction S2, if one of
                        the overlapping reads generated by L1 Reads-from one of the overlapping writes generated by S2, then none
                        of the overlapping writes generated by S2 are Coherence-after the corresponding overlapping reads generated
                        by L1.

                  For more information, see Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page E2-3011.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          E2-3007
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

E2.2.3        Multi-copy atomicity
                    In a multiprocessing system, writes to a memory location are multi-copy atomic if the following conditions are both
                    true:

                    •     All writes to the same location are serialized, meaning they are observed in the same order by all observers,
                          although some observers might not observe all of the writes.

                    •     A read of a location does not return the value of a write until all observers observe that write.

                            Note
                    Writes that are not coherent are not multi-copy atomic.

E2.2.4        Requirements for multi-copy atomicity
                    For Normal memory, writes are not required to be multi-copy atomic.

                    For Device memory, writes are not required to be multi-copy atomic.

                    The ARMv8 memory model is Other-multi-copy atomic. For more information, see Ordering constraints on
                    page E2-3015.

E2.2.5        Concurrent modification and execution of instructions
                    The ARMv8 architecture limits the set of instructions that can be executed by one thread of execution as they are
                    being modified by another thread of execution without requiring explicit synchronization.

                    Concurrent modification and execution of instructions can lead to the resulting instruction performing any behavior
                    that can be achieved by executing any sequence of instructions that can be executed from the same Exception level,
                    except where the instruction before modification and the instruction after modification are:
                    •      When executing the A32 instruction set, a B, BKPT, BL, HVC, ISB, NOP, SMC, or SVC instruction.
                    •      When executing the T32 instruction set. a 16-bit B, BKPT, BLX, BX, NOP, or SVC instruction.
                    In addition, for the 32-bit T32 instructions, for which Instruction encodings on page F2-3096 describes the meaning
                    of {hw1, hw2}:

                    •     hw1 of a 32-bit BL (immediate) instruction can be concurrently modified to hw1 of another BL (immediate)
                          instruction:
                          —      This means that some of the most significant bits of the immediate value can be modified.

                    •     hw1 of a 32-bit BLX (immediate) instruction can be concurrently modified to hw1 of another BLX immediate
                          instruction:
                          —      This means that some of the most significant bits of the immediate value can be modified.

                    •     hw1 of a 32-bit BL (immediate) or BLX (immediate) instruction can be concurrently modified to a T32 16-bit B,
                          BX, BLX, BKPT, or SVC instruction. This modification also works in reverse.

                    •     hw2 of a 32-bit BL (immediate) instruction can be concurrently modified to hw2 of another BL (immediate)
                          instruction with a different immediate:
                          —      This means that some bits of the immediate value, including the least significant bits, can be modified.

                    •     hw2 of a 32-bit BLX (immediate) instruction can be concurrently modified to hw2 of another BLX (immediate)
                          instruction with a different immediate:
                          —      This means that some bits of the immediate value, including the least significant bits, can be modified.

                    •     hw2 of a 32-bit B (immediate) instruction with a condition field can be concurrently modified to hw2 of another
                          32-bit B (immediate) instruction with a condition field with a different immediate:
                          —      This means that some bits of the immediate value, including the least significant bits, can be modified.

E2-3008                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                        E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                  E2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

                  •      hw2 of a 32-bit B (immediate) instruction without a condition field can be concurrently modified to hw2 of
                         another 32-bit B (immediate) instruction without a condition field:
                         —         This means that some bits of the immediate value, including the least significant bits, can be modified.

                             Note
                  •      In the T32 instruction set:
                         —      The only encodings of BKPT and SVC are 16-bit.
                         —      The only encoding of BL is 32-bit.

                  •      The ISB instruction can be concurrently modified and executed in the A32 and A64 instruction sets, but not
                         in the T32 instruction set.

                  For the instructions explicitly identified in this section, the architecture guarantees that, after modification of the
                  instruction, behavior is consistent with execution of either:
                  •      The instruction originally fetched.
                  •      A fetch of the modified instruction.

                  The instructions to which this applies are the B, BL, NOP, BKPT, SVC, HVC, and SMC instructions.
                  For both instruction sets, if one thread of execution changes a conditional branch instruction to another conditional
                  branch instruction, and the change affects both the condition field and the branch target, execution of the changed
                  instruction by another thread of execution before the change is synchronized can lead to either:
                  •      The old condition being associated with the new target address.
                  •      The new condition being associated with the old target address.

                  These possibilities apply regardless of whether the condition, either before or after the change to the branch
                  instruction, is the always condition.

                  For all other instructions, to avoid UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior, instruction
                  modifications must be explicitly synchronized before they are executed. The required synchronization is as follows:

                  1.     No PE must be executing an instruction when another PE is modifying that instruction.

                  2.     To ensure that the modified instructions are observable, a PE that is writing the instructions must issue the
                         following sequence of instructions and operations:
                         ; Coherency example for self-modifying code
                         ; Enter this code with <Rt> containing a new 32-bit instruction,
                         ; to be held in Cacheable space at a location pointed to by Rn. Use STRH in the first
                         ; line instead of STR for a 16-bit instruction.
                         STR <Rt>, [Rn]
                         DCCMVAU Rn                 ; Clean data cache by MVA to point of unification (PoU)
                         DSB                        ; Ensure visibility of the data stored
                         ICIMVAU Rn                 ; Invalidate instruction cache by VA to PoU
                         BPIMVA Rn                  ; Invalidate branch predictor by MVA to PoU
                         DSB                        ; Ensure completion of the invalidations

                                     Note
                         •         The DC CVAU operation is not required if the area of memory is either Non-cacheable or Write-Through
                                   Cacheable.
                         •         If the contents of physical memory differ between the mappings, changing the mapping of VAs to PAs
                                   can cause the instructions to be concurrently modified by one PE and executed by another PE. If the
                                   modifications affect instructions other than those listed as being acceptable for modification,
                                   synchronization must be used to avoid UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior.

                  3.     In a multiprocessor system, the ICIMVAU and BPIMVA are broadcast to all PEs within the Inner Shareable domain
                         of the PE running this sequence. However, once the modified instructions are observable, each PE that is
                         executing the modified instructions must issue the following instruction to ensure execution of the modified
                         instructions:
                             ISB                                ; Synchronize fetched instruction stream

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          E2-3009
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.2 Atomicity in the ARM architecture

                    For more information about the required synchronization operation, see Synchronization and coherency issues
                    between data and instruction accesses on page E2-3024.

                            Note
                    For information about memory accesses caused by instruction fetches, see Ordering constraints on page E2-3015.

E2-3010                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
                                                                                      E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                          E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

E2.3       Definition of the ARMv8 memory model
                  This section describes observation and ordering in the ARMv8 memory model. It contains the following
                  subsections:
                  •      Locations.
                  •      Ordering and observability on page E2-3012.
                  •      Ordering constraints on page E2-3015.
                  •      Completion and endpoint ordering on page E2-3016.
                  •      Memory barriers on page E2-3017.

                  For more information on endpoint ordering of memory accesses, see Reordering on page E2-3039.

                  In the ARMv8 memory model, the Shareability memory attribute indicates the degree to which hardware must
                  ensure memory coherency between a set of observers, see Memory types and attributes on page E2-3032.

                  The ARMv8 architecture defines additional memory attributes and associated behaviors, which are defined in the
                  system level section of this manual. See:
                  •     Chapter G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model.
                  •     Chapter G4 The AArch32 Virtual Memory System Architecture.

                  See also Mismatched memory attributes on page E2-3042.

E2.3.1      Locations
                  The ARMv8 memory model provides a set of definitions that are used to construct conditions on the permitted
                  sequences of accesses to memory. The ARMv8 memory model defines:

                  •     The ordering of observation of memory accesses between different observers.

                  •     The ordering of arrival of memory accesses arriving at an endpoint.

                  •     The mechanisms to control the ordering of observation of memory accesses and the arrival of memory
                        accesses at an endpoint.

                  Locations, Memory effects, and Observers
                  The ARMv8 memory model provides the following definition of a Location in memory:

                  Location
                                  A Location refers to a single byte in memory.

                  As part of its execution an instruction might generate a Memory effect. Observers in the system might observe the
                  Memory effects of that instruction on a Location. The ARMv8 memory model provides the following definitions
                  of a Memory effect and an Observer:

                  Memory effect
                                  The Memory effects of an instruction are the read, write, or barrier effects of that instruction. For an
                                  instruction that accesses memory:
                                  •      A read effect is generated for each Location that is read by the instruction.
                                  •      A write effect is generated for each Location that is written by the instruction.
                                  An instruction can generate both read and write effects.
                                  The memory effects of an instruction I1 are said to appear in program order before the Memory
                                  effects of instruction I2 if and only if I1 occurs before I2 in program order.
                                  For the purposes of describing the ARMv8 memory model, all read and write effects access only
                                  Normal memory locations in a Common Shareability Domain. Where this section refers to a read,
                                  write, or memory barrier without any qualification, then it is referring to the corresponding Memory
                                  effect.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           E2-3011
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                    Observer
                                    An Observer refers to either a processing element, or some other memory accessing agent that can
                                    generate reads from or writes to memory.

                    Common Shareability Domain
                                    A Common Shareability Domain for a program is the smallest Shareability domain that contains all
                                    of the active Observers of the Memory effects generated by a program.

E2.3.2        Ordering and observability
                    The ARMv8 memory model permits reordering of memory accesses. This section defines the permitted reordering
                    of memory accesses using the following:

                    •     Register value dependencies to establish order between instructions on a PE.

                    •     Ordering constraints to establish order between accesses to a Location.

                    Register value dependencies
                    The ARMv8 memory model defines the following dependencies between instructions:

                    Register dependency
                                    A Register dependency from a first data value V1 to a second data value V2 exists within a PE if and
                                    only if either:
                                    •      The register, excluding the AArch64 zero register (XZR or WZR), that is used to hold V1 is
                                           used in the calculation of V2.
                                    •      There is a Register dependency from V1 to a third data value V3 and there is a register
                                           dependency from V3 to V2.

                    Register data dependency
                                    A Register data dependency from a first data value V1 to a second data value V2 exists within a PE
                                    if and only if either:
                                    •      The register, excluding the AArch64 zero register (XZR or WZR) and the AArch32 PC, that
                                           is used to hold V1 and is used in the calculation of V2, and the calculation between V1 and
                                           the V2 does not consist of either:
                                           —      A conditional branch whose condition is determined by V1.
                                           —      A conditional selection, move, or computation whose condition is determined by V1,
                                                  where the input data values for the selection, move, or computation do not have a data
                                                  dependency on V1.
                                    •      There is a Register data dependency from V1 to a third data value V3, and there is a Register
                                           data dependency from V3 to V2.

                    Address dependency
                                    An Address dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent read R2 exists if and only if there is a
                                    Register data dependency from the data value that is returned by R1 to the address used by R2.
                                    An Address dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent write W2 exists if and only if there is a
                                    Register dependency from the data value that is returned by R1 to the address used by W2.

                    Data dependency
                                    A Data dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent write W2 exists if and only if there is a Register
                                    dependency from the data value returned by R1 to the data value written by W2.

E2-3012                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                      E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                          E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                  Control dependency
                                  A Control dependency from a read R1 to a subsequent instruction I2 exists if and only if there is a
                                  Register dependency from the data value returned by R1 to the data value used in the evaluation of
                                  a conditional branch or the determination of a synchronous exception on an instruction and I2 is only
                                  executed as a result of one of the possible outcomes of that conditional branch or synchronous
                                  exception.

                  Ordering and observability at a Location
                  Memory effects on a Location are related by the following relations:

                  Reads-from
                                  A Reads-from relation that couples reads and writes to the same Location such that each read is
                                  paired with a single write in the program. If a read R2 of a Location Reads-from a write W1 to the
                                  same Location if and only if R2 takes its data from W1.

                                           Note
                                  The Reads-from relation represents a read being satisfied by a write and then returning the written
                                  data.

                  Coherence order
                                  A Coherence order relation for each Location in the program that provides a total order on all writes
                                  from all coherent Observers to that Location, starting with a notional write of the initial value.

                                           Note
                                  The Coherence order of a Location represents the order in which writes to the Location arrive at
                                  memory.

                  Coherence-after
                                  A write W2 to a Location is Coherence-after another write W1 to the same Location if and only if
                                  W2 is sequenced after W1 in the Coherence order of the Location.
                                  A write W2 to a Location is Coherence-after a read R1 of the same location if and only if R1
                                  Reads-from a write W3 to the same Location and W2 is Coherence-after W3.

                  Overlapping accesses
                                  Two Memory effect overlap if and only if they access the same Location. Two instructions overlap
                                  if and only if one or more of their generated Memory effects overlap.

                  Observed-by
                                  A read or a write RW1 from an Observer is Observed-by a write W2 from a different Observer if and
                                  only if W2 is coherence-after RW1.
                                  A write W1 from an Observer is Observed-by a read R2 from a different Observer if and only if R2
                                  Reads-from W1.

                                           Note
                                  The Observed-by relation only relates accesses generated by different Observers.

                  DMB FULL
                                  A DMB FULL is a DMB with neither the LD or the ST qualifier.
                                  Where this section refers to DMB without any qualification, then it is referring to all types of DMB.
                                  Unless a specific shareability domain is defined, a DMB applies to the Common Shareability Domain.
                                  All properties that apply to DMB also apply to the corresponding DSB.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3013
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                    Ordering relations
                    In addition to the ordering relations that describe order at a location, the ARMv8 memory model also provides
                    ordering relations to describe the ordering of instructions. These are as follows:

                    Dependency-ordered-before
                                   A dependency creates externally-visible order between a read and another Memory effect generated
                                   by the same Observer. A read R1 is Dependency-ordered-before a read or write RW2 from the same
                                   Observer if and only if R1 appears in program order before RW2 and any of the following cases
                                   apply:
                                   •      There is an Address dependency or a Data dependency from R1 to RW2.
                                   •      RW2 is a write W2 and there is a Control dependency from R1 to W2.
                                   •      RW2 is a read R2 generated by an instruction appearing in program order after an instruction
                                          I3 that generates a Context synchronization event, and there is a Control dependency from R1
                                          to I3.
                                   •      RW2 is a write W2 appearing in program order after a read or a write RW3 and there is an
                                          Address dependency from R1 to RW3.
                                   •      RW2 is a write W2 that is Coherence-after a write W3 and there is a Control dependency or a
                                          Data dependency from R1 to W3.
                                   •      RW2 is a read R2 that Reads-from a write W3 and there is an Address dependency or a Data
                                          dependency from R1 to W3.

                    Atomic-ordered-before
                                   Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions provide some ordering guarantees, even in the
                                   absence of dependencies. A read or a write RW1 is Atomic-ordered-before a read or a write RW2
                                   from the same Observer if and only if RW1 appears in program order before RW2 and either of the
                                   following cases apply:
                                   •      RW1 is a read R1 and RW2 is a write W2 such that R1 and W2 are generated by an atomic
                                          instruction or a successful Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instruction pair to the same
                                          Location.
                                   •      RW1 is a write W1 generated by an atomic instruction or a successful Store-Exclusive
                                          instruction and RW2 is a read R2 generated by an instruction with Acquire semantics such
                                          that R2 Reads-from W1.
                                   For more information, see Synchronization and semaphores on page E2-3045.

                    Barrier-ordered-before
                                   Barrier instructions order prior Memory effects before subsequent Memory effects generated by the
                                   same Observer. A read or a write RW1 is Barrier-ordered-before a read or a write RW2 from the
                                   same Observer if and only if RW1 appears in program order before RW2 and any of the following
                                   cases apply:
                                   •      RW1 appears in program order before a DMB FULL that appears in program order before RW2.
                                   •      RW1 is a write W1 generated by an instruction with Release semantics and RW2 is a read R2
                                          generated by an instruction with Acquire semantics.
                                   •      RW1 is a read R1 and either:
                                          —      R1 appears in program order before a DMB LD that appears in program order before RW2.
                                          —      R1 is generated by an instruction with Acquire semantics.
                                   •      RW2 is a write W2 and either:
                                          —      RW1 is a write W1 appearing in program order before a DMB ST that appears in program
                                                 order before W2.
                                          —      W2 is generated by an instruction with Release semantics.
                                          —      RW1 appears in program order before a write W3 generated by an instruction with
                                                 Release semantics and W2 is Coherence-after W3.

E2-3014                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                    E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                        E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                  Ordered-before
                                 An arbitrary pair of Memory effects is ordered if it can be linked by a chain of ordered accesses
                                 consistent with external observation. A read or a write RW1 is Ordered-before a read or a write RW2
                                 if and only if any of the following cases apply:
                                 •      RW1 is Observed-by RW2.
                                 •      RW1 is Dependency-ordered-before RW2.
                                 •      RW1 is Atomic-ordered-before RW2.
                                 •      RW1 is Barrier-ordered-before RW2.
                                 •      RW1 is Ordered-before a read or a write that is Ordered-before RW2.

E2.3.3      Ordering constraints
                  The ARMv8 memory model is described as being Other-multi-copy atomic. The definition of Other-multi-copy
                  atomic is as follows:

                  Other-multi-copy atomic
                                 In an Other-multi-copy atomic system, it is required that a write from an Observer, if observed by a
                                 different Observer, is then observed by all other Observers that access the Location coherently. It is,
                                 however, permitted for an Observer to observe its own writes prior to making them visible to other
                                 observers in the system.

                  The Other-multi-copy atomic property of the ARMv8 memory model is enforced by placing constraints on the
                  possible executions of a program. Those executions that meet the constraints given by the ordering model are said
                  to be architecturally well-formed. An implementation that is executing a program is only permitted to exhibit
                  behavior consistent with an architecturally well-formed execution.

                  Architecturally well-formed
                                 An architecturally well-formed execution must satisfy both of the following requirements:
                                 Internal visibility requirement
                                             For a read or a write RW1 that appears in program order before a read or a write RW2 to
                                             the same Location, the internal visibility requirement requires that exactly one of the
                                             following statements is true:
                                             •      RW2 is a write W2 that is Coherence-after RW1.
                                             •      RW1 is a write W1 and RW2 is a read R2 such that either:
                                                    —      R2 Reads-from W1.
                                                    —      R2 Reads-from another write that is Coherence-after W1.
                                             •      RW1 and RW2 are both reads R1 and R2 such that R1 Reads-from a write W3 and
                                                    either:
                                                    —      R2 Reads-from W3.
                                                    —      R2 Reads-from another write that is Coherence-after W3.
                                                      Note
                                             Informally, if a Memory effect M1 from an Observer appears in program order before a
                                             Memory effect M2 from the same Observer, then M1 will be seen to occur before M2 by
                                             that Observer.

                                 External visibility requirement
                                            For a read or a write RW1 from an Observer that is Ordered-before a read or a write RW2
                                            from a different Observer, the external visibility constraint requires that RW2 is not
                                            Observed-by RW1. This means that an Architecturally well-formed execution must not
                                            exhibit a cycle in the Ordered-before relation.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          E2-3015
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                                                         Note
                                                If a Memory effect M1 from an Observer is Ordered-before another Memory effect M2,
                                                from a different Observer, then M1 will be seen to occur before M2 by all Observers in
                                                the system.

E2.3.4        Completion and endpoint ordering
                    Interaction between Observers in a system is not restricted to communication via shared variables in coherent
                    memory. For example, an Observer could configure an interrupt controller to raise an interrupt on another Observer
                    as a form of message passing. These interactions typically involve an additional agent, which defines the instruction
                    sequence that is required to establish communication links between different Observers. When these forms of
                    interaction are used in conjunction with shared variables, a DSB instruction can be used to enforce ordering between
                    them.

                    For all memory, the completion rules are defined as:

                    •     A read R1 to a Location is complete for a shareability domain when all of the following are true:
                          —      Any write to the same Location by an Observer within the shareability domain will be Coherence-after
                                 R1.
                          —      Any translation table walks associated with R1 are complete for that shareability domain.

                    •     A write W1 to a Location is complete for a shareability domain when all of the following are true:
                          —      Any write to the same Location by an Observer within the shareability domain will be Coherence-after
                                 W1.
                          —      Any read to the same Location by an Observer within the shareability domain will either Reads-from
                                 W1 or Reads-from a write that is Coherence-after W1.
                          —      Any translation table walks associated with the write are complete for that shareability domain.

                    •     A translation table walk is complete for a shareability domain when the memory accesses, including the
                          updates to translation table entries, associated with the translation table walk are complete for that
                          shareability domain, and the TLB is updated.

                    •     A cache or branch predictor maintenance instruction is complete for a shareability domain when the memory
                          effects of the instruction are complete for that shareability domain, and any translation table walks that arise
                          from the instruction are complete for that shareability domain.

                    •     A TLB invalidate instruction is complete when all memory accesses using the TLB entries that have been
                          invalidated are complete.

                    The completion of any cache, branch predictor, or TLB maintenance instruction includes its completion on all PEs
                    that are affected by both the instruction and the DSB operation that is required to guarantee visibility of the
                    maintenance instruction.

                            Note
                    These completion rules mean that, for example, a cache maintenance instruction that operates by VA to the PoC
                    completes only after memory at the PoC has been updated.

                    Additionally, for Device-nGnRnE memory, a read or write of a Location in a Memory-mapped peripheral that
                    exhibits side-effects is complete only when the read or write both:
                    •      Can begin to affect the state of the Memory-mapped peripheral.
                    •      Can trigger all associated side-effects, whether they affect other peripheral devices, PEs, or memory.

                            Note
                    This requirement for Device-nGnRnE memory is consistent with the memory access having reached the peripheral
                    endpoint.

E2-3016                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                     E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                         E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                  Peripherals
                  This section defines a Memory-mapped peripheral and the total order of reads and write to a peripheral which is
                  defined as the Peripheral coherence order:

                  Memory-mapped peripheral
                                  A Memory-mapped peripheral occupies a memory region of IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size and
                                  can be accessed using load and store instructions. Memory effects to a Memory-mapped peripheral
                                  can have side-effects, such as causing the peripheral to perform an action. Values that are read from
                                  addresses within a Memory-mapped peripheral might not correspond to the last data value written
                                  to those addresses. As such, Memory effects to a Memory-mapped peripheral might not appear in
                                  the Reads-from or Coherence order relations.

                  Peripheral coherence order
                                  The Peripheral coherence order of a Memory-mapped peripheral is a total order on all reads and
                                  writes to that peripheral.

                                           Note
                                  The Peripheral coherence order for a Memory-mapped peripheral signifies the order in which
                                  accesses arrive at the endpoint.

                                  For a read or a write RW1 and a read or a write RW2 to the same peripheral, then RW1 will appear
                                  in the Peripheral coherence order for the peripheral before RW2 if either of the following cases
                                  apply:
                                  •      RW1 and RW2 are accesses using Non-cacheable or Device attributes and RW1 is
                                         Ordered-before RW2.
                                  •      RW1 and RW2 are accesses using Device-nGnRE or Device-nGnRnE attributes and RW1
                                         appears in program order before RW2.

                  Out-of-band-ordered-before
                                  A read or a write RW1 is Out-of-band-ordered-before a read or a write RW2 if and only if either of
                                  the following cases apply:
                                  •      RW1 appears in program order before a DSB instruction that begins an IMPLEMENTATION
                                         DEFINED instruction sequence indirectly leading to the generation of RW2.

                                  •      RW1 is Ordered-before a read or a write RW3 and RW3 is Out-of-band-ordered-before RW2.
                                  If a Memory effect M1 is Out-of-band-ordered-before a read or a write M2, then M1 is seen to occur
                                  before M2 by all Observers.

E2.3.5      Memory barriers
                  The ARM architecture is a weakly ordered memory architecture that supports out of order completion. Memory
                  barrier is the general term applied to an instruction, or sequence of instructions, that forces synchronization events
                  by a PE with respect to retiring Load/Store instructions. The memory barriers defined by the ARMv8 architecture
                  provide a range of functionality, including:
                  •     Ordering of Load/Store instructions.
                  •     Completion of Load/Store instructions.
                  •     Context synchronization.

                  The following subsections describe the ARMv8 memory barrier instructions:
                  •     Instruction Synchronization Barrier (ISB) on page E2-3018.
                  •     Data Memory Barrier (DMB) on page E2-3018.
                  •     Data Synchronization Barrier (DSB) on page E2-3019.
                  •     Shareability and access limitations on the data barrier operations on page E2-3019.
                  •     Load-Acquire, Store-Release on page E2-3020.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         E2-3017
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                             Note
                    Depending on the required synchronization, a program might use memory barriers on their own, or it might use them
                    in conjunction with cache maintenance and memory management instructions that in general are only available
                    when software execution is at EL1 or higher.

                    The DMB and DSB memory barriers affect reads and writes to the memory system generated by Load/Store instructions
                    and data or unified cache maintenance instructions being executed by the PE. Instruction fetches or accesses caused
                    by a hardware translation table access are not explicit accesses.

                    AArch32 state also supports the legacy barrier instructions CP15DMB, CP15DSB, and CP15ISB. These
                    instructions are executed as MCRs using the appropriate encoding, and are accessible from EL0. However, for
                    performance reasons ARM deprecates any use of these operations, and strongly recommends that software uses the
                    DMB, DSB, and ISB instructions described in this section instead. Optionally, an implementation can support a
                    CP15BEN control that supervisory software can use to disable use of these instructions, meaning the corresponding
                    MCR encodings are UNDEFINED. When the CP15BEN control is supported, setting one of the following CP15BEN
                    fields to 0 makes execution of CP15DMB, CP15DSB, and CP15ISB UNDEFINED:

                    •     SCTLR_EL1.CP15BEN, for execution of these instructions at EL0 using AArch32 when EL1 is using
                          AArch64.

                    •     SCTLR.CP15BEN, for execution of these instructions at EL0 or EL1 when EL1 is using AArch32.

                    •     HSCTLR.CP15BEN, for execution of these instructions at EL2 when EL2 is using AArch32.

                    Instruction Synchronization Barrier (ISB)
                    An ISB instruction ensures that all instructions that come after the ISB instruction in program order are fetched from
                    the cache or memory after the ISB instruction has completed. Using an ISB ensures that the effects of
                    context-changing operations executed before the ISB are visible to the instructions fetched after the ISB instruction.
                    Examples of context-changing operations that require the insertion of an ISB instruction to ensure the effects of the
                    operation are visible to instructions fetched after the ISB instruction are:
                    •      Completed cache and TLB maintenance instructions.
                    •      Changes to System registers.

                    Any context-changing operations appearing in program order after the ISB instruction only take effect after the ISB
                    has been executed.

                    The pseudocode function for the operation of an ISB is InstructionSynchronizationBarrier().
                    See also Memory barriers on page G3-4840.

                    Data Memory Barrier (DMB)
                    The DMB instruction is a memory barrier instruction that ensures the relative order of memory accesses before the
                    barrier with memory accesses after the barrier. The DMB instruction does not ensure the completion of any of the
                    memory accesses for which it ensures relative order.

                    The full definition of the DMB is covered formally in the Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page E2-3011
                    and this introduction to the DMB instruction is not intended to contradict that section.

                    The basic principle of a DMB instruction is to introduce order between memory accesses that are specified to be
                    affected by the DMB options supplied as arguments to the DMB instruction. The DMB instruction ensures that all affected
                    memory accesses by the PE executing the DMB that appear in program order before the DMB and those which originate
                    from a different PE, to the extent required by the DMB options, which have been Observed-by the PE before the DMB
                    is executed, are Observed-by each PE, to the extent required by the DMB options, before any affected memory
                    accesses that appear in program order after the DMB are Observed-by that PE.
                    The use of a DMB creates order between the Memory effects of instructions as described in the definition of
                    Barrier-ordered-before.

                    The pseudocode function for the operation of a DMB is DataMemoryBarrier().

E2-3018                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                        E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                            E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                  Data Synchronization Barrier (DSB)
                  A DSB is a memory barrier that ensures that memory accesses that occur before the DSB have completed before the
                  completion of the DSB instruction. In doing this, it acts as a stronger barrier than a DMB and all ordering that is created
                  by a DMB with specific options is also generated by a DSB with the same options.

                  Execution of a DSB at EL2 ensures that any memory accesses caused by speculative translation table walks from the
                  Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime have been observed.

                  For more information, see Use of out-of-context translation regimes on page G4-4848.

                  A DSB completes when all of the following apply:

                  •      All explicit memory accesses that are observed by PEe before the DSB is executed and are of the required
                         access types, and are from observers in the same required shareability domain as PEe, are complete for the
                         set of observers in the required shareability domain.

                  •      If the required access types of the DSB is reads and writes, then all cache and branch predictor maintenance
                         instructions and all TLB maintenance instructions issued by PEe before the DSB are complete for the required
                         shareability domain.

                  In addition, no instruction that appears in program order after the DSB instruction can alter any state of the system or
                  perform any part of its functionality other than:

                  •      Being fetched from memory and decoded.

                  •      Reading the general-purpose, SIMD and floating-point, Special-purpose, or System registers that are directly
                         or indirectly read without causing side-effects until the DSB completes.

                  The pseudocode function for the operation of a DSB is DataSynchronizationBarrier().

                  See also Memory barrier instructions on page G3-4837 and Memory barriers on page G3-4840.

                  Shareability and access limitations on the data barrier operations
                  The DMB and DSB instructions can each take an optional limitation argument that specifies:
                  •     The shareability domain over which the instruction must operate. This is one of:
                        —      Full system.
                        —      Outer Shareable.
                        —      Inner Shareable.
                        —      Non-shareable.
                  •     The accesses for which the instruction operates. This is one of:
                        —      Read and write accesses, both before and after the barrier instruction.
                        —      Write accesses only, before and after the barrier instruction.
                        —      Read accesses before the barrier instruction, and read and write accesses after the barrier instruction.
                                         Note
                                This form of a DMB or DSB instruction can be described as a Load-Load/Store barrier.

                  For more information on whether an access is before or after a barrier instruction, see Data Memory Barrier (DMB)
                  on page E2-3018 or Data Synchronization Barrier (DSB).

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              E2-3019
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                    Table E2-1 shows how these options are encoded in the <option> field of the instruction.

                                                                  Table E2-1 Encoding of the DMB and DSB <option> parameter

          Accesses                                 Shareability domain

          Before the          After the
                                                   Full system        Outer Shareable         Inner Shareable       Non-shareable
          barrier             barrier

          Reads and writes    Reads and writes     SY                 OSH                     ISH                   NSH

          Writes              Writes               ST                 OSHST                   ISHST                 NSHST

          Reads               Reads and writes     LD                 OSHLD                   ISHLD                 NSHLD

                    If no <option> is specified then the instruction operates for read and write accesses, over the full system, meaning
                    the operation is the same as for the SY option. See the instruction descriptions for more information:
                    •      DMB on page F5-3357.
                    •      DSB on page F5-3360.

                             Note
                    ISB also supports an optional limitation argument that can only contain one value that corresponds to full system
                    operation, see ISB on page F5-3379.

                    Load-Acquire, Store-Release
                    ARMv8 provides a set of instructions with Acquire semantics for loads, and Release semantics for stores.

                    The full definition of the Load-Acquire instruction is covered formally in the Definition of the ARMv8 memory
                    model on page E2-3011 and this introduction to the Load-Acquire instruction is not intended to contradict that
                    section.

                    The basic principle of a Load-Acquire instruction is to introduce order between the memory access generated by the
                    Load-Acquire instruction and the memory accesses appearing in program order after the Load-Acquire instruction,
                    such that the memory access generated by the Load-Acquire instruction is Observed-by each PE, to the extent that
                    that PE is required to observe the access coherently, before any of the memory accesses appearing in program order
                    after the Load-Acquire instruction are Observed-by that PE, to the extent that the PE is required to observe the
                    accesses coherently.

                    The use of a Load-Acquire instruction creates order between the Memory effects of instructions as described in the
                    definition of Barrier-ordered-before.

                    The full definition of the Store-Release instruction is covered formally in the Definition of the ARMv8 memory
                    model on page E2-3011 and this introduction to the Store-Release instruction is not intended to contradict that
                    section.

                    The basic principle of a Store-Release instruction is to introduce order between the memory accesses generated by
                    the PEe executing the Store-Release instruction, together with those which originate from a different PE, to the
                    extent that the PEe is required to observe them coherently, Observed-by the PEe before executing the Store-release.

                    The use of a Store-Release instruction creates order between the Memory effects of instructions as described in the
                    definition of Barrier-ordered-before.

                    In addition, the use of a Load-Acquire or a Store-Release instruction on accesses to a Memory-mapped peripheral
                    introduces order between the Memory effects of the instructions that access that peripheral, as described in the
                    definition of Peripheral coherence order.

                    Load-Acquire and Store-Release, other than LDAEXD and STLEXD, access only a single data element. This access is
                    single-copy atomic. The address of the data object must be aligned to the size of the data element being accessed,
                    otherwise the access generates an Alignment fault.

E2-3020                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                         E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                             E2.3 Definition of the ARMv8 memory model

                     LDAEXD and STLEXD access two data elements. The address supplied to the instructions must be doubleword aligned,
                     otherwise the access generates an Alignment fault.

                     A Store-Release Exclusive instruction only has the release semantics if the store is successful.

                             Note
                     •     Each Load-Acquire Exclusive and Store-Release Exclusive instruction is essentially a variant of the
                           equivalent Load-Exclusive or Store-Exclusive instruction. All usage restrictions and single-copy atomicity
                           properties:
                           —         That apply to the Load-Exclusive instructions also apply to the Load-Acquire Exclusive instructions.
                           —         That apply to the Store-Exclusive instructions also apply to the Store-Release Exclusive instructions.

                     •     The Load-Acquire/Store-Release instructions can remove the requirement to use the explicit DMB memory
                           barrier instruction.

                     Table E2-2 summarizes the Load-Acquire/Store-release instructions.

                                                                            Table E2-2 Load-Acquire/Store-Release instructions

       Data type                 Load-Acquire          Store-Release        Load-Acquire Exclusive          Store-Release Exclusive

       32-bit word               LDA                   STL                  LDAEX                           STLEX

       16-bit halfword           LDAH                  STLH                 LDAEXH                          STLEXH

       8-bit byte                LDAB                  STLB                 LDAEXB                          STLEXB

       64-bit doubleword         -                     -                    LDAEXD                          STLEXD

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         E2-3021
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

E2.4         Caches and memory hierarchy
                    The implementation of a memory system depends heavily on the microarchitecture and therefore many details of
                    the memory system are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. ARMv8 defines the application level interface to the memory
                    system, including a hierarchical memory system with multiple levels of cache. This section describes an application
                    level view of this system. It contains the subsections:
                    •      Introduction to caches.
                    •      Memory hierarchy.
                    •      Implication of caches for the application programmer on page E2-3024.
                    •      Preloading caches on page E2-3025.

E2.4.1        Introduction to caches
                    A cache is a block of high-speed memory that contains a number of entries, each consisting of:
                    •     Main memory address information, commonly known as a tag.
                    •     The associated data.

                    Caches increase the average speed of a memory access and take account of two principles of locality:

                    Spatial locality
                                    An access to one location is likely to be followed by accesses to adjacent locations. Examples of this
                                    principle are:
                                    •      Sequential instruction execution.
                                    •      Accessing a data structure.

                    Temporal locality
                                    An access to an area of memory is likely to be repeated in a short time period. An example of this
                                    principle is the execution of a software loop.

                    To minimize the quantity of control information stored, the spatial locality property groups several locations
                    together under the same tag. This logical block is commonly known as a cache line. When data is loaded into a
                    cache, access times for subsequent loads and stores are reduced, resulting in overall performance benefits. An access
                    to information already in a cache is known as a cache hit, and other accesses are called cache misses.

                    Normally, caches are self-managing, with the updates occurring automatically. Whenever the PE accesses a
                    cacheable memory location, the cache is checked. If the access is a cache hit, the access occurs in the cache.
                    Otherwise, the access is made to memory. Typically, when making this access, a cache location is allocated and the
                    cache line loaded from memory. ARMv8 permits different cache topologies and access policies, provided they
                    comply with the memory coherency model described in this manual.

                    Caches introduce a number of potential problems, mainly because:
                    •    Memory accesses can occur at times other than when the programmer would expect them.
                    •    A data item can be held in multiple physical locations.

E2.4.2        Memory hierarchy
                    Typically memory close to a PE has very low latency, but is limited in size and expensive to implement. Further
                    from the PE it is common to implement larger blocks of memory but these have increased latency. To optimize
                    overall performance, an ARMv8 memory system can include multiple levels of cache in a hierarchical memory
                    system that exploits this trade-off between size and latency. Figure E2-1 on page E2-3023 shows an example of such
                    a system in an ARMv8-A system that supports virtual addressing.

E2-3022                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                     E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                 E2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

                         Device
                                               Address
                                                                 Physical address
                                             translation
                               Virtual
                              address

                                         System configuration
                                             and control
                               PE,                                                                       Level 3
                                                                                 Level 2                 Cache
                           AArch32 state                    Level 1
                                                                                 Cache
                                                            Cache
                                  R15
                                             Instruction                                                                     Level 4
                                                fetch                                               DRAM, SRAM,           for example,
                                                                                                    Storage-class         memory card,
                                  R0            Data                                                   memory                  disk

                                                                Figure E2-1 Multiple levels of cache in a memory hierarchy

                          Note
                  In this manual, in a hierarchical memory system, Level 1 refers to the level closest to the PE, as shown in
                  Figure E2-1.

                  Instructions and data can be held in separate caches or in a unified cache. A cache hierarchy can have one or more
                  levels of separate instruction and data caches, with one or more unified caches located at the levels closest to the
                  main memory. Memory coherency for cache topologies can be defined using the conceptual points Point of
                  Unification (PoU) and Point of Coherency (PoC). For more information, including the definitions of PoU and PoC,
                  see About cache maintenance in AArch32 state on page G3-4816.

                          Note
                  ARMv8 ARMv8.2-DCPoP adds architectural support for an additional conceptual point, Point of Persistence, but
                  this support is provided only in AArch64 state. For more information see About cache maintenance in AArch64 state
                  on page D3-2058.

                  The Cacheability and Shareability memory attributes
                  Cacheability and Shareability are two attributes that describe the memory hierarchy in a multiprocessing system:

                  Cacheability This term defines whether memory locations are allowed to be allocated into a cache or not.
                               Cacheability is defined independently for Inner and Outer Cacheability locations.

                  Shareability    This term defines whether memory locations are shareable between different agents in a system.
                                  Marking a memory location as shareable for a particular domain requires hardware to ensure that
                                  the location is coherent for all agents in that domain. Shareability is defined independently for Inner
                                  and Outer Shareability domains.

                  For more information about the Cacheability and Shareability attributes see Memory types and attributes on
                  page E2-3032.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          E2-3023
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

E2.4.3        Implication of caches for the application programmer
                    In normal operation, the caches are largely invisible to the application programmer. However they can become
                    visible when there is a breakdown in the coherency of the caches. Such a breakdown can occur:
                    •      When memory locations are updated by other agents in the system that do not use hardware management of
                           coherency.
                    •      When memory updates made from the application software must be made visible to other agents in the
                           system, without the use of hardware management of coherency.

                    For example:

                    •     In the absence of hardware management of coherency of DMA accesses, in a system with a DMA controller
                          that reads memory locations that are held in the data cache of a PE, a breakdown of coherency occurs when
                          the PE has written new data in the data cache, but the DMA controller reads the old data held in memory.

                    •     In a Harvard cache implementation, where there are separate instruction and data caches, a breakdown of
                          coherency occurs when new instruction data has been written into the data cache, but the instruction cache
                          still contains the old instruction data.

                    Data coherency issues
                    Software can ensure the data coherency of caches in the following ways:

                    •     By not using the caches in situations where coherency issues can arise. This can be achieved by:
                          —     Using Non-cacheable or, in some cases, Write-Through Cacheable memory.
                          —     Not enabling caches in the system.

                    •     By using system calls to functions using cache maintenance instructions that execute at a higher Exception
                          level.

                    •     By using hardware coherency mechanisms to ensure the coherency of data accesses to memory for cacheable
                          locations by observers within the different shareability domains, see Non-shareable Normal memory on
                          page E2-3034 and Shareable, Inner Shareable, and Outer Shareable Normal memory on page E2-3033.

                                   Note
                          The performance of these hardware coherency mechanisms is highly implementation-specific. In some
                          implementations the mechanism suppresses the ability to cache shareable locations. In other
                          implementations, cache coherency hardware can hold data in caches while managing coherency between
                          observers within the shareability domains.

                    Synchronization and coherency issues between data and instruction accesses
                    How far ahead of the current point of execution instructions are fetched from is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Such
                    prefetching can be either a fixed or a dynamically varying number of instructions, and can follow any or all possible
                    future execution paths. For all types of memory:

                    •     The PE might have fetched the instructions from memory at any time since the last Context synchronization
                          event on that PE.

                    •     Any instructions fetched in this way might be executed multiple times, if this is required by the execution of
                          the program, without being re-fetched from memory.

                    The ARM architecture does not require the hardware to ensure coherency between instruction caches and memory,
                    even for locations of shared memory.

                    If software requires coherency between instruction execution and memory, it must manage this coherency using
                    Context synchronization events and cache maintenance instructions. These can only be accessed from an Exception
                    level that is higher than EL0, and therefore require a system call, see Exception-generating and exception-handling
                    instructions on page F1-3077. The following code sequence can be used for this purpose:

                    ; Coherency example for data and instruction accesses within the same Inner Shareable domain.

E2-3024                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                         E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                     E2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

                  ; Enter this code with <Rt> containing a new 32-bit instruction,
                  ; to be held in Cacheable space at a location pointed to by Rn. Use STRH in the first line
                  ; instead of STR for a 16-bit instruction.
                          STR Rt, [Rn]
                          DCCMVAU Rn           ; Clean data cache by MVA to point of unification (PoU)
                          DSB                  ; Ensure visibility of the data cleaned from cache
                          ICIMVAU Rn           ; Invalidate instruction cache by MVA to PoU
                          BPIMVA Rn            ; Invalidate branch predictor by MVA to PoU
                          DSB                  ; Ensure completion of the invalidations
                          ISB                  ; Synchronize the fetched instruction stream

                           Note
                  •      For accesses that are Non-cacheable or Write-Through, the clean data cache instruction is not required. For
                         accesses that are Non-cacheable, the invalidate instruction cache is not required, because in AArch32 state
                         these accesses are not permitted to be held in an instruction cache.

                  •      This code can be used when the thread of execution modifying the code is the same thread of execution that
                         is executing the code. The ARMv8 architecture limits the set of instructions that can be executed by one
                         thread of execution as they are being modified by another thread of execution without requiring explicit
                         synchronization. See Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on page E2-3008.

E2.4.4      Preloading caches
                  The ARM architecture provides the memory system hints PLD (Preload Data), PLDW (Preload Data With Intent To
                  Write) and PLI (Preload Instruction) that software can use to communicate the expected use of memory locations to
                  the hardware. The memory system can respond by taking actions that are expected to speed up the memory accesses
                  if they occur. The effect of these memory system hints is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Typically, implementations
                  use this information to bring data or instruction locations into caches.

                  The Preload instructions are hints, and so implementations can treat them as NOPs without affecting the functional
                  behavior of the device. The instructions cannot generate synchronous Data Abort exceptions, but the resulting
                  memory system operations might, under exceptional circumstances, generate an asynchronous External abort,
                  which is reported using an SError interrupt and taken using an asynchronous Data Abort exception. For more
                  information, see Data Abort exception on page G1-4672.

                  A PLD, PLDW, or PLI instruction can only cause allocation to software-visible caching structures such caches or TLBs
                  for memory locations that can be accessed, according to the permissions defined by the current translation regime
                  or a translation regime for a higher Exception level in the current Security state, by any of:
                  •       Reads.
                  •       Writes.
                  •       Instruction fetches.

                  A PLD, PLDW, or PLI instruction can access any memory location in Normal memory that can be accessed, according
                  to the permissions defined by the current translation regime or a translation regime for a higher Exception level in
                  the current Security state, by any of:
                  •      Reads.
                  •      Writes.
                  •      Instruction fetches.

                           Note
                  In each case, the entire list applies to each of PLD, PLDW, and PLI.

                  A PLD, PLDW, or PLI instruction is guaranteed not to access any type of Device memory.

                  A PLI instruction must not perform any access that cannot be performed by a speculative instruction fetch by the
                  processor. Therefore in a VMSA implementation, if all associated MMUs are disabled, a PLI instruction cannot
                  access any memory location that cannot be accessed by instruction fetches.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3025
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.4 Caches and memory hierarchy

                    The pseudocode enumeration PrefetchHint defines the prefetch hint types.

                    The Hint_Prefetch() pseudocode function signals to the memory system that memory accesses of the type hint to
                    or from the specified address are likely to occur in the near future. The memory system might take some action to
                    speed up the memory accesses when they do occur, such as preloading the specified address into one or more caches
                    as indicated by the innermost cache level target and non-temporal hint stream.
                    For more information on PLD, PLI, and PLDW, see:
                    •     PLD, PLDW (immediate) on page F5-3568.
                    •     PLD (literal) on page F5-3570.
                    •     PLD, PLDW (register) on page F5-3572.
                    •     PLI (immediate, literal) on page F5-3574.
                    •     PLI (register) on page F5-3577.

E2-3026                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                           E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                    E2.5 Alignment support

E2.5          Alignment support
                         This section describes alignment support. It contains the following subsections:
                         •      Instruction alignment.
                         •      Unaligned data access.
                         •      Cases where unaligned accesses are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE on page E2-3028.
                         •      Unaligned data access restrictions on page E2-3028.
                         •      Generation of Alignment faults by Load/store multiple accesses to Device memory on page E2-3028.

                         For more information about Alignment faults see Alignment faults on page G4-4940.

E2.5.1         Instruction alignment
                         A32 instructions are word-aligned.

                         T32 instructions are halfword-aligned.

E2.5.2         Unaligned data access
                         An ARMv8 implementation must support unaligned data accesses to Normal memory by some load and store
                         instructions. As Table E2-3 shows, software can control whether a misaligned access to Normal memory by one of
                         these instructions causes an Alignment fault Data Abort exception:
                         •      By setting SCTLR.A, for unaligned accesses from any mode other than Hyp mode.
                         •      By setting HSCTLR.A, for unaligned accesses from Hyp mode.

                                                                   Table E2-3 Alignment requirements of load/store instructions

                                                                                                    Result if check fails when:
                                                                                  Alignment
  Instructions
                                                                                  check             SCTLR.A or             SCTLR.A or
                                                                                                    HSCTLR.A is 0          HSCTLR.A is 1

  LDRB, LDREXB, LDRBT, LDRSB, LDRSBT, STRB, STREXB, STRBT, TBB                    None              -                      -

  LDRH, LDRHT, LDRSH, LDRSHT, STRH, STRHT, TBH                                    Halfword          Unaligned access       Alignment fault

  LDREXH, STREXH, LDAH, STLH, LDAEXH, STLEXH                                      Halfword          Alignment fault        Alignment fault

  LDR, LDRT, STR, STRT                                                            Word              Unaligned access       Alignment fault
  PUSH, encodings T3 and A2 only
  POP, encodings T3 and A2 only

  LDREX, STREX, LDA, STL, LDAEX, STLEX                                            Word              Alignment fault        Alignment fault

  LDREXD, STREXD, LDAEXD, STLEXD                                                  Doubleword        Alignment fault        Alignment fault

  All forms of LDM and STM, LDRD, RFE, SRS, STRD                                  Word              Alignment fault        Alignment fault

  LDC, STC                                                                        Word              Alignment fault        Alignment fault

  VLDM, VLDR, VPOP, VPUSH, VSTM, VSTR                                             Word              Alignment fault        Alignment fault

  VLD1, VLD2, VLD3, VLD4, VST1, VST2, VST3, VST4, all with standard alignment     Element size      Unaligned access       Alignment fault

  VLD1, VLD2, VLD3, VLD4, VST1, VST2, VST3, VST4, all with :<align> specified a   As specified      Alignment fault        Alignment fault
                                                                                  by :<align>
     a. Previous versions of this manual used @<align> to specify alignment. Both forms are supported, see Chapter F6 T32 and A32 Advanced
        SIMD and Floating-point Instruction Descriptionsfor more information.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           E2-3027
ID121917                                                   Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.5 Alignment support

                            Note
                    Any unaligned access to any type of Device memory generates an Alignment fault, see Alignment faults on
                    page G4-4940.

E2.5.3        Cases where unaligned accesses are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE
                    Any load instruction that is not faulted by the alignment restrictions shown in Table E2-3 on page E2-3027 and that
                    loads the PC has CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior if the address it loads from is not word-aligned, see Loads
                    and Stores to unaligned locations on page K1-6392. This overrules any permitted Load/Store behavior shown in
                    Table E2-3 on page E2-3027.

E2.5.4        Unaligned data access restrictions
                    The following points apply to unaligned data accesses in ARMv8:

                    •     Accesses are not guaranteed to be single-copy atomic except at the byte access level, see Atomicity in the
                          ARM architecture on page E2-3006.

                    •     Unaligned accesses typically take a number of additional cycles to complete compared to a naturally-aligned
                          access.

                    •     An operation that performs an unaligned access can abort on any memory access that it makes, and can abort
                          on more than one access. This means that an unaligned access that occurs across a page boundary can
                          generate an abort on either side of the boundary.

E2.5.5        Generation of Alignment faults by Load/store multiple accesses to Device memory
                    When ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented and the value of the applicable nTLSMD field is 0, any memory access
                    by an AArch32 Load Multiple or Store Multiple instruction to an address that the stage 1 translation assigns as
                    Device-nGRE, Device-nGnRE, or Device-nGnRnE generates an Alignment fault.

                    The applicable nTLSMD field is the field in the SCTLR_EL1, SCTLR_EL2, HSCTLR, or SCTLR register that
                    applies to the Exception level and Security state at which the LDM or STM instruction is executed.

E2-3028                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                           E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                       E2.6 Endian support

E2.6         Endian support
                      General description of endianness in the ARM architecture describes the relationship between endianness and
                      memory addressing in the ARM architecture.

                      The following subsections then describe the endianness schemes supported by the architecture:
                      •     Instruction endianness.
                      •     Data endianness on page E2-3030.
                      •     Endianness of memory-mapped peripherals on page E2-3031.

E2.6.1         General description of endianness in the ARM architecture
                      This section only describes memory addressing and the effects of endianness for data elements up to doubleword
                      of 64 bits. However, this description can be extended to apply to larger data elements.

                      For an address A, Figure E2-2 shows, for big-endian and little-endian memory systems, the relationship between:
                      •     The doubleword at address A.
                      •     The words at addresses A and A+4.
                      •     The halfwords at addresses A, A+2, A+4, and A+6.
                      •     The bytes at addresses A, A+1, A+2, A+3, A+4, A+5, A+6, and A+7.

                      The terms in Figure E2-2 have the following definitions:
                      MSByte         Most-significant byte.
                      LSByte         Least-significant byte.

       Big-endian memory system

           MSByte                                         Incrementing byte address                                         LSByte

                                                            Doubleword at address A

                               Word at address A                                               Word at address A+4

            Halfword at address A           Halfword at address A+2           Halfword at address A+4        Halfword at address A+6

            Byte, A        Byte, A+1       Byte, A+2        Byte, A+3         Byte, A+4      Byte, A+5       Byte, A+6     Byte, A+7

         Little-endian memory system

             MSByte                                         Incrementing byte address                                         LSByte

                                                              Doubleword at address A

                               Word at address A+4                                                Word at address A

             Halfword at address A+6          Halfword at address A+4           Halfword at address A+2         Halfword at address A

            Byte, A+7        Byte, A+6       Byte, A+5        Byte, A+4        Byte, A+3       Byte, A+2      Byte, A+1       Byte, A

       In this figure, Byte, A+1 is an abbreviation for Byte at address A+1

                                                                          Figure E2-2 Endianness relationships in AArch32 state

E2.6.2         Instruction endianness
                      In ARMv8-A, the mapping of instruction memory is always little-endian.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3029
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.6 Endian support

E2.6.3        Data endianness
                     The size of the data value that is loaded or stored is the size that is used for the purpose of endian conversion for
                     floating-point, Advanced SIMD, and general-purpose register loads and stores.

                     Table E2-4 shows the element sizes of all the load/store instructions, for all instruction sets.

                                                                                 Table E2-4 Element size of load/store instructions

          Instructions                                                                       Element size

          LDRB, LDREXB, LDRBT, LDRSB, LDRSBT, STRB, STREXB, STRBT, TBB                       Byte

          LDRH, LDREXH, LDRHT, LDRSH, LDRSHT, STRH, STREXH, STRHT, TBH                       Halfword

          LDR, LDRT, LDREX, STR, STRT, STREX                                                 Word

          LDRD, LDREXD, STRD, STREXD                                                         Word

          All forms of LDM, PUSH, POP, RFE, SRS, all forms of STM,                           Word

          LDC, STC                                                                           Word

          Forms of VLDM, VLDR, VPOP, VPUSH, VSTM, VSTR that transfer 32-bit Si registers     Word

          Forms of VLDM, VLDR, VPOP, VPUSH, VSTM, VSTR that transfer 64-bit Di registers     Doubleword

          VLD1, VLD2, VLD3, VLD4, VST1, VST2, VST3, VST4                                     Element size of the Advanced SIMD access

                     CPSR.E determines the data endianness.

                     The data size used for endianness conversions:

                     •      Is the size of the data value that is loaded or stored for Advanced SIMD and floating-point register and
                            general-purpose register loads and stores.

                     •      Is the size of the data element that is loaded or stored for Advanced SIMD element and data structure loads
                            and stores. For more information see Endianness in Advanced SIMD on page E2-3031.

                     Instructions to reverse bytes in registers
                     An application or device driver might have to interface to memory-mapped peripheral registers or shared memory
                     structures that are not the same endianness as the internal data structures. Similarly, the endianness of the operating
                     system might not match that of the peripheral registers or shared memory. In these cases, the PE requires an efficient
                     method to transform explicitly the endianness of the data.

                     Table E2-5 shows the instructions that provide this functionality in the A32 and T32 instruction sets.

                                                                                                 Table E2-5 Byte reversal instructions

                                                    T32 / A32
 Function                                                              Notes
                                                    Instruction

 Reverse bytes in whole register                    REV                For use with general purpose registers.

 Reverse bytes in 16-bit halfwords                  REV16              For use with general purpose registers.

 Reverse bytes in halfword and sign-extend          REVSH              For use with general purpose registers.

 Reverse elements in doublewords, vector            VREV64             For use with registers in the SIMD and floating-point register file

 Reverse elements in words, vector                  VREV32             For use with registers in the SIMD and floating-point register file

 Reverse elements in halfwords, vector              VREV16             For use with registers in the SIMD and floating-point register file

E2-3030                            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                           Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                       E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                   E2.6 Endian support

                  Endianness in Advanced SIMD
                  Advanced SIMD element Load/Store instructions transfer vectors of elements between memory and the SIMD and
                  floating-point register file. An instruction specifies both the length of the transfer and the size of the data elements
                  being transferred. This information is used by the PE to load and store data correctly in both big-endian and
                  little-endian systems.

                  Consider, for example, the A32 or T32 instruction:

                      VLD1.16 {D0}, [R1]

                  This loads a 64-bit register with four 16-bit values. The four elements appear in the register in array order, with the
                  lowest indexed element fetched from the lowest address. The order of bytes in the elements depends on the
                  endianness configuration, as shown in Figure E2-3. Therefore, the order of the elements in the registers is the same
                  regardless of the endianness configuration.

                                                            64-bit register containing four 16-bit elements

                                D[15:8]       D[7:0]       C[15:8]       C[7:0]       B[15:8]        B[7:0]      A[15:8]      A[7:0]

                                    0 A[7:0]                                                                          0 A[15:8]
                                    1 A[15:8]                                                                         1 A[7:0]
                                    2 B[7:0]                                                                          2 B[15:8]
                                    3 B[15:8]                                                                         3 B[7:0]
                                    4 C[7:0]           VLD1.16 {D0}, [R1]                       VLD1.16 {D0}, [R1]    4 C[15:8]
                                    5 C[15:8]                                                                         5 C[7:0]
                                    6 D[7:0]                                                                          6 D[15:8]
                                    7 D[15:8]                                                                         7 D[7:0]
                                 Memory system with                                                               Memory system with
                           little-endian addressing (LE)                                                      big-endian addressing (BE)

                                                        Figure E2-3 Advanced SIMD byte order example for AArch32 state

                  For information about the alignment of Advanced SIMD instructions see Alignment support on page E2-3027.

                  The BigEndian() pseudocode function determines the current endianness of the data.
                  The BigEndianReverse() pseudocode function reverses the endianness of a bitstring.

                  The BigEndian() and BigEndianReverse() functions are defined in Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode.

E2.6.4      Endianness of memory-mapped peripherals
                  All memory-mapped peripherals defined in the ARM architecture must be little-endian.

                  Peripherals to which this requirement applies include:

                  •      Memory-mapped register interfaces to a debugger, or to a cross-trigger interface, see Chapter H8 About the
                         External Debug Registers.

                  •      The memory-mapped register interface to the system level implementation of the Generic Timer, see
                         Chapter I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer.

                  •      A memory-mapped register interface to the Performance Monitors, see Chapter I3 Recommended External
                         Interface to the Performance Monitors.

                  •      Memory-mapped register interfaces to an ARM Generic Interface Controller, see the ARM® Generic
                         Interrupt Controller Architecture Specification, GIC architecture version 3.0 and version 4.0.
                  •      The memory-mapped register interface to an ARM trace component. See, for example, the ARM® Embedded
                         Trace Macrocell Architecture Specification, ETMv4.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            E2-3031
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.7 Memory types and attributes

E2.7         Memory types and attributes
                    In ARMv8 the ordering of accesses for addresses in memory, referred to as the memory order model, is defined by
                    the memory attributes. The following sections describe this model:
                    •     Normal memory.
                    •     Device memory on page E2-3036.
                    •     Memory access restrictions on page E2-3041.

E2.7.1        Normal memory
                    The Normal memory type attribute applies to most memory in a system. It indicates that the hardware is permitted
                    by the architecture to perform speculative data read accesses to these locations, regardless of the access permissions
                    for these locations.

                    The Normal memory type has the following properties:

                    •     A write to a memory location with the Normal attribute completes in finite time. This means that it is globally
                          observed for the shareability domain of the memory location in finite time. For a Non-cacheable location, the
                          location is observed by all observers in finite time.

                    •     A completed write to a memory location with the Normal attribute is globally observed for the shareability
                          domain of the memory location in finite time without the need for explicit cache maintenance instructions or
                          barriers. For a Non-cacheable location, the completed write is globally observed for all observers in finite
                          time without the need for explicit cache maintenance instructions or barriers.

                    •     Writes to a memory location with the Normal memory attribute that is Non-cacheable must reach the
                          endpoint for that location in the memory system in finite time.

                    •     Unaligned memory accesses can access Normal memory if the system is configured to generate such
                          accesses.

                    •     There is no requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the elements accessed
                          by multi-register Load/Store instructions. See Multi-register loads and stores that access Normal memory on
                          page E2-3036.

                            Note
                    •     The Normal memory attribute is appropriate for locations of memory that are idempotent, meaning that they
                          exhibit all of the following properties:
                          —      Read accesses can be repeated with no side-effects.
                          —      Repeated read accesses return the last value written to the resource being read.
                          —      Read accesses can fetch additional memory locations with no side-effects.
                          —      Write accesses can be repeated with no side-effects if the contents of the location accessed are
                                 unchanged between the repeated writes or as the result of an exception, as described in this section.
                          —      Unaligned accesses can be supported.
                          —      Accesses can be merged before accessing the target memory system.

                    •     An instruction that generates a sequence of accesses as described in Atomicity in the ARM architecture on
                          page E2-3006 might be abandoned as a result of an exception being taken during the sequence of accesses.
                          On return from the exception the instruction is restarted, and therefore one or more of the memory locations
                          might be accessed multiple times. This can result in repeated write accesses to a location that has been
                          changed between the write accesses.

                    The following sections describe the other attributes for Normal memory:
                    •     Shareable Normal memory on page E2-3033.
                    •     Non-shareable Normal memory on page E2-3034.
                    •     Cacheability attributes for Normal memory on page E2-3034.

E2-3032                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                      E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                    E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  See also:

                  •     Multi-register loads and stores that access Normal memory on page E2-3036.

                  •     Atomicity in the ARM architecture on page E2-3006.

                  •     Memory barriers on page E2-3017. For accesses to Normal memory, a DMB instruction is required to ensure
                        the required ordering.

                  •     Concurrent modification and execution of instructions on page E2-3008.

                  Shareable Normal memory
                  A Normal memory location has a Shareability attribute that is defined as one of:
                  •    Inner Shareable.
                  •    Outer Shareable.
                  •    Non-shareable.

                  The shareability attributes define the data coherency requirements of the location, that hardware must enforce. They
                  do not affect the coherency requirements of instruction fetches, see Synchronization and coherency issues between
                  data and instruction accesses on page E2-3024.

                          Note
                  •     System designers can use the Shareability attribute to specify the locations in Normal memory for which
                        coherency must be maintained. However, software developers must not assume that specifying a memory
                        location as Non-shareable permits software to make assumptions about the incoherency of the location
                        between different PEs in a shared memory system. Such assumptions are not portable between different
                        multiprocessing implementations that might use the Shareability attribute. Any multiprocessing
                        implementation might implement caches that are shared, inherently, between different PEs.

                  •     This architecture assumes that all PEs that use the same operating system or hypervisor are in the same Inner
                        Shareable shareability domain.

                  Shareable, Inner Shareable, and Outer Shareable Normal memory

                  The ARM architecture abstracts the system as a series of Inner and Outer Shareability domains.

                  Each Inner Shareability domain contains a set of observers that are data coherent for each member of that set for
                  data accesses with the Inner Shareable attribute made by any member of that set.

                  Each Outer Shareability domain contains a set of observers that are data coherent for each member of that set for
                  data accesses with the Outer Shareable attribute made by any member of that set.

                  The following properties also hold:

                  •     Each observer is only a member of a single Inner Shareability domain.

                  •     Each observer is only a member of a single Outer Shareability domain.

                  •     All observers in an Inner Shareability domain are always members of the same Outer Shareability domain.
                        This means that an Inner Shareability domain is a subset of an Outer Shareability domain, although it is not
                        required to be a proper subset.

                          Note
                  •     Because all data accesses to Non-cacheable locations are data coherent to all observers, Non-cacheable
                        locations are always treated as Outer Shareable.

                  •     The Inner Shareable domain is expected to be the set of PEs controlled by a single hypervisor or operating
                        system.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      E2-3033
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                    The details of the use of the Shareability attributes are system-specific. Example E2-1 shows how they might be
                    used.

                                                                                       Example E2-1 Use of shareability attributes

                    In an implementation, a particular subsystem with two clusters of PEs has the requirement that:

                    •      In each cluster, the data caches or unified caches of the PEs in the cluster are transparent for all data accesses
                           to memory locations with the Inner Shareable attribute.

                    •      However, between the two clusters, the caches:
                           —    Are not required to be coherent for data accesses that have only the Inner Shareable attribute.
                           —    Are coherent for data accesses that have the Outer Shareable attribute.

                    In this system, each cluster is in a different Shareability domain for the Inner Shareable attribute, but all components
                    of the subsystem are in the same Shareability domain for the Outer Shareable attribute.

                    A system might implement two such subsystems. If the data caches or unified caches of one subsystem are not
                    transparent to the accesses from the other subsystem, this system has two Outer Shareable Shareability domains.

                    Having two levels of shareability means system designers can reduce the performance and power overhead for
                    shared memory locations that do not need to be part of the Outer Shareable Shareability domain.

                    For Shareable Normal memory, the Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive synchronization primitives take account
                    of the possibility of accesses by more than one observer in the same Shareability domain.

                    Non-shareable Normal memory
                    For Normal memory locations, the Non-shareable attribute identifies Normal memory that is likely to be accessed
                    only by a single PE.

                    A location in Normal memory with the Non-shareable attribute does not require the hardware to make data accesses
                    by different observers coherent, unless the memory is Non-cacheable. For a Non-shareable location, if other
                    observers share the memory system, software must use cache maintenance instructions, if the presence of caches
                    might lead to coherency issues when communicating between the observers. This cache maintenance requirement
                    is in addition to the barrier operations that are required to ensure memory ordering.

                    For Non-shareable Normal memory, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the Load-Exclusive and
                    Store-Exclusive synchronization primitives take account of the possibility of accesses by more than one observer.

                    Cacheability attributes for Normal memory
                    In addition to being Outer Shareable, Inner Shareable or Non-shareable, each region of Normal memory is assigned
                    a Cacheability attribute that is one of:
                    •      Write-Through Cacheable.
                    •      Write-Back Cacheable.
                    •      Non-cacheable.

                    Also, for Write-Through Cacheable and Write-Back Cacheable Normal memory regions:

                    •      A region might be assigned cache allocation hints for read and write accesses.

                    •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the cache allocation hints can have an additional attribute of
                           Transient or Non-transient.

                    For more information see Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints on page G3-4812.

E2-3034                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                       E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                     E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  A memory location can be marked as having different cacheability attributes, for example when using aliases in a
                  VA to PA mapping:
                  •     If the attributes differ only in the cache allocation hint this does not affect the behavior of accesses to that
                        location.
                  •     For other cases see Mismatched memory attributes on page E2-3042.

                  The cacheability attributes provide a mechanism of coherency control with observers that lie outside the
                  Shareability domain of a region of memory. In some cases, the use of Write-Through Cacheable or Non-cacheable
                  regions of memory might provide a better mechanism for controlling coherency than the use of hardware coherency
                  mechanisms or the use of cache maintenance routines. To this end, the architecture requires the following properties
                  for Non-cacheable or Write-Through Cacheable memory:

                  •      A completed write to a memory location that is Non-cacheable or Write-Through Cacheable for a level of
                         cache made by an observer accessing the memory system inside the level of cache is visible to all observers
                         accessing the memory system outside the level of cache without the need of explicit cache maintenance.

                  •      A completed write to a memory location that is Non-cacheable for a level of cache made by an observer
                         accessing the memory system outside the level of cache is visible to all observers accessing the memory
                         system inside the level of cache without the need of explicit cache maintenance.

                           Note
                  Implementations can use the cache allocation hints to indicate a probable performance benefit of caching. For
                  example, a programmer might know that a piece of memory is not going to be accessed again and would be better
                  treated as Non-cacheable. The distinction between memory regions with attributes that differ only in the cache
                  allocation hints exists only as a hint for performance.

                  For Normal memory, the ARM architecture provides cacheability attributes that are defined independently for each
                  of two conceptual levels of cache, the inner and the outer cache. The relationship between these conceptual levels
                  of cache and the implemented physical levels of cache is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and can differ from the
                  boundaries between the Inner and Outer Shareability domains. However:
                  •      Inner refers to the innermost caches, meaning the caches that are closest to the PE, and always includes the
                         lowest level of cache.
                  •      No cache that is controlled by the Inner cacheability attributes can lie outside a cache that is controlled by the
                         Outer cacheability attributes.
                  •      An implementation might not have any outer cache.

                  Example E2-2, Example E2-3 on page E2-3036, and Example E2-4 on page E2-3036 describe the possible ways of
                  implementing a system with three levels of cache, level 1 (L1) to level 3 (L3).

                           Note
                  •      L1 cache is the level closest to the PE, see Memory hierarchy on page E2-3022.

                  •      When managing coherency, system designs must consider both the inner and outer cacheability attributes, as
                         well as the Shareability attributes. This is because hardware might have to manage the coherency of caches
                         at one conceptual level, even when another conceptual level has the Non-cacheable attribute.

                                                Example E2-2 Implementation with two inner and one outer cache levels

                  Implement the three levels of cache in the system, L1 to L3, with:
                  •    The Inner cacheability attribute applied to L1 and L2 cache.
                  •    The Outer cacheability attribute applied to L3 cache.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            E2-3035
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                                                 Example E2-3 Implementation with three inner and no outer cache levels

                    Implement the three levels of cache in the system, L1 to L3, with the Inner cacheability attribute applied to L1, L2,
                    and L3 cache. Do not use the Outer cacheability attribute.

                                                 Example E2-4 Implementation with one inner and two outer cache levels

                    Implement the three levels of cache in the system, L1 to L3, with:
                    •    The Inner cacheability attribute applied to L1 cache.
                    •    The Outer cacheability attribute applied to L2 and L3 cache.

                    Multi-register loads and stores that access Normal memory
                    For all instructions that load or store more than one general-purpose register from an Exception level there is no
                    requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the elements accessed by these
                    load or store instructions.

                    For all instructions that load or store more than one general-purpose register from an Exception level the order in
                    which the registers are accessed is not defined by the architecture.

                    For all instructions that load or store one or more registers from the SIMD and floating-point register file from an
                    Exception level there is no requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the
                    element accessed by these load or store instructions.

E2.7.2        Device memory
                    The Device memory type attributes define memory locations where an access to the location can cause side-effects,
                    or where the value returned for a load can vary depending on the number of loads performed. Typically, the Device
                    memory attributes are used for memory-mapped peripherals and similar locations.

                    The attributes for ARMv8 Device memory are:

                    Gathering       Identified as G or nG, see Gathering on page E2-3038.

                    Reordering      Identified as R or nR, see Reordering on page E2-3039.

                    Early Write Acknowledgement
                                    Identified as E or nE, see Early Write Acknowledgement on page E2-3040.

                    The ARMv8 Device memory types are:

                    Device-nGnRnE           Device non-Gathering, non-Reordering, No Early write acknowledgement.
                                            Equivalent to the Strongly-ordered memory type in earlier versions of the architecture.

                    Device-nGnRE            Device non-Gathering, non-Reordering, Early Write Acknowledgement.
                                            Equivalent to the Device memory type in earlier versions of the architecture.

                    Device-nGRE             Device non-Gathering, Reordering, Early Write Acknowledgement.
                                            ARMv8 adds this memory type to the translation table formats found in earlier versions of
                                            the architecture. The use of barriers is required to order accesses to Device-nGRE memory.
                                            The Device-nGRE memory type is introduced into the AArch32 translation table formats
                                            when the PE is using the Long Descriptor Translation Table format.

                    Device-GRE              Device Gathering, Reordering, Early Write Acknowledgement.

E2-3036                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                    E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                  E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                                         ARMv8 adds this memory type to the translation table formats found in earlier versions of
                                         the architecture. Device-GRE memory has the fewest constraints. It behaves similar to
                                         Normal memory, with the restriction that speculative accesses to Device-GRE memory is
                                         forbidden.
                                         The Device-GRE memory type is introduced into the AArch32 translation table formats
                                         when the PE is using the Long Descriptor Translation Table format.

                  Collectively these are referred to as any Device memory type. Going down the list, the memory types are described
                  as getting weaker; conversely the going up the list the memory types are described as getting stronger.

                          Note
                  •     As the list of types shows, these additional attributes are hierarchical. For example, a memory location that
                        permits Gathering must also permit Reordering and Early Write Acknowledgement.

                  •     The architecture does not require an implementation to distinguish between each of these memory types and
                        ARM recognizes that not all implementations will do so. The subsection that describes each of the attributes,
                        describes the implementation rules for the attribute.

                  •     Earlier versions of the ARM architecture defined the following memory types:
                        —      Strongly-ordered memory. This is the equivalent of the Device-nGnRnE memory type.
                        —      Device memory. This is the equivalent of the Device-nGnRE memory type.

                  All of these memory types have the following properties:

                  •     Speculative data accesses are not permitted to any memory location with any Device memory attribute. This
                        means that each memory access to any Device memory type must be one that would be generated by a simple
                        sequential execution of the program.
                        An exception to this applies:
                        —      Reads generated by the Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions can access bytes that are not
                               explicitly accessed by the instruction if the bytes accessed are in a 16-byte window, aligned to
                               16-bytes, that contains at least one byte that is explicitly accessed by the instruction.

                                 Note
                  •     An instruction that generates a sequence of accesses as described in Atomicity in the ARM architecture on
                        page E2-3006 might be abandoned as a result of an exception being taken during the sequence of accesses.
                        On return from the exception the instruction is restarted, and therefore one or more of the memory locations
                        might be accessed multiple times. This can result in repeated accesses to a location where the program only
                        defines a single access. For this reason, ARM strongly recommends that no accesses to Device memory are
                        performed from a single instruction that spans the boundary of a translation granule or which in some other
                        way could lead to some of the accesses being aborted.
                        —      Write speculation that is visible to other observers is prohibited for all memory types.

                  •     A write to a memory location with any Device memory attribute completes in finite time. This means that it
                        is globally observed for all observers in the system in finite time.

                  •     If a location with any Device memory attribute changes without an explicit write by an observer, this change
                        must also be globally observed for all observers in the system in finite time. Such a change might occur in a
                        peripheral location that holds status information.

                  •     A completed write to a memory location with any Device memory attribute is globally observed for all
                        observers in finite time without the need for explicit maintenance.

                  •     Data accesses to memory locations are coherent for all observers in the system, and correspondingly are
                        treated as being Outer Shareable.

                  •     A memory location with any Device memory attribute cannot be allocated into a cache.

                  •     Writes to a memory location with any Device memory attribute must reach the endpoint for that address in
                        the memory system in finite time. Typically, the endpoint is a peripheral or some physical memory.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3037
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                    •      All accesses to memory with any Device memory attribute must be aligned. Any unaligned access generates
                           an Alignment fault at the first stage of translation that defined the location as being Device.

                                    Note
                           In the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime in systems where HCR.TGE==1 and HCR.DC==0, any
                           Alignment fault that results from the fact that all locations are treated as Device is a fault at the first stage of
                           translation. This causes the value of HSR.ISS.[24] to be 0.

                    •      Hardware does not prevent speculative instruction fetches from a memory location with any of the Device
                           memory attributes unless the memory location is also marked as Execute-never for all Exception levels.

                                    Note
                           This means that to prevent speculative instruction fetches from memory locations with Device memory
                           attributes, any location that is assigned any Device memory type must also be marked as Execute-never for
                           all Exception levels. Failure to mark a memory location with any Device memory attribute as Execute-never
                           for all Exception levels is a programming error.

                    See also Memory access restrictions on page E2-3041.

                    The memory types for Translation table walks cannot be defined as any Device memory type within the TCR. For
                    the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime, the memory accesses made during a stage 1 translation table walk are
                    subject to a stage 2 translation, and as a result of this second stage of translation, the accesses from the first stage
                    translation table walk might be made to memory locations with any Device memory type. These accesses might be
                    made speculatively. When the value of the HCR.PTW bit is 1, a stage 2 permission fault is generated if a first stage
                    translation table walk is made to any Device memory type.

                    For instruction fetches, if branches cause the program counter to point to an area of memory with the Device
                    attribute which is not marked as Execute-never for the current Exception level, an implementation can either:
                    •      Treat the instruction fetch as if it were to a memory location with the Normal Non-cacheable attribute.
                    •      Take a Permission fault.

                    Gathering
                    In the Device memory attribute:
                    G              Indicates that the location has the Gathering attribute.
                    nG             Indicates that the location does not have the Gathering attribute, meaning it is non-Gathering.

                    The Gathering attribute determines whether it is permissible for either:

                    •      Multiple memory accesses of the same type, read or write, to the same memory location to be merged into a
                           single transaction.

                    •      Multiple memory accesses of the same type, read or write, to different memory locations to be merged into
                           a single memory transaction on an interconnect.

                    For memory types with the Gathering attribute, either of these behaviors is permitted, provided that the ordering and
                    coherency rules of the memory location are followed.

                    For memory types with the non-Gathering attribute, neither of these behaviors is permitted. As a result:

                    •      The number of memory accesses that are made corresponds to the number that would be generated by a
                           simple sequential execution of the program.

                    •      All access occur at their programmed size, except that there is no requirement for the memory system beyond
                           the PE to be able to identify the elements accessed by multi-register Load/Store instructions. See
                           Multi-register loads and stores that access Device memory on page E2-3040.

E2-3038                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                     E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                   E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  Gathering between memory accesses separated by a memory barrier that affects those memory accesses is not
                  permitted. This applies if one memory access is in Group A and one memory access is in Group B. That is, gathering
                  is not permitted between a memory access in Group A and a memory access in Group B if the two accesses are
                  separated by a barrier that affects at least one of the accesses.

                  Gathering between two memory accesses generated by a Load-Acquire/Store-Release is not permitted.

                  A read from a memory location with the non-Gathering attribute cannot come from a cache or a buffer, but must
                  come from the endpoint for that address in the memory system. Typically this is a peripheral or physical memory.

                          Note
                  •     A read from a memory location with the Gathering attribute can come from intermediate buffering of a
                        previous write, provided that:
                        —      The accesses are not separated by a DMB or DSB barrier that affects both of the accesses, for example if
                               one access is in Group A and the other is in Group B.
                        —      The accesses are not separated by other ordering constructions that require that the accesses are in
                               order. Such a construction might be a combination of Load-Acquire and Store-Release.
                        —      The accesses are not generated by a Store-Release instruction.

                  •     The ARM architecture only defines programmer visible behavior. Therefore, gathering can be performed if
                        a programmer cannot tell whether gathering has occurred.

                  An implementation is permitted to perform an access with the Gathering attribute in a manner consistent with the
                  requirements specified by the non-Gathering attribute.

                  An implementation is not permitted to perform an access with the non-Gathering attribute in a manner consistent
                  with the relaxations allowed by the Gathering attribute.

                  Reordering
                  In the Device memory attribute:
                  R              Indicates that the location has the Reordering attribute.
                  nR             Indicates that the location does not have the Reordering attribute, meaning it is non-Reordering.

                  For all memory types with the non-Reordering attribute, the order of memory accesses arriving at a single peripheral
                  of IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size, as defined by the peripheral, must be the same order that occurs in a simple
                  sequential execution of the program. That is, the accesses appear in program order. This ordering applies to all
                  accesses using any of the memory types with the non-Reordering attribute. As a result, if there is a mixture of
                  Device-nGnRE and Device-nGnRnE accesses to the same peripheral, these occur in program order. If the memory
                  accesses are not to a peripheral, then this attribute imposes no restrictions.

                          Note
                  •     The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size of the single peripheral is the same as applies for the ordering guarantee
                        provided by the DMB instruction.

                  •     The ARM architecture only defines programmer visible behavior. Therefore, reordering can be performed if
                        a programmer cannot tell whether reordering has occurred.

                  An implementation is permitted to perform an access with the Reordering attribute in a manner consistent with the
                  requirements specified by the non-Reordering attribute.

                  An additional relaxation is that an implementation is not permitted to perform an access with the non-Reordering
                  attribute in a manner consistent with the relaxations allowed by the Reordering attribute.

                  The non-Reordering attribute does not require any additional ordering, other than that which applies to Normal
                  memory, between:

                  •     Accesses with the non-Reordering attribute and accesses with the Reordering attribute.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3039
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                    •      Accesses with the non-Reordering attribute and accesses to Normal memory.

                    •      Accesses with the non-Reordering attribute and accesses to different peripherals of IMPLEMENTATION
                           DEFINED size.

                    Early Write Acknowledgement
                    In the Device memory attribute:
                    E              Indicates that the location has the Early Write Acknowledgement attribute.
                    nE             Indicates that the location has the No Early Write Acknowledgement attribute.

                    For memory system endpoints where the system architecture in which the PE is operating requires that
                    acknowledgement of a write comes from the endpoint, assigning the No Early Write Acknowledgement attribute to
                    a Device memory location guarantees that:
                    •     Only the endpoint of the write access returns a write acknowledgement of the access.
                    •     No earlier point in the memory system returns a write acknowledgement.

                    This means that a DSB barrier instruction, executed by the PE that performed the write to the No Early Write
                    Acknowledgement Location, completes only after the write has reached its endpoint in the memory system.

                    Peripherals are an example of system endpoints that require that the acknowledgement of a write comes from the
                    endpoint.

                             Note
                    •      The Early Write Acknowledgement attribute only affects where the endpoint acknowledgement is returned
                           from, and does not affect the ordering of arrival at the endpoint between accesses, which is determined by
                           either the Device Reordering attribute, or the use of barriers to create order.

                    •      The areas of the physical memory map for which write acknowledgement from the endpoint is required is
                           outside the scope of the ARM Architecture definition and must be defined as part of the system architecture
                           in which the PE is operating. In particular, regions of memory handled as PCIe configuration writes are
                           expected to support write acknowledgement from the endpoint.

                    •       ARM recognizes that not all areas of a physical memory map will be capable of supporting write
                           acknowledgement from the endpoint. In particular, ARM expects that regions of memory handled as posted
                           writes under PCIe will not support write acknowledgement from the endpoint.

                    •      For maximum software compatibility, ARM strongly recommends that all peripherals for which standard
                           software drivers expect that the use of a DSB instruction will determine that a write has reached its endpoint
                           are placed in areas of the physical memory map that support write acknowledgement from the endpoint.

                    Multi-register loads and stores that access Device memory
                    For all instructions that load or store more than one general-purpose register there is no requirement for the memory
                    system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the elements accessed by these load and store instructions.

                    For all instructions that load or store one or more registers from the SIMD and floating-point register file there is
                    no requirement for the memory system beyond the PE to be able to identify the size of the element accessed by these
                    load and store instructions.

                    For an LDRD, STRD, or LDM instruction with a register list that includes the PC, or an STM instruction with a register list
                    that includes the PC, the order in which the registers are accessed is not defined by the architecture.

                    For a load or store of an Advanced SIMD element or structure, the order in which the registers are accessed is not
                    defined by the architecture.

                    For a VLDM and VSTM instruction with a register list that does not include the PC, all registers are accessed in ascending
                    address order for accesses to Device memory with the non-Reordering attribute.

E2-3040                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                      E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                    E2.7 Memory types and attributes

                  For a LDM or STM instruction with a register list that does not include the PC:

                  •      When ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is not implemented, and when ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented and the
                         value of the applicable LSMAOE field is 1, all registers are accessed in ascending address order for accesses
                         to Device memory with the non-Reordering attribute.

                  •      When ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented and the value of the applicable LSMAOE field is 0, no memory
                         accesses are required to be ordered.

                  •      When ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented and the value of the applicable nTLSMD field is 0, any memory
                         access to an address that the stage 1 translation assigns as Device-nGRE, Device-nGnRE, or Device-nGnRnE
                         generates an Alignment fault.

                  The applicable LSMAOE or nTLSMD field is the field in the SCTLR_EL1, SCTLR_EL2, HSCTLR, or SCTLR
                  register that applies to the Exception level and Security state at which the LDM or STM instruction is executed.
                  ARMv8.2 deprecates software relying on accesses to Device memory made by a single LDM or STM instruction not
                  being reordered.

E2.7.3      Memory access restrictions
                  The following restrictions apply to memory accesses:

                  •      For accesses to any two bytes, p and q, that are generated by the same instruction:
                         —      The bytes p and q must have the same memory type and Shareability attributes. otherwise the results
                                are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. For example, an LDC, LDM, LDRD STC, STM or STRD instruction, or an
                                unaligned load or store that spans the boundary between Normal memory and Device memory is
                                CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.

                         —      Except for possible differences in the cache allocation hints, ARM deprecates having different
                                cacheability attributes for bytes p and q.
                         For the permitted CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior, see Crossing a page boundary with different
                         memory types or Shareability attributes on page K1-6399.

                  •      If the accesses of an instruction that causes multiple accesses to any type of Device memory cross a 4KB
                         address boundary then behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE and Crossing a 4KB boundary with a
                         Device access on page K1-6400 describes the permitted behaviors.

                                  Note
                         —      The boundary referred to is between two Device memory regions that are both of 4KB and aligned to
                                4KB.
                         —      This restriction means it is important that an access to a volatile memory device is not made using a
                                single instruction that crosses a 4KB address boundary.
                         —      ARM expects this restriction to constrain the placing of volatile memory devices in the system
                                memory map, rather than expecting a compiler to be aware of the alignment of memory accesses.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       E2-3041
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.8 Mismatched memory attributes

E2.8         Mismatched memory attributes
                    In the ARMv8 architecture mismatched memory attributes are controlled by privileged software. For more
                    information, see Chapter G4 The AArch32 Virtual Memory System Architecture.

                    Physical memory Locations are accessed with mismatched attributes if all accesses to the Location do not use a
                    common definition of all of the following attributes of that Location:
                    •     Memory type, Device or Normal.
                    •     Shareability.
                    •     Cacheability, for the same level of the inner or outer cache, but excluding any cache allocation hints.

                    Collectively these are referred to as memory attributes.

                              Note
                    In this document, the terms location and memory location refer to any byte within the current coherency granule
                    and are used interchangeably.

                    When a memory Location is accessed with mismatched attributes the only software visible effects are one or more
                    of the following:

                    •     Uniprocessor semantics for reads and writes to that memory Location might be lost. This means:
                          —      A read of the memory Location by one agent might not return the value most recently written to that
                                 memory Location by the same agent.
                          —      Multiple writes to the memory Location by one agent with different memory attributes might not be
                                 ordered in program order.

                    •     There might be a loss of coherency when multiple agents attempt to access a memory Location.

                    •     There might be a loss of properties derived from the memory type, as described in later bullets in this section.

                    •     If all Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instructions executed across all threads to access a given memory
                          Location do not use consistent memory attributes, the Exclusives monitor state becomes UNKNOWN.

                    •     Bytes written without the Write-Back cacheable attribute within the same Write-Back granule as bytes
                          written with the Write-Back cacheable attribute might have their values reverted to the old values as a result
                          of cache Write-Back.

                    The loss of properties associated with mismatched memory type attributes refers only to the following properties of
                    Device memory that are additional to the properties of Normal memory:
                    •     Prohibition of speculative read accesses.
                    •     Prohibition on Gathering.
                    •     Prohibition on Re-ordering.

                    For the following situations, when a physical memory Location is accessed with mismatched attributes, a more
                    restrictive set of behaviors applies. The description of each situation also describes the behaviors that apply:

                    1.    If the only memory type mismatch associated with a memory Location across all users of the memory
                          Location is between different types of Device memory, then all accesses might take the properties of the
                          weakest Device memory type.

                    2.    Any agent that reads that memory Location using the same common definition of the Shareability and
                          Cacheability attributes is guaranteed to access it coherently, to the extent required by that common definition
                          of the memory attributes, only if all the following conditions are met:
                          •      All writes are performed to an alias of the memory Location that uses the same definition of the
                                 Shareability and Cacheability attributes.
                          •      Either:
                                 —      In the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, HCR2.MIOCNCE has a value of 0.
                                 —      All aliases with write permission have the Inner Cacheability attribute the same as the Outer
                                        Cacheability attribute.

E2-3042                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                      E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                  E2.8 Mismatched memory attributes

                        •      Either:
                               —        All writes are performed to an alias of the memory Location that has Inner Cacheability and
                                        Outer Cacheability attributes both as Non-cacheable.
                               —        All aliases to a memory Location use a definition of the Shareability attributes that encompasses
                                        all the agents with permission to access the Location.

                  3.    The possible software-visible effects caused by mismatched attributes for a memory Location are defined
                        more precisely if all of the mismatched attributes define the memory Location as one of:
                        •     Any Device memory type.
                        •     Normal Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable memory.
                        In these cases, the only permitted software-visible effects of the mismatched attributes are one or more of the
                        following:
                        •      Possible loss of properties derived from the memory type when multiple agents attempt to access the
                               memory Location.
                        •      Possible reordering of memory transactions to the same memory Location with different memory
                               attributes, potentially leading to a loss of coherency or uniprocessor semantics. Any possible loss of
                               coherency or uniprocessor semantics can be avoided by inserting DMB barrier instructions between
                               accesses to the same memory Location that might use different attributes.

                  Where there is a loss of the uniprocessor semantics, ordering, or coherency, the following approaches can be used:

                  1.    If the mismatched attributes for a memory Location all assign the same Shareability attribute to a Location
                        that has a cacheable attribute, any loss of uniprocessor semantics, ordering, or coherency within a
                        Shareability domain can be avoided by use of software cache management. To do so, software must use the
                        techniques that are required for the software management of the ordering or coherency of cacheable
                        Locations between agents in different shareability domains. This means:
                        •      Before writing to a cacheable Location not using the Write-Back attribute, software must invalidate,
                               or clean, a Location from the caches if any agent might have written to the Location with the
                               Write-Back attribute. This avoids the possibility of overwriting the Location with stale data.
                        •      After writing to a cacheable Location with the Write-Back attribute, software must clean the Location
                               from the caches, to make the write visible to external memory.
                        •      Before reading the Location with a cacheable attribute, software must invalidate, or clean and
                               invalidate, the Location from the caches, to ensure that any value held in the caches reflects the last
                               value made visible in external memory.
                        •      Executing a DMB barrier instruction, with scope that applies to the common Shareability of the accesses,
                               between any accesses to the same cacheable Location that use different attributes.

                                 Note
                        In AArch32 state, cache maintenance instructions can only be accessed from an Exception level that is higher
                        than EL0, and therefore require a system call. For information on system calls, see Exception-generating and
                        exception-handling instructions on page F1-3077. For information about the AArch32 cache maintenance
                        instructions, see AArch32 cache and branch predictor support on page G3-4809.

                        In all cases:
                        •      Location refers to any byte within the current coherency granule.
                        •      A clean and invalidate instruction can be used instead of a clean instruction, or instead of an invalidate
                               instruction.
                        •      In the sequences outlined in this section, all cache maintenance instructions and memory transactions
                               must be completed, or ordered by the use of barrier operations, if they are not naturally ordered by the
                               use of a common address, see Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on
                               page G3-4829.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           E2-3043
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.8 Mismatched memory attributes

                                   Note
                          With software management of coherency, race conditions can cause loss of data. A race condition occurs
                          when different agents write simultaneously to bytes that are in the same Location, and the invalidate, write,
                          clean sequence of one agent overlaps with the equivalent sequence of another agent. A race condition also
                          occurs if the first operation of either sequence is a clean, rather than an invalidate.

                    2.    If the mismatched attributes for a Location mean that multiple cacheable accesses to the Location might be
                          made with different Shareability attributes, then ordering and coherency are guaranteed only if:
                          •      Each PE that accesses the Location with a cacheable attribute performs a clean and invalidate of the
                                 Location before and after accessing that Location.
                          •      A DMB barrier with scope that covers the full Shareability of the accesses is placed between any accesses
                                 to the same memory Location that use different attributes.

                                   Note
                          The Note in rule 1 of this list, about possible race conditions, also applies to this rule.

                    In addition, if multiple agents attempt to use Load-Exclusive or Store-Exclusive instructions to access a Location,
                    and the accesses from the different agents have different memory attributes associated with the Location, the
                    Exclusives monitor state becomes UNKNOWN.

                    ARM strongly recommends that software does not use mismatched attributes for aliases of the same Location. An
                    implementation might not optimize the performance of a system that uses mismatched aliases.

E2-3044                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                       E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

E2.9       Synchronization and semaphores
                   ARMv8 provides non-blocking synchronization of shared memory, using synchronization primitives. The
                   information in this section about memory accesses by synchronization primitives applies to accesses to both Normal
                   and Device memory.

                             Note
                   Use of the ARMv8 synchronization primitives scales for multiprocessing system designs.

                   Table E2-6 shows the synchronization primitives and the associated CLREX instruction.

                       Table E2-6 Synchronization primitives and associated instruction, T32 and A32 instruction sets

            Transaction size        Additional semantics              Load-Exclusive a         Store-Exclusive a     Other a

            Byte                    -                                 LDREXB                   STREXB                -

                                    Load-Acquire/Store-Release        LDAEXB                   STLEXB                -

            Halfword                -                                 LDREXH                   STREXH                -

                                    Load-Acquire/Store-Release        LDAEXH                   STLEXH                -

            Word                    -                                 LDREX                    STREX                 -

                                    Load-Acquire/Store-Release        LDAEX                    STLEX                 -

            Doubleword              -                                 LDREXD                   STREXD                -

                                    Load-Acquire/Store-Release        LDAEXD                   STLEXD                -

            None                    Clear-Exclusive                   -                        -                     CLREX

              a. Instruction in the T32 and A32 instruction sets.

                   Except for the row showing the CLREX instruction, the two instructions in a single row are a
                   Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instruction pair. The model for the use of a Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive
                   instruction pair accessing a non-aborting memory address x is:

                   •       The Load-Exclusive instruction reads a value from memory address x.

                   •       The corresponding Store-Exclusive instruction succeeds in writing back to memory address x only if no other
                           observer, process, or thread has performed a more recent store to address x. The Store-Exclusive instruction
                           returns a status bit that indicates whether the memory write succeeded.

                   A Load-Exclusive instruction marks a small block of memory for exclusive access. The size of the marked block is
                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, see Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page E2-3051. A
                   Store-Exclusive instruction to any address in the marked block clears the marking.

                             Note
                   In this section, the term PE includes any observer that can generate a Load-Exclusive or a Store-Exclusive
                   instruction.

                   The following sections give more information:
                   •     Exclusive access instructions and Non-shareable memory locations on page E2-3046.
                   •     Exclusive access instructions and shareable memory locations on page E2-3048.
                   •     Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page E2-3051.
                   •     Context switch support on page E2-3051.
                   •     Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instruction usage restrictions on page E2-3052.
                   •     Use of WFE and SEV instructions by spin-locks on page E2-3054.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       E2-3045
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

E2.9.1        Exclusive access instructions and Non-shareable memory locations
                    For memory locations for which the Shareability attribute is Non-shareable, the exclusive access instructions rely
                    on a local Exclusives monitor, or local monitor, that marks any address from which the PE executes a
                    Load-Exclusive instruction. Any non-aborted attempt by the same PE to use a Store-Exclusive instruction to modify
                    any address is guaranteed to clear the marking.

                    A Load-Exclusive instruction performs a load from memory, and:
                    •    The executing PE marks the physical memory address for exclusive access.
                    •    The local monitor of the executing PE transitions to the Exclusive Access state.

                    A Store-Exclusive instruction performs a conditional store to memory that depends on the state of the local monitor:

                    If the local monitor is in the Exclusive Access state
                                    •      If the address of the Store-Exclusive instruction is the same as the address that has been
                                           marked in the monitor by an earlier Load-Exclusive instruction, then the store occurs.
                                           Otherwise, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the store occurs.
                                    •      A status value is returned to a register:
                                           —      If the store took place the status value is 0.
                                           —      Otherwise, the status value is 1.
                                    •      The local monitor of the executing PE transitions to the Open Access state.
                                    When an Exclusives monitor is in the Exclusive Access state the monitor is set.

                    If the local monitor is in the Open Access state
                                   •       No store takes place.
                                   •       A status value of 1 is returned to a register.
                                   •       The local monitor remains in the Open Access state.
                                    When an Exclusives monitor is in the Exclusive Access state the monitor is clear.

                    The Store-Exclusive instruction defines the register to which the status value is returned.

                    When a PE writes using any instruction other than a Store-Exclusive instruction:

                    •     If the write is to a PA that is not marked as Exclusive Access by its local monitor and that local monitor is in
                          the Exclusive Access state it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the write affects the state of the local
                          monitor.

                    •     If the write is to a PA that is marked as Exclusive Access by its local monitor it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                          whether the write affects the state of the local monitor.
                    It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a store to a marked PA causes a mark in the local monitor to be cleared if
                    that store is by an observer other than the one that caused the PA to be marked.

                    Figure E2-4 on page E2-3047 shows the state machine for the local monitor and the effect of each of the operations
                    shown in the figure.

E2-3046                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                      E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                               E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                                                               LoadExcl(x)                                LoadExcl(x)

                                                       Open                                   Exclusive
                                                      Access                                   Access

                                     StoreExcl(x)              Store(Marked_address)*                     Store(Marked_address)*
                                         Store(x)              Store(!Marked_address)*                    Store(!Marked_address)*
                                            CLREX              StoreExcl(Marked_address)
                                                               StoreExcl(!Marked_address)
                                                               CLREX
                                       Operations marked * are possible alternative IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED options.
                                       In the diagram: LoadExcl represents any Load-Exclusive instruction
                                                       StoreExcl represents any Store-Exclusive instruction
                                                       Store represents any other store instruction.
             Any LoadExcl operation updates the marked address to the most significant bits of the address x used for the operation.

                                                                           Figure E2-4 Local monitor state machine diagram

                   For more information about marking see Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page E2-3051.

                            Note
                   For the local monitor state machine, as shown in Figure E2-4:

                   •      The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED options for the local monitor are consistent with the local monitor being
                          constructed so that it does not hold any PA, but instead treats any access as matching the address of the
                          previous Load-Exclusive instruction.

                   •      A local monitor implementation can be unaware of Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions from
                          other PEs.

                   •      The architecture does not require a load instruction, by another PE, that is not a Load-Exclusive instruction,
                          to have any effect on the local monitor.

                   •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the transition from Exclusive Access to Open Access state occurs
                          when the Store or StoreExcl is from another observer.

                   Changes to the local monitor state resulting from speculative execution
                   The architecture permits a local monitor to transition to the Open Access state as a result of speculation, or from
                   some other cause. This is in addition to the transitions to Open Access state caused by the architectural execution
                   of an operation shown in Figure E2-4.

                   An implementation must ensure that:

                   •      The local monitor cannot be seen to transition to the Exclusive Access state except as a result of the
                          architectural execution of one of the operations shown in Figure E2-4.

                   •      Any transition of the local monitor to the Open Access state not caused by the architectural execution of an
                          operation shown in Figure E2-4 must not indefinitely delay forward progress of execution.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3047
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

E2.9.2        Exclusive access instructions and shareable memory locations
                    In the context of this section, a shareable memory location is a memory location that has, or is treated as if it has, a
                    Shareability attribute of Inner Shareable or Outer Shareable.

                    For shareable memory locations, exclusive access instructions rely on:

                    •      A local monitor for each PE in the system, that marks any address from which the PE executes a
                           Load-Exclusive. The local monitor operates as described in Exclusive access instructions and Non-shareable
                           memory locations on page E2-3046, except that for shareable memory any Store-Exclusive is then subject to
                           checking by the global monitor if it is described in that section as doing at least one of the following:
                           —     Updating memory.
                           —     Returning a status value of 0.
                           The local monitor can ignore accesses from other PEs in the system.

                    •      A global monitor that marks a PA as exclusive access for a particular PE. This marking is used later to
                           determine whether a Store-Exclusive to that address that has not been failed by the local monitor can occur.
                           Any successful write to the marked block by any other observer in the Shareability domain of the memory
                           location is guaranteed to clear the marking. For each PE in the system, the global monitor:
                           —      Can hold at least one marked block.
                           —      Maintains a state machine for each marked block it can hold.

                                    Note
                           For each PE, the architecture only requires global monitor support for a single marked address. Any situation
                           that might benefit from the use of multiple marked addresses on a single PE is CONSTRAINED
                           UNPREDICTABLE, see Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instruction usage restrictions on page E2-3052.

                             Note
                    The global monitor can either reside in a block that is part of the hardware on which the PE executes or exist as a
                    secondary monitor at the memory interfaces. The IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED aspects of the monitors mean that the
                    global monitor and local monitor can be combined into a single unit, provided that the unit performs the global
                    monitor and local monitor functions defined in this manual.

                    For shareable memory locations, in some implementations and for some memory types, the properties of the global
                    monitor require functionality outside the PE. Some system implementations might not implement this functionality
                    for all locations of memory. In particular, this can apply to:
                    •       Any type of memory in the system implementation that does not support hardware cache coherency.
                    •       Non-cacheable memory, or memory treated as Non-cacheable, in an implementation that does support
                            hardware cache coherency.

                    In such a system, it is defined by the system:
                    •      Whether the global monitor is implemented.
                    •      If the global monitor is implemented, which address ranges or memory types it monitors.

                             Note
                    To support the use of the Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive mechanism when address translation is disabled, a system
                    might define at least one location of memory, of at least the size of the translation granule, in the system memory
                    map to support the global monitor for all PEs within a common Inner Shareable domain. However, this is not an
                    architectural requirement. Therefore, architecturally-compliant software that requires mutual exclusion must not
                    rely on using the Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive mechanism, and must instead use a software algorithm such as
                    Lamport’s Bakery algorithm to achieve mutual exclusion.

E2-3048                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                        E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                                 E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                  Because implementations can choose which memory types are treated as Non-cacheable, the only memory types for
                  which it is architecturally guaranteed that a global Exclusives monitor is implemented are:

                  •      Inner Shareable, Inner Write-Back, Outer Write-Back Normal memory with Read allocation hint and Write
                         allocation hint and not transient.

                  •      Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Back, Outer Write-Back Normal memory with Read allocation hint and Write
                         allocation hints and not transient.

                  If the global monitor is not implemented for an address range or memory type, then performing a
                  Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instruction to such a location has one or more of the following effects:
                  •       The instruction generates an External abort.
                  •       The instruction generates an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED MMU fault. This is reported using the Fault status
                          code of:
                          —       DFSR.STATUS = 0b110101 when using the Long-descriptor translation table format. The fault can also
                                  be reported in the HSR.ISS[5:0] field for exceptions to Hyp mode.
                          —       DFSR.FS = 0b10101 when using the Short-descriptor translation table format.
                          If the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED MMU fault is generated for the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime then:
                          —       If the fault is generated because of the memory type defined in the first stage of translation, or if the
                                  second stage of translation is disabled, then this is a first stage fault and the exception is taken to EL1.
                          —       Otherwise, the fault is a second stage fault and the exception is taken to EL2.
                          The priority of this fault is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                  •       The instruction is treated as a NOP.
                  •       The Load-Exclusive instruction is treated as if it were accessing a Non-shareable location, but the state of the
                          local monitor becomes UNKNOWN.
                  •       The Store-Exclusive instruction is treated as if it were accessing a Non-shareable location, but the state of the
                          local monitor becomes UNKNOWN.
                  •       The value held in the result register of the Store-Exclusive instruction becomes UNKNOWN.
                  In addition, for write transactions generated by non-PE observers that do not implement exclusive accesses or other
                  atomic access mechanisms, the effect that writes have on the global and local monitors used by an ARM PE is
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. The writes might not clear the global monitors of other PEs for:
                  •      Some address ranges.
                  •      Some memory types.

                  Operation of the global Exclusives monitor
                  A Load-Exclusive instruction from shareable memory performs a load from memory, and causes the PA of the
                  access to be marked as exclusive access for the requesting PE. This access can also cause the exclusive access mark
                  to be removed from any other PA that has been marked by the requesting PE.

                           Note
                  The global monitor only supports a single outstanding exclusive access to shareable memory for each PE.

                  A Load-Exclusive instruction by one PE has no effect on the global monitor state for any other PE.

                  A Store-Exclusive instruction performs a conditional store to memory:

                  •      The store is guaranteed to succeed only if the PA accessed is marked as exclusive access for the requesting
                         PE and both the local monitor and the global monitor state machines for the requesting PE are in the
                         Exclusive Access state. In this case:
                         —      A status value of 0 is returned to a register to acknowledge the successful store.
                         —      The final state of the global monitor state machine for the requesting PE is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
                         —      If the address accessed is marked for exclusive access in the global monitor state machine for any other
                                PE then that state machine transitions to Open Access state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              E2-3049
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                     •     If no address is marked as exclusive access for the requesting PE, the store does not succeed:
                           —      A status value of 1 is returned to a register to indicate that the store failed.
                           —      The global monitor is not affected and remains in Open Access state for the requesting PE.

                     •     If a different PA is marked as exclusive access for the requesting PE, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                           the store succeeds or not:
                           —      If the store succeeds a status value of 0 is returned to a register, otherwise a value of 1 is returned.
                           —      If the global monitor state machine for the PE was in the Exclusive Access state before the
                                  Store-Exclusive instruction it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether that state machine transitions to
                                  the Open Access state.

                     The Store-Exclusive instruction defines the register to which the status value is returned.

                     In a shared memory system, the global monitor implements a separate state machine for each PE in the system. The
                     state machine for accesses to shareable memory by PE(n) can respond to all the shareable memory accesses visible
                     to it. This means it responds to:
                     •       Accesses generated by PE(n).
                     •       Accesses generated by the other observers in the Shareability domain of the memory location. These accesses
                             are identified as (!n).

                     In a shared memory system, the global monitor implements a separate state machine for each observer that can
                     generate a Load-Exclusive or a Store-Exclusive instruction in the system.

                     A global monitor:
                     •     In the Exclusive Access state is set.
                     •     In the Open Access state is clear.

                     Clear global monitor event

                     Whenever the global monitor state for a PE changes from Exclusive access to Open access, an event is generated
                     and held in the Event register for that PE. This register is used by the Wait for Event mechanism, see Wait For Event
                     and Send Event on page G1-4688.

                     Figure E2-5 shows the state machine for PE(n) in a global monitor.

                                    LoadExcl(x,n)                                               LoadExcl(x,n)

                            Open                                                     Exclusive
                           Access                                                     Access

             CLREX(n)               StoreExcl(Marked_address,!n)‡                               StoreExcl(Marked_address,!n)‡
            CLREX(!n)               Store(Marked_address,!n)                                    Store(!Marked_address,n)
       LoadExcl(x,!n)               StoreExcl(Marked_address,n)*                                StoreExcl(Marked_address,n)*
       StoreExcl(x,n)               StoreExcl(!Marked_address,n)*                               StoreExcl(!Marked_address,n)*
      StoreExcl(x,!n)               Store(Marked_address,n)*                                    Store(Marked_address,n)*
           Store(x,n)               CLREX(n)*                                                   CLREX(n)*
          Store(x,!n)                                                                           StoreExcl(!Marked_address,!n)
                                                                                                Store(!Marked_address,!n)
                                                                                                CLREX(!n)
                ‡StoreExcl(Marked_address,!n) clears the monitor only if the StoreExcl updates memory
                 Operations marked * are possible alternative IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED options.
                 In the diagram: LoadExcl represents any Load-Exclusive instruction
                                 StoreExcl represents any Store-Exclusive instruction
                                 Store represents any other store instruction.

      Any LoadExcl operation updates the marked address to the most significant bits of the address x used for the operation.

                               Figure E2-5 Global monitor state machine diagram for PE(n) in a multiprocessor system

                     For more information about marking see Marking and the size of the marked memory block on page E2-3051.

E2-3050                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                      E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                               E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                          Note
                  For the global monitor state machine, as shown in Figure E2-5 on page E2-3050:

                  •     The architecture does not require a load instruction by another PE, that is not a Load-Exclusive instruction,
                        to have any effect on the global monitor.

                  •     Whether a Store-Exclusive instruction successfully updates memory or not depends on whether the address
                        accessed matches the marked shareable memory address for the PE issuing the Store-Exclusive instruction,
                        and whether the local and global monitors are in the exclusive state. For this reason, Figure E2-5 on
                        page E2-3050 only shows how the operations by (!n) cause state transitions of the state machine for PE(n).

                  •     A Load-Exclusive instruction can only update the marked shareable memory address for the PE issuing the
                        Load-Exclusive instruction.

                  •     When the global monitor is in the Exclusive Access state, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a CLREX
                        instruction causes the global monitor to transition from Exclusive Access to Open Access state.

                  •     It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED:
                        —      Whether a modification to a Non-shareable memory location can cause a global monitor to transition
                               from Exclusive Access to Open Access state.
                        —      Whether a Load-Exclusive instruction to a Non-shareable memory location can cause a global monitor
                               to transition from Open Access to Exclusive Access state.

E2.9.3      Marking and the size of the marked memory block
                  When a Load-Exclusive instruction is executed, the resulting marked block ignores the least significant bits of the
                  64-bit memory address.

                  When a Load-Exclusive instruction is executed, a marked block of size 2a bytes is created by ignoring the least
                  significant bits of the memory address. A marked address is any address within this marked block. The size of the
                  marked memory block is called the Exclusives reservation granule. The Exclusives reservation granule is
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED in the range 4 - 512 words.

                          Note
                  This definition means that the Exclusives reservation granule is:
                  •     4 words in an implementation where a is 4.
                  •     512 words in an implementation where a is 11.

                  For example, in an implementation where a is 4, a successful LDREXB of address 0x341B4 defines a marked block
                  using bits[47:4] of the address. This means that the four words of memory from 0x341B0 to 0x341BF are marked for
                  exclusive access.

                  In some implementations the CTR identifies the Exclusives reservation granule, see CTR. Otherwise, software must
                  assume that the maximum Exclusives reservation granule, 512 words, is implemented.

E2.9.4      Context switch support
                  An exception return clears the local monitor. As a result, performing a CLREX instruction as part of a context switch
                  is not required in most situations.

                          Note
                  Context switching is not an application level operation. However, this information is included here to complete the
                  description of the exclusive operations.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        E2-3051
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

E2.9.5        Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instruction usage restrictions
                    The Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions are intended to work together as a pair, for example a
                    LDREX/STREX pair or a LDREXB/STREXB pair. To support different implementations of these functions, software must
                    follow the notes and restrictions given in this subsection.

                    The following notes describe use of a Load-Exclusive/ Store-Exclusive instruction pair, LoadExcl/StoreExcl, to
                    indicate the use of any of the Load-Exclusive/Store-Exclusive instruction pairs shown in Table E2-6 on
                    page E2-3045. In this context, a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair comprises two instructions in the same thread of execution:

                    •     The exclusives support a single outstanding exclusive access for each PE thread that is executed. The
                          architecture makes use of this by not requiring an address or size check as part of the IsExclusiveLocal()
                          function. If the target VA of a StoreExcl is different from the VA of the preceding LoadExcl instruction in the
                          same thread of execution, behavior can be CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE with the following behavior:
                          —      The StoreExcl either passes or fails, the status value returned by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN, and the
                                 states of the local and global monitors for that PE are UNKNOWN.
                                          Note
                                 This means the StoreExcl might pass for some instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched
                                 addresses, and fail for other instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched addresses.

                          —      The data at the address accessed by the LoadExcl, and at the address accessed by the StoreExcl, is
                                 UNKNOWN.

                          This means software can rely on a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair to eventually succeed only if the LoadExcl and the
                          StoreExcl are executed with the same VA.

                    •     An implementation of the Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions can require that, in any thread of
                          execution, the transaction size of a StoreExcl instruction is the same as the transaction size of the preceding
                          LoadExcl instruction executed in that thread. If the transaction size of a StoreExcl instruction is different from
                          the preceding LoadExcl instruction in the same thread of execution, behavior can be CONSTRAINED
                          UNPREDICTABLE with the following behavior:

                          —      The StoreExcl either passes or fails, and the status value returned by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN.
                                          Note
                                 This means the StoreExcl might pass for some instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched
                                 transaction sizes, and fail for other instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with mismatched transaction
                                 sizes.

                          —      The block of data of the size of the larger of the transaction sizes used by the LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair
                                 at the address accessed by the LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair, is UNKNOWN.
                          This means software can rely on a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair to eventually succeed only if the LoadExcl and the
                          StoreExcl have the same transaction size.

                    •     LoadExcl/StoreExcl loops are guaranteed to make forward progress only if, for any LoadExcl/StoreExcl loop
                          within a single thread of execution, the software meets all of the following conditions:
                          1           Between the Load-Exclusive and the Store-Exclusive, there are no explicit memory accesses,
                                      preloads, direct or indirect System register writes, address translation instructions, cache or TLB
                                      maintenance instructions, exception generating instructions, exception returns, or indirect
                                      branches.
                          2           Between the Store-Exclusive returning a failing result and the retry of the corresponding
                                      Load-Exclusive:
                                      •      There are no stores or PLDW instructions to any address within the Exclusives reservation
                                             granule accessed by the Store-Exclusive.
                                      •      There are no loads or preloads to any address within the Exclusives reservation granule
                                             accessed by the Store-Exclusive that use a different VA alias to that address.
                                      •      There are no direct or indirect System register writes, other than changes to the flag fields
                                             in the CPSR or FPSCR, caused by data processing or comparison instructions.

E2-3052                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                   E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
                                                                                            E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                                  •      There are no direct or indirect address translation instructions, cache or TLB maintenance
                                         instructions, exception generating instructions, exception returns, or indirect branches.
                                  •      All loads and stores are to a block of contiguous virtual memory of not more than 512
                                         bytes in size.
                      The Exclusives monitor can be cleared at any time without an application-related cause, provided that such
                      clearing is not systematically repeated so as to prevent the forward progress in finite time of at least one of
                      the threads that is accessing the Exclusives monitor. However, it is permissible for the LoadExcl/StoreExcl
                      loop not to make forward progress if a different thread is repeatedly doing any of the following in a tight loop:
                      —      Performing stores to a PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.
                      —      Prefetching with intent to write to a PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.
                      —      Executing data cache clean, data cache invalidate, or data cache clean and invalidate instructions to a
                             PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.
                      —      Executing instruction cache invalidate all instructions.
                      —      Executing instruction cache invalidate by VA instructions to a PA covered by the Exclusives monitor.

                  •   Implementations can benefit from keeping the LoadExcl and StoreExcl operations close together in a single
                      thread of execution. This minimizes the likelihood of the Exclusives monitor state being cleared between the
                      LoadExcl instruction and the StoreExcl instruction. Therefore, for best performance, ARM strongly
                      recommends a limit of 128 bytes between LoadExcl and StoreExcl instructions in a single thread of execution.

                  •   The architecture sets an upper limit of 2048 bytes on the Exclusives reservation granule that can be marked
                      as exclusive. For performance reasons, ARM recommends that objects that are accessed by exclusive
                      accesses are separated by the size of the Exclusives reservation granule. This is a performance guideline
                      rather than a functional requirement.

                  •   After taking a Data Abort exception, the state of the Exclusives monitors is UNKNOWN.

                  •   For the memory location accessed by a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair, if the memory attributes for a StoreExcl
                      instruction are different from the memory attributes for the preceding LoadExcl instruction in the same thread
                      of execution, behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. Where this occurs because the translation of the
                      accessed address changes between the LoadExcl instruction and the StoreExcl instruction, the CONSTRAINED
                      UNPREDICTABLE behavior is as follows:

                      —      The StoreExcl either passes or fails, and the status value returned by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN.
                                      Note
                             This means the StoreExcl might pass for some instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with changed
                             memory attributes, and fail for other instances of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair with changed memory
                             attributes.

                      —      The data at the address accessed by the StoreExcl is UNKNOWN.

                               Note
                      Another bullet point in this list covers the case where the memory attributes of a LoadExcl/StoreExcl pair
                      differ as a result of using different VAs with different attributes that point to the same PA.

                  •   The effect of a data or unified cache invalidate, clean, or clean and invalidate instruction on a local or global
                      Exclusives monitor that is in the Exclusive Access state is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and the instruction
                      might clear the monitor, or it might leave it in the Exclusive Access state. For address-based maintenance
                      instructions, this also applies to the monitors of other PEs in the same Shareability domain as the PE
                      executing the cache maintenance instruction, as determined by the Shareability domain of the address being
                      maintained.

                               Note
                      ARM strongly recommends that implementations ensure that the use of such maintenance instructions by a
                      PE in the Non-secure state cannot cause a denial of service on a PE in the Secure state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           E2-3053
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
E2 The AArch32 Application Level Memory Model
E2.9 Synchronization and semaphores

                    •     If the mapping of the VA to PA is changed between the LoadExcl instruction and the StoreExcl instruction,
                          and the change is performed using a break-before-make sequence as described in Using break-before-make
                          when updating translation table entries on page G4-4916, if the StoreExcl is performed after another write
                          to the same PA as the StoreExcl, and that other write was performed after the old translation was properly
                          invalidated and that invalidation was properly synchronized, then the StoreExcl will not pass its monitor
                          check.

                                   Note
                          ARM expects that, in many implementations, either:
                          —   The TLB invalidation will clear either the local or global monitor.
                          —   The PA will be checked between the LoadExcl and StoreExcl.

                    •     The Exclusive Access state for an address accessed by a PE can be lost as a result of a PLDW instruction to the
                          same PA executed by another PE. This means that a very high rate of repeated PLDW accesses to a memory
                          location might impede the forward progress of another PE.

                            Note
                    In the event of repeatedly-contending LoadExcl/StoreExcl instruction sequences from multiple PEs, an
                    implementation must ensure that forward progress is made by at least one PE.

E2.9.6        Use of WFE and SEV instructions by spin-locks
                    ARMv8 provides Wait For Event, Send Event, and Send Event Local instructions, WFE, SEV, SEVL, that can assist with
                    reducing power consumption and bus contention caused by PEs repeatedly attempting to obtain a spin-lock. These
                    instructions can be used at the application level, but a complete understanding of what they do depends on a system
                    level understanding of exceptions. They are described in Wait For Event and Send Event on page G1-4688.
                    However, in ARMv8, when the global monitor for a PE changes from Exclusive Access state to Open Access state,
                    an event is generated.

                            Note
                    This is equivalent to issuing an SEVL instruction on the PE for which the monitor state has changed. It removes the
                    need for spinlock code to include an SEV instruction after clearing a spinlock.

E2-3054                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
