Chapter G3
The AArch32 System Level Memory Model

                  This chapter provides a system level view of the general features of the memory system. It contains the following
                  sections:
                  •      About the memory system architecture on page G3-4806.
                  •      Address space on page G3-4807.
                  •      Mixed-endian support on page G3-4808.
                  •      AArch32 cache and branch predictor support on page G3-4809.
                  •      System register support for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory features on page G3-4834.
                  •      External aborts on page G3-4835.
                  •      Memory barrier instructions on page G3-4837.
                  •      Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions on page G3-4838.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G3-4805
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.1 About the memory system architecture

G3.1        About the memory system architecture
                    The ARM architecture supports different implementation choices for the memory system microarchitecture and
                    memory hierarchy, depending on the requirements of the system being implemented. In this respect, the memory
                    system architecture describes a design space in which an implementation is made. The architecture does not
                    prescribe a particular form for the memory systems. Key concepts are abstracted in a way that permits
                    implementation choices to be made while enabling the development of common software routines that do not have
                    to be specific to a particular microarchitectural form of the memory system. For more information about the concept
                    of a hierarchical memory system see Memory hierarchy on page E2-3022.

G3.1.1        Form of the memory system architecture
                    The ARMv8 A-profile architecture includes a Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA). Chapter G4 The
                    AArch32 Virtual Memory System Architecture describes the AArch32 view of the VMSA.

G3.1.2        Memory attributes
                    Memory types and attributes on page E2-3032 describes the memory attributes, including how different memory
                    types have different attributes. Each location in memory has a set of memory attributes, and the translation tables
                    define the virtual memory locations, and the attributes for each location.

                    Table G3-1 shows the memory attributes that are visible at the system level.

                                                                                             Table G3-1 Memory attribute summary

                                       Memory type              Shareability                     Cacheability

                                       Device a                 Outer Shareable                  Non-cacheable.

                                       Normal                   One of:                          One of b:
                                                                •     Non-shareable.             •     Non-cacheable.
                                                                •     Inner Shareable.           •     Write-Through Cacheable.
                                                                •     Outer Shareable.           •     Write-Back Cacheable.
                                          a. Takes additional attributes, see Device memory on page E2-3036.
                                          b. See also Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints on page G3-4812.

                    For more information on Cacheability and Shareability see The Cacheability and Shareability memory attributes on
                    page E2-3023, Non-shareable Normal memory on page E2-3034, and Caches and memory hierarchy on
                    page E2-3022.

G3-4806                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                        G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                               G3.2 Address space

G3.2       Address space
                  The ARMv8 architecture is designed to support a wide range of applications with different memory requirements.
                  It supports a range of physical address (PA) sizes, and provides associated control and identification mechanisms.
                  For more information, see About VMSAv8-32 on page G4-4842.

G3.2.1      Address space overflow or underflow
                  This subsection describes address space overflow or underflow:

                  Instruction address space overflow
                  When a PE performs a normal, sequential execution of instructions, it calculates:

                      (address_of_current_instruction) + (size_of_executed_instruction)

                  This calculation is performed after each instruction to determine which instruction to execute next.

                  If the address calculation performed after executing an A32 or T32 instruction overflows 0xFFFF FFFF, the program
                  counter becomes UNKNOWN.

                  If the PE executes an instruction for which the instruction address, size, and alignment mean that it contains the
                  bytes 0xFFFFFFFF and 0x00000000, the bytes that apparently from 0x00000000 onwards come from an UNKNOWN
                  address.

                  Data address space overflow and underflow
                  If the PE executes a load or store instruction for which the computed address, total access size, and alignment mean
                  that it accesses bytes 0xFFFFFFFF and 0x00000000, then the bytes that apparently come from 0x00000000 onwards come
                  from UNKNOWN addresses.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G3-4807
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.3 Mixed-endian support

G3.3        Mixed-endian support
                    Table G3-2 shows the endianness of explicit data accesses and translation table walks.

                                                                                                  Table G3-2 Endianness support

 Exception level       Explicit data accesses          Stage 1 translation table walks          Stage 2 translation table walks

 EL0                   PSTATE.E                        SCTLR(S/NS).EE                           HSCTLR.EE

 EL1                   PSTATE.E                        SCTLR(S/NS).EE                           HSCTLR.EE

 EL2                   PSTATE.E                        HSCTLR.EE                                N/A

 EL3                   PSTATE.E                        SCTLR(S).EE                              N/A

                   AArch32 state provides the following options for endianness support:

                   •      All Exception levels support mixed-endianness:
                          —     SCTLR(S/NS).EE, HSCTLR.EE, and PSTATE.E are RW.

                   •      Only EL0 supports mixed-endianness and EL1, EL2, and EL3 support only little-endianness:
                          —     SCTLR(S/NS).EE and HSCTLR.EE are RES0. PSTATE.E is RW when in EL0 and RES0 when in EL1,
                                EL2, or EL3. SPSR.E is also RES0 when not returning to EL0.

                   •      Only EL0 supports mixed-endianness and EL1, EL2, and EL3 support only big-endianness:
                          —     SCTLR(S/NS).EE and HSCTLR.EE are RES1. PSTATE.E is RW when in EL0 and RES1 when in EL1,
                                EL2, or EL3. SPSR.E is also RES1 when not returning to EL0.

                   •      All Exception levels support only little-endianness:
                          —     Each of SCTLR(S/NS).EE, HSCTLR.EE, PSTATE.E, and SPSR.E is RES0.

                   •      All Exception levels support only big-endianness:
                          —     Each of SCTLR(S/NS).EE, HSCTLR.EE, PSTATE.E, and SPSR.E is RES1.

                   If mixed endian support is implemented for an Exception level using AArch32, endianness is controlled by
                   PSTATE.E. For exception returns to AArch32 state, PSTATE.E is copied from SPSR_ELx.E. If the target Exception
                   level supports only little-endian accesses, SPSR_ELx.E is RES0. If the target Exception level supports only
                   big-endian accesses, SPSR_ELx.E is RES1.

                            Note
                   •      When using AArch32, ARM deprecates PSTATE.E having a different value from the equivalent System
                          register EE bit when in EL1, EL2 or EL3. The use of the SETEND instruction is also deprecated.

                   •      If the higher Exception levels are using AArch64, the corresponding registers are:
                          —       SCTLR_EL1 for SCTLR(NS).
                          —       SCTLR_EL2 for HSCTLR.
                          —       SCTLR_EL3 for SCTLR(S).

                   The BigEndian() function determines whether the current Exception level and Execution state is using big-endian
                   data.

                   For more information about endianness in the ARM architecture see Endian support on page E2-3029.

G3-4808                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
                                                                                        G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                     G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

G3.4       AArch32 cache and branch predictor support
                  The following sections describe the support for caches and branch predictors in AArch32 state:
                  •     General behavior of the caches.
                  •     Cache identification on page G3-4811.
                  •     Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints on page G3-4812.
                  •     Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses in AArch32 state on page G3-4813.
                  •     Behavior of caches at reset on page G3-4815.
                  •     AArch32 cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4820.
                  •     About cache maintenance in AArch32 state on page G3-4816.
                  •     AArch32 cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4820.
                  •     Cache lockdown on page G3-4831.
                  •     System level caches on page G3-4833.

                  See also Chapter G4 The AArch32 Virtual Memory System Architecture, and in particular Caches in VMSAv8-32 on
                  page G4-4929.

                          Note
                  •     Branch predictors typically use a form of cache to hold branch target data. Therefore, they are included in
                        this section.

                  •     In the instruction mnemonics, MVA is a synonym for VA.

G3.4.1      General behavior of the caches
                  When a memory location is marked with a Normal Cacheable memory attribute, determining whether a copy of the
                  memory location is held in a cache still depends on many aspects of the implementation. The following
                  non-exhaustive list of factors might be involved:
                  •     The size, line length, and associativity of the cache.
                  •     The cache allocation algorithm.
                  •     Activity by other elements of the system that can access the memory.
                  •     Speculative instruction fetching algorithms.
                  •     Speculative data fetching algorithms.
                  •     Interrupt behaviors.

                  Given this range of factors, and the large variety of cache systems that might be implemented, the architecture
                  cannot guarantee whether:
                  •     A memory location present in the cache remains in the cache.
                  •     A memory location not present in the cache is brought into the cache.

                  Instead, the following principles apply to the behavior of caches:

                  •     The architecture has a concept of an entry locked down in the cache. How lockdown is achieved is
                        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and lockdown might not be supported by:
                        —     A particular implementation.
                        —     Some memory attributes.

                  •     An unlocked entry in a cache might not remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that an
                        unlocked cache entry remains in the cache or remains incoherent with the rest of memory. Software must not
                        assume that an unlocked item that remains in the cache remains dirty.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G3-4809
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     •     A locked entry in a cache is guaranteed to remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that a
                           locked cache entry remains incoherent with the rest of memory, that is, it might not remain dirty.

                                    Note
                           For more information, see The interaction of cache lockdown with cache maintenance instructions on
                           page G3-4832.

                     •     Any memory location that has a Normal Cacheable attribute at either the current Exception level or at a
                           higher Exception level can be allocated to a cache at any time.

                     •     It is guaranteed that no memory location that does not have a Normal Cacheable attribute is allocated into the
                           cache.

                     •     It is guaranteed that no memory location is allocated to the cache if it has a Normal Non-cacheable attribute
                           or any type of Device memory attribute in both:
                           —       The translation regime at the current Exception level.
                           —       The translation regime at any higher Exception level.

                     •     For data accesses, any memory location with a Normal Inner Shareable or Normal Outer Shareable attribute
                           is guaranteed to be coherent with all masters in its Shareability domain.

                     •     Any memory location is not guaranteed to remain incoherent with the rest of memory.

                     •     The eviction of a cache entry from a cache level can overwrite memory that has been written by another
                           observer only if the entry contains a memory location that has been written to by an observer in the
                           Shareability domain of that memory location. The maximum size of the memory that can be overwritten is
                           called the Cache Write-back Granule. In some implementations the CTR identifies the Cache Write-back
                           Granule.

                     •     The allocation of a memory location into a cache cannot cause the most recent value of that memory location
                           to become invisible to an observer, if it was previously visible to that observer.

                             Note
                     The Cacheability attribute of an address is determined by the applicable translation table entry for that address, as
                     modified by any applicable System register Cacheability controls, such as the SCTLR.{I, C} controls.

                     For the purpose of these principles, a cache entry covers at least 16 bytes and no more than 2KB of contiguous
                     address space, aligned to the size of the cache entry.

G3-4810                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                         G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                      G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

G3.4.2      Cache identification
                  The ARMv8 cache identification consists of a set of registers that describe the implemented caches that are affected
                  by cache maintenance instructions executed on the PE. This includes cache maintenance instructions that:
                  •     Affect the entire cache, for example ICIALLUIS.
                  •     Operate by VA, for example ICIMVAU.
                  •     Operate by set/way, for example DCISW.

                  The cache identification registers are:

                  •     A single Cache Type Register, CTR, that defines:
                        —     The minimum line length of any of the instruction caches affected by the instruction cache
                              maintenance instructions.
                        —     The minimum line length of any of the data or unified caches, affected by the data cache maintenance
                              instructions.
                        —     The cache indexing and tagging policy of the Level 1 instruction cache.

                                 Note
                        It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether caches beyond the PoC will be reported by this mechanism, and
                        because of the possible existence of system caches some caches before the PoC might not be reported. For
                        more information about system caches see System level caches on page G3-4833.

                  •     A single Cache Level ID Register, CLIDR, that defines:
                        —     The type of cache that is implemented and can be maintained using the architected cache maintenance
                              instructions that operate by set/way or operate on the entire cache at each cache level, up to the
                              maximum of seven levels.
                        —     The Level of Unification Inner Shareable (LoUIS), Level of Coherence (LoC) and the Level of
                              Unification (LoU) for the caches. See Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on
                              page G3-4816 for a definition of these terms.
                        —     An optional ICB field to indicate the boundary between the caches use for caching Inner Cacheable
                              memory regions and those used only for caching Outer Cacheable regions.

                  •     A single Cache Size Selection Register, CSSELR, that selects the cache level and cache type of the current
                        Cache Size Identification Register.

                  •     For each implemented cache that is identifiable by this mechanism, across all the levels of caching, a Cache
                        Size Identification Register, that defines:
                        —      Whether the cache supports Write-Through, Write-Back, Read-Allocate and Write-Allocate.
                        —      The number of sets, associativity, and line length of the cache. See Terms used in describing the cache
                               maintenance instructions on page G3-4816 for a definition of these terms.

                                 Note
                        From ARMv8.3, it is possible to have multiple Cache Size Identification Registers. For more details, see
                        Possible formats of the Cache Size Identification Registers, CCSIDR and CCSIDR2 on page G3-4812.

                  To determine the cache topology associated with a PE:

                  1.    Read the Cache Type Register to find the indexing and tagging policy used for the Level 1 instruction cache.
                        This register also provides the size of the smallest cache lines used for the instruction caches, and for the data
                        and unified caches. These values are used in cache maintenance instructions.

                  2.    Read the Cache Level ID Register to find what caches are implemented. The register includes seven Cache
                        type fields, for cache levels 1 to 7. Scanning these fields, starting from Level 1, identifies the instruction, data
                        or unified caches implemented at each level. This scan ends when it reaches a level at which no caches are
                        defined. The Cache Level ID Register also specifies the Level of Unification (LoU) and the Level of
                        Coherence (LoC) for the cache implementation.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G3-4811
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     3.    For each cache identified at stage 2:
                           •      Write to the Cache Size Selection Register to select the required cache. A cache is identified by its
                                  level, and whether it is:
                                  —       An instruction cache.
                                  —       A data or unified cache.
                           •      Read the Cache Size Identification Register to find details of the cache.

                     Possible formats of the Cache Size Identification Registers, CCSIDR and CCSIDR2
                     From ARMv8.3, two different formats are available for defining the number of sets and associativity of the currently
                     selected cache. For a definition of these terms, see Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on
                     page G3-4816.

                     When ARMv8.3-CCIDX is implemented:

                     •     There are two Cache Size Identification Registers, CCSIDR and CCSIDR2.

                     •     The length of the CCSIDR.Assoc field is 21 bits. This limits the associativity of the currently selected cache
                           to 221.

                     •     The length of the CCSIDR2.NumSets field is 24 bits. This limits the number of sets in the currently selected
                           cache to 224.
                     This is the 64-bit format of the Cache Size Identification Register.

                     When ARMv8.3-CCIDX is not implemented:

                     •     There is a single Cache Size Identification Register, CCSIDR.

                     •     The length of the CCSIDR.Assoc field is 10 bits. This limits the associativity of the currently selected cache
                           to 210.

                     •     The length of the CCSIDR.NumSets field is 15 bits. This limits the number of sets in the currently selected
                           cache to 215.
                     This is the 32-bit format of the Cache Size Identification Register.

                     When one of these formats is implemented, it is implemented across all the levels of caching.

G3.4.3        Cacheability, cache allocation hints, and cache transient hints
                     Cacheability only applies to Normal memory, and is defined independently for Inner and Outer cache locations. All
                     types of Device memory are always treated as Non-cacheable.

                     As described in Memory types and attributes on page E2-3032, the memory attributes include a cacheability
                     attribute that is one of:
                     •      Non-cacheable.
                     •      Write-Through cacheable.
                     •      Write-Back cacheable.

                     In ARMv8, Cacheability attributes other than Non-cacheable can be complemented by a cache allocation hint. This
                     is an indication to the memory system of whether allocating a value to a cache is likely to improve performance. In
                     addition, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a cache transient hint is supported, see Transient cacheability hint
                     on page G3-4813.

                     The cache allocation hints are assigned independently for read and write accesses, and therefore when the Transient
                     hit is supported the following cache allocation hints can be used:

                     For read accesses:      Read-Allocate, Transient Read-Allocate, or No Read-Allocate.

                     For write accesses:     Write-Allocate, Transient Write-Allocate, or No Write-Allocate.

G3-4812                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                           G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                        G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                           Note
                  •      A Cacheable location with both No Read-Allocate and No Write-Allocate hints is not the same as a
                         Non-cacheable location. A Non-cacheable location has coherency guarantees for all observers within the
                         system that do not apply for a location that is Cacheable, No Read-Allocate, No Write-Allocate.

                  •      Implementations can use the cache allocation hints to limit cache pollution to a part of a cache, such as to a
                         subset of ways.

                  •      For VMSAv8-32 translation table walks using the Long-descriptor translation table format, the appropriate
                         TCR.{IRGNn, ORGNn} fields define the memory attributes of the translation tables, including the
                         cacheability. However, this assignment supports only a subset of the cacheability attributes described in this
                         section.

                  The architecture does not require an implementation to make any use of cache allocation hints. This means an
                  implementation might not make any distinction between memory locations with attributes that differ only in their
                  cache allocation hint.

                  Transient cacheability hint
                  In ARMv8, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether a Transient hint is supported for the VMSAv8-32 translation
                  scheme when using the Long-descriptor translation table format. In an implementation that supports the Transient
                  hint, the Transient hint is a qualifier of the cache allocation hints, and indicates that the benefit of caching is for a
                  relatively short period. It indicates that it might be better to restrict allocation of transient entries, to avoid possibly
                  casting-out other, less transient, entries.

                           Note
                  The architecture does not specify what is meant by a relatively short period.

                  When using the Short-descriptor translation table format, VMSAv8-32 cannot support the Transient hint.

                  The description of the MAIR0, MAIR1, HMAIR0, and HMAIR1 registers includes the assignment of the Transient
                  attribute in an implementation that supports this option. In this assignment:
                  •      The Transient hint is defined independently for Inner Cacheable and Outer Cacheable memory regions.
                  •      A single Transient hint applies to both read and write accesses to a memory region.

G3.4.4      Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses in AArch32 state
                  In ARMv8, Cacheability control fields can force all memory locations with the Normal memory type to be treated
                  as Non-cacheable, regardless of their assigned Cacheability attribute. Independent controls are provided for each
                  stage of address translation, with separate controls for:
                  •      Data accesses. These controls also apply to accesses to the translation tables.
                  •      Instruction accesses.

                           Note
                  These Cacheability controls replace the cache enable controls provided in previous versions of the ARM
                  architecture.

                  In AArch32 state, the Cacheability control fields and their effects are as follows:

                  For the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime
                                   The Non-secure instance of SCTLR holds the EL1 controls that affect cacheability:
                                   •      When the value of SCTLR.C is 0:
                                          —    All stage 1 translations for data accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                          —    All accesses to the PL1&0 stage 1 translation tables are Non-cacheable.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G3-4813
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                                    •      When the value of SCTLR.I is 0:
                                           —    All stage 1 translations for instruction accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                    •      When the value of HCR2.CD is 1:
                                           —    All stage 2 translations for data accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                           —    All accesses to the PL1&0 stage 2 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                    •      When the value of HCR2.ID is 1:
                                           —    All stage 2 translations for instruction accesses to Normal memory are Non-cacheable.
                                    •      When the value of HCR.DC is 1, all Non-secure stage 1 translations and all accesses to the
                                           Non-secure EL1&0 stage 1 translation tables, are treated as accesses to Normal
                                           Non-shareable Inner Write-Back Cacheable Read-Allocate Write-Allocate, Outer
                                           Write-Back Cacheable Read-Allocate Write-Allocate memory, regardless of the value of
                                           SCTLR.C. This applies to translations for both data and instruction accesses.
                                    In addition, when the value of SCTLR.M is 0, indicating that the stage 1 translations are disabled
                                    for the translation regime, then if EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.DC is 0 or if EL2 is
                                    using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.DC is 0, then:
                                    •      If the value of SCTLR.I is 0, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                           translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                    •      If the value of SCTLR.I is 1, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                           translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Through cacheable, Outer
                                           Write-Through cacheable.

                                             Note
                                    •      In Non-secure state, the stage 1 and stage 2 cacheability attributes are combined as described
                                           in Combining the Cacheability attribute on page G4-4909.
                                    •      The Non-secure SCTLR.{C, I} and HCR.DC fields have no effect on the Secure PL1&0 and
                                           EL2 translation regimes.
                                    •      The HCR2.{ID, CD} fields affect only stage 2 of the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                    •      In Non-secure state, the PL1&0 translation regime can be described as the Non-secure
                                           EL1&0 translation regime. This is consistent with the equivalent AArch64 descriptions.

                     For the Secure PL1&0 translation regime
                                    The Secure instance of SCTLR holds the controls that determine cacheability:
                                    •      When the value of SCTLR.C is 0:
                                           —      All data accesses to Normal memory using the Secure PL1&0 translation regime are
                                                  Non-cacheable.
                                           —      All accesses to the Secure PL1&0 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                    •      When the value of SCTLR.I is 0:
                                           —      All instruction accesses to Normal memory using the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                                  regime are Non-cacheable.
                                    In addition, when the value of SCTLR.M is 0, indicating that stage 1 translations are disabled, then:
                                    •      If the value of SCTLR.I is 0, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                           translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                    •      If the value of SCTLR.I is 1, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                           translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Through cacheable, Outer
                                           Write-Through cacheable.

                                             Note
                                    The Secure SCTLR.{I, C, M} fields have no effect on the Non-secure PL1&0 and EL2 translation
                                    regimes.

G3-4814                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                       G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                    G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                  For the EL2 translation regime
                                 •      When the value of HSCTLR.C is 0:
                                        —      All data accesses to Normal memory using the EL2 translation regime are
                                               Non-cacheable.
                                        —      All accesses to the EL2 translation tables are Non-cacheable.
                                 •      When the value of HSCTLR.I is 0:
                                        —    All instruction accesses to Normal memory using the EL2 translation regime are
                                             Non-cacheable.
                                 In addition, when the value of HSCTLR.M is 0, indicating that stage 1 translations are disabled,
                                 then:
                                 •      If the value of HSCTLR.I is 0, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                        translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                 •      If the value of HSCTLR.I is 1, instruction accesses to Normal memory from stage 1 of the
                                        translation regime are Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Through cacheable, Outer
                                        Write-Through cacheable.

                                          Note
                                 The HSCTLR.{I. C, M} fields have no effect on the PL1&0 and EL3 translation regimes.

                  The effect of the SCTLR.C or HSCTLR.C and HCR2.CD bits is reflected in the result of the address translation
                  instructions in the PAR.

                          Note
                  •     The requirements in this section mean the architecturally required effects of SCTLR.I and HSCTLR.I are
                        limited to their effects on caching instruction accesses in unified caches.

                  •     This specification can give rise to different cacheability attributes between instruction and data accesses to
                        the same location. Where this occurs, the measures for mismatch memory attributes described in Mismatched
                        memory attributes on page E2-3042 must be followed to manage the corresponding loss of coherency.

G3.4.5      Behavior of caches at reset
                  In ARMv8:

                  •     All caches reset to IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED states that might be UNKNOWN.

                  •     The Cacheability control fields described in Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses in
                        AArch32 state on page G3-4813 reset to values that force all memory locations to be treated as
                        Non-cacheable.

                                 Note
                        This applies only to the controls that apply to the Translation regime that is used by the Exception level, PE
                        mode, and Security state entered on reset.

                  •     An implementation can require the use of a specific cache initialization routine to invalidate its storage array
                        before caching is enabled. The exact form of any required initialization routine is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED,
                        and the routine must be documented clearly as part of the documentation of the device.

                  •     If an implementation permits cache hits when the Cacheability control fields force all memory locations to
                        be treated as Non-cacheable then the cache initialization routine must:
                        —      Provide a mechanism to ensure the correct initialization of the caches.
                        —      Be documented clearly as part of the documentation of the device.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G3-4815
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                             In particular, if an implementation permits cache hits when the Cacheability controls force all memory
                             locations to be treated as Non-cacheable, and the cache contents are not invalidated at reset, the initialization
                             routine must avoid any possibility of running from an uninitialized cache. It is acceptable for an initialization
                             routine to require a fixed instruction sequence to be placed in a restricted range of memory.

                     •       ARM recommends that whenever an invalidation routine is required, it is based on the ARMv8 cache
                             maintenance instructions.

                     Similar rules apply to:
                     •     Branch predictor behavior, see Behavior of the branch predictors at reset on page G3-4824.
                     •     TLB behavior, see TLB behavior at reset on page G4-4912.

G3.4.6        About cache maintenance in AArch32 state
                     The following sections give general information about cache maintenance in ARMv8:
                     •     Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions.
                     •     The ARMv8 abstraction of the cache hierarchy on page G3-4819.

                     The following sections describe the AArch32 state cache maintenance instructions:
                     •     AArch32 instruction cache maintenance instructions (IC*) on page G3-4821.
                     •     AArch32 data cache maintenance instructions (DC*) on page G3-4822.

                               Note
                     Some descriptions of the cache maintenance instructions refer to the Cacheability of the address on which the
                     instruction operates. The Cacheability of an address is determined by the applicable translation table entry for that
                     address, as modified by any applicable System register Cacheability controls, such as the SCTLR.{I, C} controls.

                     Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions
                     Cache maintenance instructions are defined to act on particular memory locations. Instructions can be defined:
                     •     By the virtual address of the memory location to be maintained, referred to as operating by VA.
                     •     By a mechanism that describes the location in the hardware of the cache, referred to as operating by set/way.

                     In addition, for instruction caches and branch predictors, there are instructions that invalidate all entries.

                     The following subsections define the terms used in the descriptions of the cache maintenance instructions:
                     •     Terminology for cache maintenance instructions operating by set/way.
                     •     Terminology for Clean, Invalidate, and Clean and Invalidate instructions on page G3-4817.

                               Note
                     There is no terminology specific to cache maintenance instructions that operate by VA. When all applicable stages
                     of translation are disabled, the VA used is identical to the PA. For more information about memory system behavior
                     when address translation is disabled, see The effects of disabling address translation stages on VMSAv8-32 behavior
                     on page G4-4850.

                     Terminology for cache maintenance instructions operating by set/way

                     Cache maintenance instruction that operate by set/way refer to the particular structures in a cache. Three parameters
                     describe the location in a cache hierarchy that an instruction works on. These parameters are:

                     Level            The cache level of the hierarchy. The number of levels of cache is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. The
                                      cache levels that can be managed using the architected cache maintenance instructions that operate
                                      by set/way can be determined from the CLIDR.
                                      In the ARM architecture, the lower numbered cache levels are those closest to the PE. See Memory
                                      hierarchy on page E2-3022.

G3-4816                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                          G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                       G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                  Set              Each level of a cache is split up into a number of sets. Each set is a set of locations in a cache level
                                   to which an address can be assigned. Usually, the set number is an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                   function of an address.
                                   In the ARM architecture, sets are numbered from 0.

                  Way              The associativity of a cache is the number of locations in a set to which a specific address can be
                                   assigned. The way number specifies one of these locations.
                                   In the ARM architecture, ways are numbered from 0.

                            Note
                  Because the allocation of a memory address to a cache location is entirely IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, ARM expects
                  that most portable software will use only the cache maintenance instructions by set/way as single steps in a routine
                  to perform maintenance on the entire cache.

                  Terminology for Clean, Invalidate, and Clean and Invalidate instructions

                  Caches introduce coherency problems in two possible directions:

                  1.      An update to a memory location by a PE that accesses a cache might not be visible to other observers that
                          can access memory. This can occur because new updates are still in the cache and are not visible yet to the
                          other observers that do not access that cache.

                  2.      Updates to memory locations by other observers that can access memory might not be visible to a PE that
                          accesses a cache. This can occur when the cache contains an old, or stale, copy of the memory location that
                          has been updated.

                  The Clean and Invalidate instructions address these two issues. The definitions of these instructions are:

                  Clean            A cache clean instruction ensures that updates made by an observer that controls the cache are made
                                   visible to other observers that can access memory at the point to which the instruction is performed.
                                   Once the Clean has completed, the new memory values are guaranteed to be visible to the point to
                                   which the instruction is performed, for example to the Point of Unification.
                                   The cleaning of a cache entry from a cache can overwrite memory that has been written by another
                                   observer only if the entry contains a location that has been written to by an observer in the
                                   Shareability domain of that memory location.

                  Invalidate       A cache invalidate instruction ensures that updates made visible by observers that access memory
                                   at the point to which the invalidate is defined, are made visible to an observer that controls the cache.
                                   This might result in the loss of updates to the locations affected by the invalidate instruction that
                                   have been written by observers that access the cache, if those updates have not been cleaned from
                                   the cache since they were made.
                                   If the address of an entry on which the invalidate instruction operates is Normal, Non-cacheable or
                                   any type of Device memory then an invalidate instruction also ensures that this address is not
                                   present in the cache.

                                            Note
                                   Entries for addresses that are Normal Cacheable can be allocated to the cache at any time, and so
                                   the cache invalidate instruction cannot ensure that the address is not present in a cache.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G3-4817
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     Clean and Invalidate
                                    A cache clean and invalidate instruction behaves as the execution of a clean instruction followed
                                    immediately by an invalidate instruction. Both instructions are performed to the same location.
                     The points to which a cache maintenance instruction can be defined differ depending on whether the instruction
                     operates by VA or by set/way:

                     •     For instructions operating by set/way, the point is defined to be to the next level of caching. For the All
                           operations, the point is defined as the Point of Unification for each location held in the cache.

                     •     For instruction operating by VA, two conceptual points are defined:
                           Point of Coherency (PoC)
                                      The point at which all agents that can access memory are guaranteed to see the same copy of a
                                      memory location for accesses of any memory type or cacheability attribute. In many cases this is
                                      effectively the main system memory, although the architecture does not prohibit the
                                      implementation of caches beyond the PoC that have no effect on the coherency between memory
                                      system agents.
                                                  Note
                                       The presence of system caches can affect the determination of the point of coherency as described
                                       in System level caches on page G3-4833.

                           Point of Unification (PoU)
                                      The PoU for a PE is the point by which the instruction and data caches and the translation table
                                      walks of that PE are guaranteed to see the same copy of a memory location. In many cases, the
                                      Point of Unification is the point in a uniprocessor memory system by which the instruction and
                                      data caches and the translation table walks have merged.
                                      The PoU for an Inner Shareable Shareability domain is the point by which the instruction and
                                      data caches and the translation table walks of all the PEs in that Inner Shareable Shareability
                                      domain are guaranteed to see the same copy of a memory location. Defining this point permits
                                      self-modifying software to ensure future instruction fetches are associated with the modified
                                      version of the software by using the standard correctness policy of:
                                      1.     Clean data cache entry by address.
                                      2.     Invalidate instruction cache entry by address.
                           The following fields in the CLIDR relate to these conceptual points:
                           LoC, Level of Coherence
                                     This field defines the last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or
                                     invalidating to the Point of Coherency. The LoC value is a cache level, so, for example, if LoC
                                     contains the value 3:
                                       •      A clean to the Point of Coherency operation requires the level 1, level 2 and level 3 caches
                                              to be cleaned.
                                       •       Level 4 cache is the first level that does not have to be maintained.
                                       If the LoC field value is 0x0, this means that no levels of cache need to cleaned or invalidated
                                       when cleaning or invalidating to the Point of Coherency.
                                       If the LoC field value is a nonzero value that corresponds to a level that is not implemented, this
                                       indicates that all implemented caches are before the Point of Coherency.
                           LoUU, Level of Unification, uniprocessor
                                    This field defines the last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or
                                    invalidating to the Point of Unification for the PE. As with LoC, the LoUU value is a cache level.
                                    If the LoUU field value is 0x0, this means that no levels of cache need to cleaned or invalidated
                                    when cleaning or invalidating to the Point of Unification.
                                    If the LoUU field value is a nonzero value that corresponds to a level that is not implemented,
                                    this indicates that all implemented caches are before the Point of Unification.

G3-4818                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                        G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                     G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                        LoUIS, Level of Unification, Inner Shareable
                                  In any implementation:
                                     •      This field defines the last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning
                                            or invalidating to the Point of Unification for the Inner Shareable Shareability domain. As
                                            with LoC, the LoUIS value is a cache level.
                                     •      If the LoUIS field value is 0x0, this means that no levels of cache need to cleaned or
                                            invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the Point of Unification for the Inner
                                            Shareable Shareability domain.
                                     •      If the LoUIS field value is a nonzero value that corresponds to a level that is not
                                            implemented, this indicates that all implemented caches are before the Point of
                                            Unification.
                        For more information, see the CLIDR description.

                  The ARMv8 abstraction of the cache hierarchy
                  The following subsections describe the ARMv8 abstraction of the cache hierarchy:
                  •     Cache maintenance instructions that operate by VA.
                  •     Cache maintenance instructions that operate by set/way.

                  Cache maintenance instructions that operate by VA

                  The VA-based cache maintenance instructions are described as operating by VA. Each of these instructions is always
                  qualified as being either:
                  •      Performed to the Point of Coherency.
                  •      Performed to the Point of Unification.

                  See Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on page G3-4816 for definitions of Point of
                  Coherency and Point of Unification, and more information about possible meanings of VA.

                  AArch32 cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4820 lists the VA-based maintenance
                  instructions.

                  The CTR holds minimum line length values for:
                  •    The instruction caches.
                  •    The data and unified caches.

                  These values support efficient invalidation of a range of addresses, because this value is the most efficient address
                  stride to use to apply a sequence of VA-based maintenance instructions to a range of VAs.

                  For the Invalidate data or unified cache line by VA instruction, the Cache Write-back Granule field of the CTR
                  defines the maximum granule that a single invalidate instruction can invalidate. This meaning of the Cache
                  Write-back Granule is in addition to its defining the maximum size that can be written back.

                  Cache maintenance instructions that operate by set/way

                  AArch32 cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4820 lists the set/way-based
                  maintenance instructions. Some encodings of these instructions include a required field that specifies the cache level
                  for the instruction:

                  •     A clean instruction cleans from the level of cache specified through to at least the next level of cache, moving
                        further from the PE.

                  •     An invalidate instruction invalidates only at the level specified.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G3-4819
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

G3.4.7        AArch32 cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions
                     The instruction and data cache maintenance instructions have the same functionality in AArch32 state and in
                     AArch64 state. Table G3-3 shows the AArch32 system instructions. Instructions that take an argument include Rt
                     in the instruction description.

                     AArch32 state also provides branch predictor maintenance instructions.

                             Note
                     •     In Table G3-3 the Point of Unification is the Point of Unification of the PE executing the cache maintenance
                           instruction.

                     •     In AArch32 state, all of the maintenance instructions are available from EL1 or higher.

                     •     In AArch64 state, branch predictors are always invisible to software, and therefore AArch64 state does not
                           provide any branch predictor maintenance instructions.

                                                           Table G3-3 AArch32 System instructions for cache maintenance

                                             Register                   Instruction

                                             Instruction cache maintenance instructions

                                             ICIALLUIS                  Invalidate all to Point of Unification, Inner Shareable

                                             ICIALLU                    Invalidate all to Point of Unification

                                             ICIMVAU, Rt                Invalidate by virtual address to Point of Unification

                                             Data cache maintenance instructions

                                             DCIMVAC, Rt                Invalidate by virtual address to Point of Coherency

                                             DCISW, Rt                  Invalidate by set/way

                                             DCCMVAC, Rt                Clean by virtual address to Point of Coherency

                                             DCCSW, Rt                  Clean by set/way

                                             DCCMVAU, Rt                Clean by virtual address to Point of Unification

                                             DCCIMVAC, Rt               Clean and invalidate by virtual address to Point of Coherency

                                             DCCISW, Rt                 Clean and invalidate by set/way

                                             Branch prediction maintenance instructions

                                             BPIMVA, Rt                 Invalidate the virtual address from the branch predictors

                                             BPIALLIS, Rt               Invalidate all entries from branch predictors, Inner Shareable

                                             BPIALL, Rt                 Invalidate all entries from branch predictors

                     A DSB or DMB instruction intended to ensure the completion of cache or branch predictor maintenance instructions
                     must have an access type of both loads and stores.

                     In an implementation where the branch predictors are architecturally invisible, the BPIMVA, BPIALLIS, and
                     BPIALL instructions can execute as NOPs.

G3-4820                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                         G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                      G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                  The following subsections give more information about these instructions:

                  •      AArch32 instruction cache maintenance instructions (IC*).

                  •      AArch32 data cache maintenance instructions (DC*) on page G3-4822.

                  •      Branch predictors on page G3-4823.

                  •      General requirements for the scope of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on
                         page G3-4824.

                  •      Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the Point of Coherency on page G3-4825.

                  •      Effects of instructions that operate by VA but not to the Point of Coherency on page G3-4825.

                  •      Effects of All and set/way maintenance instructions on page G3-4826.

                  •      Effects of virtualization and security on the AArch32 cache maintenance instructions on page G3-4826.

                  •      Boundary conditions for cache maintenance instructions on page G3-4828.

                  •      Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4829.

                  •      Performing cache maintenance instructions on page G3-4830.

                  AArch32 instruction cache maintenance instructions (IC*)
                  Where an address argument for these instructions is required, it takes the form of a 32-bit register that holds the
                  virtual address argument. No alignment restrictions apply for this address.

                  Any cache maintenance instruction operating by VA includes as part of any required VA to PA translation:
                  •     For an instruction executed at EL1, the current system Address Space IDentifier, ASID.
                  •     The current Security state.
                  •     Whether the instruction was performed from Hyp mode, or from Non-secure EL1 state.
                  •     For an instruction executed from a Non-secure EL1 state, the Virtual Machine IDentifier, VMID.

                  That VA to PA translation might fault. However for an instruction cache maintenance instruction that operates by
                  VA:

                  •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the operation can generate a Data Abort exception for a Translation
                         fault or an Access flag fault.

                  •      The operation cannot generate a Data Abort exception for a Domain fault or a Permission fault, except for
                         the Permission fault case on a Stage 2 fault on a stage 1 translation table walk.

                  For more information about the possible faults on an instruction that operates by VA see Types of MMU faults on
                  page G4-4933.

                  An instruction cache maintenance instruction can complete at any time after it is executed, but is only guaranteed
                  to be complete, and its effects visible to other observers, following a DSB instruction executed by the PE that executed
                  the cache maintenance instruction. See also the completion requirements for cache and branch predictor
                  maintenance instructions in Completion and endpoint ordering on page E2-3016.

                  See also Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4829.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G3-4821
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     AArch32 data cache maintenance instructions (DC*)
                     Data cache maintenance instructions that take a set/way/level argument take a 32-bit register.

                     If a data cache maintenance by set/way instruction specifies a set, way, or level argument that is larger than the value
                     supported by the implementation then the instruction is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, see Out of range values of
                     the Set/Way/Index fields in cache maintenance instructions on page K1-6401 or the instruction description.

                     DCISW instructions executed at EL1 perform a clean and invalidate, meaning they execute as a DCCISW
                     instruction, if all of the following apply:
                     •      EL2 is implemented.
                     •      Either:
                            —       EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.SWIO is 1.
                            —       EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.SWIO is 1.
                     •      EL3 is not implemented, or either:
                            —       EL3 is using AArch32 and the value of SCR.NS is 1.
                            —       EL3 is using AArch64 and the value of SCR_EL3.NS is 1.

                     Where an address argument for these instructions is required, it takes the form of a 32-bit register that holds the
                     virtual address argument. No alignment restrictions apply for this address.

                     Any cache maintenance instruction operating by VA includes as part of any required VA to PA translation:
                     •     For an instruction executed at EL1, the current system Address Space IDentifier, ASID.
                     •     The current Security state.
                     •     Whether the instruction was performed from Hyp mode, or from Non-secure EL1 state.
                     •     For an instruction executed from a Non-secure EL1 state, the Virtual Machine IDentifier, VMID.

                     That VA to PA translation might fault. However a data or unified cache maintenance instruction that operates by VA
                     cannot generate a Data Abort exception for a Domain fault, and cannot generate a Data Abort exception for a
                     Permission fault, except for the Permission fault case on a Stage 2 fault on a stage 1 translation table walk.
                     For more information about the possible faults on an instruction that operates by VA see Types of MMU faults on
                     page G4-4933.

                     DCIMVAC and DCISW instructions executed at EL1 perform a clean and invalidate, meaning they execute as a
                     DCCIMVAC or DCCISW instruction, if all of the following apply:
                     •   EL2 is implemented.
                     •   PL1&0 stage two address translation is enabled, meaning either:
                         —     EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.VM is 1.
                         —     EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.VM is 1.
                     •   EL3 is not implemented, or either:
                         —     EL3 is using AArch32 and the value of SCR.NS is 1.
                         —     EL3 is using AArch64 and the value of SCR_EL3.NS is 1.

                     If a memory fault that sets FAR for the translation regime applicable for the cache maintenance instruction is
                     generated from a data cache maintenance instruction, the FAR holds the address specified in the register argument
                     of the instruction.

                     See also Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4829.

G3-4822                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                            G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                         G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                  Branch predictors
                  In AArch32 state it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether branch prediction is architecturally visible. This means
                  that under some circumstances software must perform branch predictor maintenance to avoid incorrect execution
                  caused by out-of-date entries in the branch predictor. For example, to ensure correct operation it might be necessary
                  to invalidate branch predictor entries on a change to instruction memory, or a change of instruction address mapping.
                  For more information, see Specific requirements for branch predictor maintenance instructions.

                  In an implementation where the branch predictors are architecturally invisible, the branch predictor maintenance
                  instructions can execute as NOPs.
                  An invalidate all operation on the branch predictor ensures that any location held in the branch predictor has no
                  functional effect on execution. An invalidate branch predictor by VA instruction operates on the address of the
                  branch instruction, but can affect other branch predictor entries.

                           Note
                  The architecture does not make visible the range of addresses in a branch predictor to which the invalidate operation
                  applies. This means the address used in the invalidate by VA operation must be the address of the branch to be
                  invalidated.

                  If branch prediction is architecturally visible, an instruction cache invalidate all operation also invalidates all branch
                  predictors.

                  See also Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4829.

                  Specific requirements for branch predictor maintenance instructions

                  If, for a given translation regime and a given ASID and VMID as appropriate, the instructions at any virtual address
                  change, then branch predictor maintenance instructions must be performed to invalidate entries in the branch
                  predictor, to ensure that the change is visible to subsequent execution. This maintenance is required when writing
                  new values to instruction locations. It can also be required as a result of any of the following situations that change
                  the translation of a virtual address to a physical address, if, as a result of the change to the translation, the instructions
                  at the virtual addresses change:

                  •      For any translation regime other than the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, enabling or disabling stage 1
                         translations.

                  •      For the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime:
                         —      When stage 2 translations are enabled, enabling or disabling stage 1 translations unless accompanied
                                by a change of VMID.
                         —      When stage 2 translations are disabled, enabling or disabling stage 1 translations.
                         —      Enabling or disabling stage 2 translations.

                  •      Writing new mappings to the translation tables.

                  •      Any change to the TTBR0, TTBR1, or TTBCR registers, unless:
                         —      For a change to the Secure PL1&0 translation regime, the change is accompanied by a change to the
                                ASID.
                         —      For a change to the stage 1 translations of the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, the change is
                                accompanied by a change to the ASID or a change to the VMID.

                  •      Any change to the VTTBR or VTCR registers, unless accompanied by a change to the VMID.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                G3-4823
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                             Note
                     Invalidation is not required if the changes to the translations are such that the instructions associated with the
                     non-faulting translations of a virtual address, for a given translation regime and a given ASID and VMID, as
                     appropriate, remain unchanged throughout the sequence of changes to the translations. Examples of translation
                     changes to which this applies are:
                     •      Changing a valid translation to a translation that generates an MMU fault.
                     •      Changing a translation that generates an MMU fault to a valid translation.

                     Failure to invalidate entries might give CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE results, caused by the execution of old
                     branches. For more information, see Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on
                     page G3-4829.

                             Note
                     •     In ARMv8, there is no requirement to use the branch predictor maintenance operations to invalidate the
                           branch predictor after:
                           —      Changing the ContextID or VMID.
                           —      A cache maintenance instruction that is identified as also flushing the branch predictors, see AArch32
                                  cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4820.

                     Cache maintenance system instructions on page K13-6631 shows the branch predictor maintenance operations in a
                     VMSA implementation.

                     Behavior of the branch predictors at reset

                     In AArch32 state:

                     •     If branch predictors are not architecturally invisible:
                           —      The branch predictors reset to an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED state that might be UNKNOWN.
                           —      The branch predictors are disabled at reset.

                     •     An implementation can require the use of a specific branch predictor initialization routine to invalidate the
                           branch predictor storage array before it is enabled. The exact form of any required initialization routine is
                           IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, but the routine must be documented clearly as part of the documentation of the
                           device.

                     •     ARM recommends that whenever an invalidation routine is required, it is based on the AArch32 branch
                           predictor maintenance operations.

                     Similar rules apply:
                     •     To cache behavior, see Behavior of caches at reset on page G3-4815.
                     •     To TLB behavior, see TLB behavior at reset on page G4-4912.

                     General requirements for the scope of cache and branch predictor maintenance
                     instructions
                     The ARMv8 specification of the cache maintenance and branch predictor instructions describes what each
                     instruction is guaranteed to do in a system. It does not limit other behaviors that might occur, provided they are
                     consistent with the requirements described in General behavior of the caches on page G3-4809, Behavior of caches
                     at reset on page G3-4815, and Preloading caches on page E2-3025.

                     This means that as a side-effect of a cache maintenance instruction:
                     •     Any location in the cache might be cleaned.
                     •     Any unlocked location in the cache might be cleaned and invalidated.

                     As a side-effect of a branch predictor maintenance instruction, any entry in the branch predictor might be
                     invalidated.

G3-4824                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                         G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                      G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                            Note
                   ARM recommends that, for best performance, such side-effects are kept to a minimum. ARM strongly recommends
                   that the side-effects of operations performed in Non-secure state do not have a significant performance impact on
                   execution in Secure state.

                   Effects of instructions that operate by VA to the Point of Coherency
                   For Normal memory that is not Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable, these instructions must affect the caches
                   of other PEs in the Shareability domain described by the Shareability attributes of the VA supplied with the
                   instruction.

                   For Device memory and Normal memory that is Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable, these instructions must
                   affect the caches of all PEs in the Outer Shareable Shareability domain of the PE on which the instruction is
                   operating.

                   In all cases, for any affected PE, these instructions affect all data and unified caches to the Point of Coherency.

                                Table G3-4 PEs affected by cache maintenance instructions to the Point of Coherency

 Shareability      PEs affected                                                               Effective to

 Non-shareable     The PE performing the operation                                            The Point of Coherency of the entire
                                                                                              system

 Inner Shareable   All PEs in the same Inner Shareable Shareability domain as the PE          The Point of Coherency of the entire
                   performing the operation                                                   system

 Outer Shareable   All PEs in the same Outer Shareable Shareability domain as the PE          The Point of Coherency of the entire
                   performing the operation                                                   system

                   Effects of instructions that operate by VA but not to the Point of Coherency
                   The following instruction operate by VA but not to the Point of Coherency:
                   •     Clean data or unified cache line by MVA to the Point of Unification, DCCMVAU.
                   •     Invalidate instruction cache line by MVA to Point of Unification, ICIMVAU.
                   •     Invalidate by MVA from branch predictors, BPIMVA.

                   For these instructions, Table G3-5 shows how, for a VA in a Normal or Device memory location, the Shareability
                   attribute of the VA determines the minimum set of PEs affected, and the point to which the instruction must be
                   effective.

                                Table G3-5 PEs affected by cache maintenance instructions to the Point of Unification

 Shareability       PEs affected                         Effective to

 Non-shareable      The PE executing the instruction     The Point of Unification of instruction cache fills, data cache fills and
                                                         write-backs, and translation table walks, on the PE executing the instruction

 Inner Shareable    All PEs in the same Inner            The Point of Unification of instruction cache fills, data cache fills and
 or                 Shareable Shareability domain        write-backs, and translation table walks, of all PEs in the same Inner
 Outer Shareable    as the PE executing the              Shareable Shareability domain as the PE executing the instruction
                    instruction

                            Note
                   The set of PEs guaranteed to be affected is never greater than the PEs in the Inner Shareable Shareability domain
                   containing the PE executing the instruction.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G3-4825
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     Effects of All and set/way maintenance instructions
                     The ICIALLU, BPIALL and DC* set/way instructions apply only to the caches and branch predictors of the PE that
                     performs the instruction. If the branch predictors are architecturally-visible, ICIALLU also performs a BPIALL
                     operation.

                     The ICIALLUIS and BPIALLIS instructions can affect the caches and branch predictors of all PEs in the same Inner
                     Shareable Shareability domain as the PE that performs the instruction. If the branch predictors are
                     architecturally-visible, ICIALLUIS also performs a BPIALLIS operation. These instructions have an effect to the
                     Point of Unification of instruction cache fills, data cache fills, and write-backs, and translation table walks, of all
                     PEs in the same Inner Shareable Shareability domain.

                              Note
                     The possible presence of system caches, as described in System level caches on page G3-4833, means architecture
                     does not guarantee that all levels of cache can be maintained using set/way instructions.

                     Effects of virtualization and security on the AArch32 cache maintenance instructions
                     Each Security state has its own physical address space, and therefore cache entries are associated with physical
                     address space. In addition, cache maintenance and branch predictor instructions performed in Non-secure state have
                     to take account of:
                     •      Whether the instruction was performed at EL1 or at EL2.
                     •      For instructions that operate by VA, the current VMID.

                     Table G3-6 shows the effects of virtualization and security on these maintenance instructions.

                     Table G3-6 Effects of virtualization and security on the AArch32 cache maintenance instructions

 Cache maintenance                   Security
                                                     Specified entry
 instructions                        state

 Data or unified cache maintenance instructions

    Invalidate, Clean, or Clean      Either          All lines that hold the PA that, in the current translation regime, are mapped to by
    and Invalidate by VA:                            the combination of all of:
    DCIMVAC, DCCMVAC,                                •      The specified VA.
    DCCMVAU, DCCIMVAC                                •      For an instruction executed at EL1, the current ASID if the location is
                                                            mapped to by a non-global page.
                                                     •      For an instruction executed at Non-secure EL1, the current VMID a.

    Invalidate, Clean, or Clean      Non- secure     Line specified by set/way provided that the entry comes from the Non-secure PA
    and Invalidate by set/way:                       space.
    DCISW, DCCSW,
    DCCISW                           Secure          Line specified by set/way regardless of the PA space that the entry has come from.

G3-4826                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                   G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

       Table G3-6 Effects of virtualization and security on the AArch32 cache maintenance instructions (continued)

 Cache maintenance                     Security
                                                         Specified entry
 instructions                          state

 Instruction cache maintenance instructions

   Invalidate by VA:                   Either            All lines corresponding to the specified VAb in the current translation regime and:
   ICIMVAU                                               •      For an instruction executed at EL1 or EL0, the current ASID.
                                                         •      For an instruction executed at Non-secure EL1 or Non-secure EL0, the
                                                                current VMID a.

   Invalidate All: ICIALLU,                              •       Can invalidate any unlocked entry in the instruction cache.
   ICIALLUIS                                             •       Are required to invalidate any entries relevant to the software component that
                                                                 executed it. The Non-secure and Secure descriptions give more information:
                                                                 Non-secure
                                                                              An instruction executed at EL1 must operate on all instruction
                                                                              cache lines that contain entries associated with the current virtual
                                                                              machine, meaning any entry with the current VMID.a
                                                                              An instruction executed at EL2 must operate on all instruction
                                                                              cache lines that contain entries that can be accessed from
                                                                              Non-secure state.
                                                                 Secure       The instruction must invalidate all instruction cache lines.

 Branch predictor instructions c

   Invalidate by VA: BPIMVA            Either            All lines that, in the current translation regime, are mapped to by the combination
                                                         of: all of:
                                                         •       The specified VA.
                                                         •       For an instruction executed at EL1 or EL0, the current ASID if the location
                                                                 is mapped to by a non-global page.
                                                         •       For an instruction executed at Non-secure EL1 or EL0, the current VMID a.

   Invalidate all: BPIALL,             •        Can invalidate any unlocked entry in the branch predictor.
   BPIALLIS                            •        Are required to invalidate any entries relevant to the software component that executed it.
                                                The Non-secure and Secure descriptions give more information.
    a. Dependencies on the VMID apply even when either EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.VM is 0 or EL2 is using AArch64 and
       the value of HCR_EL2.VM is 0. If the PE resets into an Exception level that is using AArch32, VTTBR.VMID resets to zero, meaning there
       is a valid VMID from reset. However, if the PE resets into an Exception level that is using AArch64, VTTBR_EL2.VMID resets to a value
       that is architecturally UNKNOWN, and the VTTBR_EL2.VMID field must be set to a known value, that might be zero, as part of the PE
       initialization sequence.
    b. The type of instruction cache used affects the interpretation of the specified entries in this table such that:
       • For a PIPT instruction cache, the cache maintenance applies to all entries whose physical address corresponds to the specified address.
       • For a VIPT instruction cache, the cache maintenance applies to entries whose virtual index and physical tag corresponds to the specified
       address.
       For information of types of instruction cache, see Instruction caches on page G4-4930.
    c. In an implementation where the branch predictors are architecturally invisible, these instructions can execute as NOPs.

                       For locked entries and entries that might be locked, the behavior of cache maintenance instructions described in The
                       interaction of cache lockdown with cache maintenance instructions on page G3-4832 applies.

                       With an implementation that generates aborts if entries are locked or might be locked in the cache, when the use of
                       lockdown aborts is enabled, these aborts can occur on any cache maintenance instructions.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G3-4827
ID121917                                                   Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     In an implementation that includes EL2:

                     •     The architecture does not require cache cleaning when switching between virtual machines. Cache
                           invalidation by set/way must not present an opportunity for one virtual machine to corrupt state associated
                           with a second virtual machine. To ensure this requirement is met, Non-secure clean by set/way instructions
                           can, instead, perform a clean and invalidate by set/way.

                     •     The AArch32 Data cache invalidate instructions DCIMVAC and DCISW, perform a cache clean as well as
                           a cache invalidate, meaning DCIMVAC performs the same invalidation as a DCCIMVAC instruction, and
                           DCISW performs the same invalidation as a DCCISW instruction, if both of the following apply:
                           —     The value of HCR.VM is 1.
                           —     The instruction is executed in Non-secure state, or EL3 is not implemented.

                     •     The AArch32 Data cache invalidate by set/way instruction DCISW performs a cache clean as well as a cache
                           invalidate, meaning it performs the same invalidation as a DCCISW instruction, if both of the following
                           apply:
                           —      The value of HCR.SWIO is 1.
                           —      The instruction is executed in Non-secure state, or EL3 is not implemented.

                     •     When the value of HCR.FB is 1, TLB and instruction cache invalidate instructions executed in the
                           Non-secure EL1 Exception level are broadcast across the Inner Shareable domain. When Non-secure EL1 is
                           using AArch32, this applies to the TLBIMVA, TLBIASID, TLBIMVAA, TLBIMVAL, TLBIMVAAL, and
                           ICIALLU instructions. This means the instruction performs the invalidation that would be performed by the
                           corresponding Inner Shareable instruction, for example ICIALLU performs the invalidation that would be
                           performed by ICIALLUIS, and BPIALL performs the invalidation that would be performed by BPIALLIS.

                     For more information about the cache maintenance instructions, see About cache maintenance in AArch32 state on
                     page G3-4816, AArch32 cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions on page G3-4820, and Chapter G4
                     The AArch32 Virtual Memory System Architecture.

                     Boundary conditions for cache maintenance instructions
                     Cache maintenance instructions operate on the caches regardless of whether the System register Cacheability
                     controls force all memory accesses to be Non-cacheable.

                     For VA-based cache maintenance instructions, the instructions operate on the caches regardless of the memory type
                     and cacheability attributes marked for the memory address in the VMSA translation table entries. This means that
                     the effects of the cache maintenance instructions can apply regardless of:

                     •     Whether the address accessed:
                           —      Is Normal memory or Device memory.
                           —      Has the Cacheable attribute or the Non-cacheable attribute.

                     •     Any applicable domain control of the address accessed.

                     •     The access permissions for the address accessed, other than the effect of the stage two write permission on
                           data or unified cache invalidation instructions.

G3-4828                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                        G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                     G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                  Ordering of cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions
                  The following rules describe the effect of the memory order model on the cache and branch predictor maintenance
                  instructions:

                  •     All cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions that do not specify an address execute, relative to
                        each other, in program order.
                        All cache and branch predictor instructions that specify an address:
                        —      Execute in program order relative to all cache and branch predictor operations that do not specify an
                               address.
                        —      Execute in program order relative to all cache and branch predictor operations that specify the same
                               address.
                        —      Can execute in any order relative to cache and branch predictor operations that specify a different
                               address.

                  •     Where a cache maintenance or branch predictor instruction appears in program order before a change to the
                        translation tables, the architecture guarantees that the cache or branch predictor maintenance instruction uses
                        the translations that were visible before the change to the translation tables.

                  •     Where a change of the translation tables appears in program order before a cache maintenance or branch
                        predictor instruction, software must execute the sequence outlined in Ordering and completion of TLB
                        maintenance instructions on page G4-4918 before performing the cache or branch predictor maintenance
                        instruction, to ensure that the maintenance operation uses the new translations.

                  •     A DMB instruction causes the effect of all data or unified cache maintenance instructions appearing in program
                        order before the DMB to be visible to all explicit load and store operations appearing in program order after the
                        DMB.
                        Also, a DMB instruction ensures that the effects of any data or unified cache maintenance instruction appearing
                        in program order before the DMB are observable by any observer in the same required Shareability domain
                        before any data or unified cache maintenance or explicit memory operations appearing in program order after
                        the DMB are observed by the same observer. Completion of the DMB does not guarantee the visibility of all data
                        to other observers. For example, all data might not be visible to a translation table walk, or to instruction
                        fetches.

                  •     A DSB is required to guarantee the completion of all cache maintenance instruction that appear in program
                        order before the DSB instruction.

                  •     A Context synchronization event is required to guarantee the effects of any branch predictor maintenance
                        operation. This means a Context synchronization event causes the effect of all completed branch predictor
                        maintenance operations appearing in program order before the Context synchronization event to be visible to
                        all instructions after the Context synchronization event.
                        This means that, if a branch instruction appears after an invalidate branch predictor operation and before any
                        Context synchronization event, it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether the branch instruction is affected
                        by the invalidate. Software must avoid this ordering of instructions, because it might cause CONSTRAINED
                        UNPREDICTABLE behavior.

                  •     Any data or unified cache maintenance instruction by VA must be executed in program order relative to any
                        explicit load or store on the same PE to an address covered by the VA of the cache instruction if that load or
                        store is to Normal Cacheable memory. The order of memory accesses that result from the cache maintenance
                        instruction, relative to any other memory accesses to Normal Cacheable memory, are subject to the memory
                        ordering rules. For more information, see Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page E2-3011.
                        Any data or unified cache maintenance instruction by VA can be executed in any order relative to any explicit
                        load or store on the same PE to an address covered by the VA of the cache maintenance instruction if that
                        load or store is not to Normal Cacheable memory.

                  •     There is no restriction on the ordering of data or unified cache maintenance instruction by VA relative to any
                        explicit load or store on the same PE where the address of the explicit load or store is not covered by the VA
                        of the cache instruction. Where the ordering must be restricted, a DMB instruction must be inserted to enforce
                        ordering.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G3-4829
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     •     There is no restriction on the ordering of a data or unified cache maintenance instruction by set/way relative
                           to any explicit load or store on the same PE. Where the ordering must be restricted, a DMB instruction must be
                           inserted to enforce ordering.

                     •     Software must execute a Context synchronization event after the completion of an instruction cache
                           maintenance instruction, to guarantee that the effect of the maintenance instruction is visible to any
                           instruction fetch.

                     A DSB or DMB instruction intended to ensure the completion of cache maintenance instructions or branch predictor
                     instructions must have an access type of both loads and stores.

                     See also the completion requirements for cache and branch predictor maintenance instructions in Completion and
                     endpoint ordering on page E2-3016.

                     The scope of instruction cache maintenance depends on the type of the instruction cache. For more information see
                     Instruction caches on page G4-4930.

                                                           Example G3-1 Cache cleaning operations for self-modifying code

                     The sequence of cache cleaning operations for a line of self-modifying code on a uniprocessor system is:

                     ; Coherency example for data and instruction accesses within the same Inner Shareable domain.
                     ; Enter this code with <Rt> containing a new 32-bit instruction,
                     ; to be held in Cacheable space at a location pointed to by Rn. Use STRH in the first line
                     ; instead of STR for a 16-bit instruction.
                             STR Rt, [Rn]
                             DCCMVAU Rn           ; Clean data cache by MVA to point of unification (PoU)
                             DSB                  ; Ensure visibility of the data cleaned from cache
                             ICIMVAU Rn           ; Invalidate instruction cache by MVA to PoU
                             BPIMVA Rn            ; Invalidate branch predictor by MVA to PoU
                             DSB                  ; Ensure completion of the invalidations
                             ISB                  ; Synchronize the fetched instruction stream

                     Performing cache maintenance instructions
                     To ensure all cache lines in a block of address space are maintained through all levels of cache ARM strongly
                     recommends that software:

                     •     For data or unified cache maintenance, uses the CTR.DMinLine value to determine the loop increment size
                           for a loop of data cache maintenance by VA instructions.

                     •     For instruction cache maintenance, uses the CTR.IMinLine value to determine the loop increment size for a
                           loop of instruction cache maintenance by VA instructions.

                     Example code for cache maintenance instructions

                     The cache maintenance instructions by set/way can be used to clean or invalidate, or both, the entirety of one or
                     more levels of cache attached to a PE. However, unless all PEs attached to the caches regard all memory locations
                     as Non-cacheable, it is not possible to prevent locations being allocated into the cache during such a sequence of
                     the cache maintenance instructions.

                              Note
                     Because the set/way instructions operate only locally, there is no guarantee of the atomicity of cache maintenance
                     between different PEs, even if those different PEs are each executing the same cache maintenance instructions at
                     the same time. Because any cacheable line can be allocated into the cache at any time, it is possible for a cache line
                     to migrate from an entry in the cache of one PE to the cache of a different PE in a way that means the cache line is
                     not affected by set/way based cache maintenance. Therefore, ARM strongly discourages the use of set/way
                     instructions to manage coherency in coherent systems. The expected use of the cache maintenance instructions that
                     operate by set/way is limited to the cache maintenance associated with the powerdown and powerup of caches, if
                     this is required by the implementation.

G3-4830                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                         G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                      G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                  The limitations of cache maintenance by set/way mean maintenance by set/way does not happen on multiple PEs,
                  and cannot be made to happen atomically for each address on each PE. Therefore in multiprocessor or multithreaded
                  systems, the use of cache maintenance by set/way to clean, or clean and invalidate, the entire cache for coherency
                  management with very large buffers or with buffers with unknown address can fail to provide the expected
                  coherency results because of speculation by other PEs, or possibly by other threads. The only way that these
                  instructions can be used in this way is to first ensure that all PEs that might cause speculative accesses to caches that
                  need to be maintained are not capable of generating speculative accesses. This can be achieved by ensuring that
                  those PEs have no memory locations with a Normal Cacheable attribute. Such an approach can have very large
                  system performance effects, and ARM advises implementers to use hardware coherency mechanisms in systems
                  where this will be an issue.

                  System level caches on page G3-4833 refers to other limitations of cache maintenance by set/way.

                  The following example code for cleaning a data or unified cache to the Point of Coherency illustrates a generic
                  mechanism for cleaning the entire data or unified cache to the Point of Coherency. It assumes the current Cache Size
                  Identification Register is in 32-bit format. For more information, see Possible formats of the Cache Size
                  Identification Registers, CCSIDR and CCSIDR2 on page G3-4812.

                       MRC p15, 1, R0, c0, c0, 1   ; Read CLIDR into R0
                       ANDS R3, R0, #0x07000000
                       MOV R3, R3, LSR #23         ; Cache level value (naturally aligned)
                       BEQ Finished
                       MOV R10, #0
                  Loop1
                       ADD R2, R10, R10, LSR #1    ; Work out 3 x cache level
                       MOV R1, R0, LSR R2          ; bottom 3 bits are the Cache type for this level
                       AND R1, R1, #7              ; get those 3 bits alone
                       CMP R1, #2
                       BLT Skip                    ; no cache or only instruction cache at this level
                       MCR p15, 2, R10, c0, c0, 0 ; write CSSELR from R10
                       ISB                         ; ISB to sync the change to the CCSIDR
                       MRC p15, 1, R1, c0, c0, 0   ; read current CCSIDR to R1
                       AND R2, R1, #7              ; extract the line length field
                       ADD R2, R2, #4              ; add 4 for the line length offset (log2 16 bytes)
                       MOV R4, #0x3FF
                       ANDS R4, R4, R1, LSR #3     ; R4 is the max number on the way size (right aligned)
                       CLZ R5, R4                  ; R5 is the bit position of the way size increment
                       MOV R9, R4                  ; R9 working copy of the max way size (right aligned)
                  Loop2
                       MOV R7, #0x00007FFF
                       ANDS R7, R7, R1, LSR #13    ; R7 is the max number of the index size (right aligned)
                  Loop3
                       ORR R11, R10, R9, LSL R5    ; factor in the way number and cache number into R11
                       ORR R11, R11, R7, LSL R2    ; factor in the index number
                       MCR p15, 0, R11, c7, c10, 2 ; DCCSW, clean by set/way
                       SUBS R7, R7, #1             ; decrement the index
                       BGE Loop3
                       SUBS R9, R9, #1             ; decrement the way number
                       BGE Loop2
                  Skip
                       ADD R10, R10, #2            ; increment the cache number
                       CMP R3, R10
                       DSB                         ; ensure completion of previous cache maintenance instruction
                       BGT Loop1
                  Finished

                  Similar approaches can be used for all cache maintenance instructions.

G3.4.8      Cache lockdown
                  The concept of an entry locked in a cache is allowed, but not architecturally defined. How lockdown is achieved is
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED and might not be supported by:
                  •     An implementation.
                  •     Some memory attributes.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G3-4831
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                     An unlocked entry in a cache might not remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that an unlocked
                     cache entry remains in the cache or remains incoherent with the rest of memory. Software must not assume that an
                     unlocked item that remains in the cache remains dirty.

                     A locked entry in a cache is guaranteed to remain in that cache. The architecture does not guarantee that a locked
                     cache entry remains incoherent with the rest of memory, that is, it might not remain dirty.

                     The interaction of cache lockdown with cache maintenance instructions
                     The interaction of cache lockdown and cache maintenance instructions is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. However, an
                     architecturally-defined cache maintenance instruction on a locked cache line must comply with the following
                     general rules:

                     •     The effect of the following instructions on locked cache entries is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED:
                           —     Cache clean by set/way, DCCSW.
                           —     Cache invalidate by set/way, DCISW.
                           —     Cache clean and invalidate by set/way, DCISW.
                           —     Instruction cache invalidate all, ICIALLU and ICIALLUIS.
                           However, one of the following approaches must be adopted in all these cases:
                           1.      If the instruction specified an invalidation, a locked entry is not invalidated from the cache.
                           2.      If the instruction specified a clean it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether locked entries are cleaned.
                           3.      If an entry is locked down, or could be locked down, an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED Data Abort
                                   exception is generated, using the Fault status code defined for this purpose. See Data Abort exception
                                   on page G1-4672.
                           This permits a usage model for cache invalidate routines to operate on a large range of addresses by
                           performing the required operation on the entire cache, without having to consider whether any cache entries
                           are locked.

                     The effect of the following instructions is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED:
                     •     Cache clean by virtual address, DCCMVAC and DCCMVAU.
                     •     Cache invalidate by virtual address, DCIMVAC.
                     •     Cache clean and invalidate by virtual address, DCCIMVAC.

                     However, one of the following approaches must be adopted in all these cases:

                     1.    If the instruction specified an invalidation, a locked entry is invalidated from the cache. For the clean and
                           invalidate instructions, the entry must be cleaned before it is invalidated.

                     2.    If the instruction specified an invalidation, a locked entry is not invalidated from the cache. If the instruction
                           specified a clean it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether locked entries are cleaned.

                     3.    If an entry is locked down, or could be locked down, an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED Data Abort exception is
                           generated, using the Fault status code defined for this purpose. See DFSR or HSR.

                     In an implementation that includes EL2, if HCR.TIDCP is set to 1, any exception relating to lockdown of an entry
                     associated with Non-secure memory is routed to EL2.

                                Note
                     An implementation that uses an abort mechanism for entries that can be locked down but are not actually locked
                     down must:

                     •     Document the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED instruction sequences that perform the required operations on
                           entries that are not locked down.

                     •     Implement one of the other permitted alternatives for the locked entries.

                     ARM recommends that, when possible, such IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED instruction sequences use
                     architecturally-defined instructions. This minimizes the number of customized instructions required.

G3-4832                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                        G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                     G3.4 AArch32 cache and branch predictor support

                  In addition, an implementation that uses an abort to handle cache maintenance instructions for entries that might be
                  locked must provide a mechanism that ensures that no entries are locked in the cache.

                  The reset setting of the cache must be that no cache entries are locked.

                  Additional cache functions for the implementation of lockdown

                  An implementation can add additional cache maintenance functions for the handling of lockdown in the
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED space.

G3.4.9      System level caches
                  The ARM Architecture defines a system cache as a cache that is not described in the PE Cache Identification
                  registers, CCSIDR, CCSIDR2, and CLIDR, and for which the set/way cache maintenance instructions do not apply.

                  Conceptually, three classes of system cache can be envisaged:

                  1.    System caches which lie before the point of coherency and cannot be managed by cache maintenance
                        instructions. Such systems fundamentally undermine the concept of cache maintenance instructions
                        operating to the point of coherency, as they imply the use of non-architecture mechanisms to manage
                        coherency. The use of such systems in the ARM architecture is explicitly prohibited.

                  2.    System caches which lie before the point of coherency and can be managed by cache maintenance by address
                        instructions that apply to the point of coherency, but cannot be managed by cache maintenance by set/way
                        instructions. Where maintenance of the entire system cache must be performed, as is the case for power
                        management, it must be performed using non-architectural mechanisms.

                  3.    System caches which lie beyond the point of coherency and so are invisible to software. The management of
                        such caches is outside the scope of architecture.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G3-4833
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.5 System register support for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory features

G3.5        System register support for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory features
                   The VMSAv8-32 defines the following registers for describing IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED features of the memory
                   system:

                   •     The TCM Type Register,TCMTR must be implemented. The following conditions apply to this register:
                         —     If no TCMs are implemented, the TCMTR indicates zero-size TCMs.
                         —     If bits[31:29] are 0b100, the format of the rest of the register is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. This value
                               indicates that the implementation includes TCMs that do not follow the legacy usage model. Other
                               fields in the register might give more information about the TCMs.

                   •     The System register encoding space with {coproc ==0b1111, CRn == c9, CRm =={c0-c2, c5-c7}} is
                         IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED for all values of opc2 and opc1. This space is reserved for branch predictor, cache
                         and TCM functionality, for example maintenance, override behaviors and lockdown.

                   •     In a VMSAv8-32 implementation, part of the System register encoding space with {coproc == 0b1111,
                         CRn == c10} is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED and reserved for TLB functionality, see TLB lockdown on
                         page G4-4913.

                   •     The System register encoding space with {coproc ==0b1111, CRn == c11, CRm =={c0-c8, c15}} is
                         IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED for all values of opc2 and opc1. This space is reserved for DMA operations to and
                         from the TCMs.

                   In addition, the System register encoding space with {coproc ==0b1111, CRn == c15}is reserved for
                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED registers, and can provide additional registers for the memory system. For more
                   information, see VMSAv8-32 organization of registers in the (coproc==0b1111) encoding space on page G6-4996.

G3-4834                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                     Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                          G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                                G3.6 External aborts

G3.6       External aborts
                  The ARM architecture defines External aborts as errors that occur in the memory system, other than those that are
                  detected by the MMU or Debug hardware. An External abort might signal a data corruption to the PE. For example,
                  a memory location might have been corrupted, and this corruption is detected by hardware using a parity or error
                  correction code (ECC). The error might have been propagated. The RAS Extension provides mechanisms for
                  software to determine the extent of the corruption and contain propagation of the error. For more information, see
                  the ARM® Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Specification, ARMv8, for the ARMv8-A architecture
                  profile.

                  An External abort is one of:
                  •    Synchronous.
                  •    Precise asynchronous.
                  •    Imprecise asynchronous.

                  For more information, see Exception terminology on page G1-4592.

                  The RAS Extension provides an expanded taxonomy for describing aborts. When the RAS Extension is not
                  implemented, the ARM architecture does not provide any method to distinguish between precise asynchronous and
                  imprecise asynchronous External aborts.

                  VMSAv8-32 permits External aborts on data accesses, translation table walks, and instruction fetches to be either
                  synchronous or asynchronous. The reported fault code identifies whether the External abort is synchronous or
                  asynchronous.

                  It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED which External aborts, if any, are supported. Asynchronous External aborts generate
                  SError interrupt exceptions.

                  In AArch32 state:
                  •    SError interrupts are taken as asynchronous Data Abort exceptions.
                  •    Synchronous External aborts:
                       —      On data accesses are taken as synchronous Data Abort exceptions.
                       —      On instruction fetches, or prefetches, are taken as synchronous Prefetch Abort exceptions.

                  See also:
                  •      External abort on a translation table walk on page G4-4941.
                  •      Handling exceptions that are taken to an Exception level using AArch32 on page G1-4622.

                  Normally, External aborts are rare. An imprecise asynchronous External abort is likely to be fatal to the process that
                  is running. ARM recommends that implementations make External aborts precise wherever possible.

                  The following subsections give more information about possible External aborts:
                  •     Provision for classification of External aborts.
                  •     Parity or ECC error reporting, RAS Extension not implemented on page G3-4836.

                  The section Exception reporting in a VMSAv8-32 implementation on page G4-4944 describes the reporting of
                  External aborts.

G3.6.1      Provision for classification of External aborts
                  For an External abort taken to a privileged mode other than Hyp mode, an implementation can use the DFSR.ExT
                  or IFSR.ExT bits to provide more information about the External abort:
                  •     DFSR.ExT provides an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of External aborts on data accesses.
                  •     IFSR.ExT provides an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of External aborts on instruction accesses.
                  For an External abort taken to Hyp mode, the HSR.EA bit, provides an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of
                  External aborts.

                  For all aborts other than External aborts these bits return a value of 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G3-4835
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.6 External aborts

                   If the RAS Extension is implemented:
                   •      The HSR.AET field provides information about the state of the PE following an SError interrupt exception
                          taken to Hyp mode.
                   •      The DFSR.AET field provides information about the state of the PE following an asynchronous Data Abort
                          exception.
                   •      The implementation might define error record registers.

                   For more information on the RAS Extension, see ARM® Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS)
                   Specification, ARMv8, for the ARMv8-A architecture profile.

G3.6.2       Parity or ECC error reporting, RAS Extension not implemented
                   The ARM architecture supports the reporting of both synchronous and asynchronous parity or ECC errors from the
                   cache systems. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED what parity or ECC errors in the cache systems, if any, result in
                   synchronous or asynchronous parity or ECC errors.

                   A fault code is defined for reporting parity or ECC errors, see Exception reporting in a VMSAv8-32 implementation
                   on page G4-4944. However when parity or ECC error reporting is implemented it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                   whether a parity or ECC error is reported using the assigned fault code, or using another appropriate encoding.

                   For all purposes other than the Fault status encoding, parity or ECC errors are treated as External aborts.

G3-4836                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                               G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                                                           G3.7 Memory barrier instructions

G3.7       Memory barrier instructions
                     Memory barriers on page E2-3017 describes the memory barrier instructions. This section describes the system
                     level controls of those instructions.

G3.7.1      EL2 control of the Shareability of data barrier instructions executed at EL0 or EL1
                     In an implementation that includes EL2 and supports Shareability limitations on the data barrier instructions, the
                     HCR.BSU field can modify the required Shareability of an instruction that is executed at EL0 or EL1 in Non-secure
                     state. Table G3-7 shows the encoding of this field:

                                     Table G3-7 EL2 control of Shareability of barrier instructions executed at EL0 or EL1

                                                           HCR.BSU               Minimum Shareability of barrier instructions

                                                           00                    No effect, Shareability is as specified by the instruction

                                                           01                    Inner Shareable

                                                           10                    Outer Shareable

                                                           11                    Full system

                     For an instruction executed at EL0 or EL1 in Non-secure state, Table G3-8 shows how the HCR.BSU is combined
                     with the Shareability specified by the argument of the DMB or DSB instruction to give the scope of the instruction:

                    Table G3-8 Effect of the HCR_EL2.BSU on barrier instructions executed at Non-secure EL1 or EL1

                  Shareability specified by the DMB or DSB argument                   HCR.BSU                 Resultant Shareability

                  Full system                                                         Any                     Full system

                  Outer Shareable                                                     00, 01, or 10           Outer Shareable

                                                                                      11, Full system         Full system

                  Inner Shareable                                                     00 or 01                Inner Shareable

                                                                                      10, Outer Shareable     Outer Shareable

                                                                                      11, Full system         Full system

                  Non-shareable                                                       00, No effect           Non-shareable

                                                                                      01, Inner Shareable     Inner Shareable

                                                                                      10, Outer Shareable     Outer Shareable

                                                                                      11, Full system         Full system

ARM DDI 0487C.a                   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G3-4837
ID121917                                                  Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.8 Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions

G3.8         Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions
                     This section lists the pseudocode describing general memory operations:
                     •      Memory data type definitions.
                     •      Basic memory access.
                     •      Aligned memory access on page G3-4839.
                     •      Unaligned memory access on page G3-4839.
                     •      Exclusives monitors operations on page G3-4839.
                     •      Access permission checking on page G3-4840.
                     •      Abort exceptions on page G3-4840.
                     •      Memory barriers on page G3-4840.

G3.8.1         Memory data type definitions
                     This section lists the memory data types.

                     The memory data types are:
                     •    Address descriptor, defined by the AddressDescriptor type.
                     •    Full address, defined by the FullAddress type.
                     •    Memory attributes, defined by the MemoryAttributes type.
                     •    Memory type, defined by the MemType enumeration.
                     •    Device memory type, defined by the DeviceType enumeration.
                     •    Normal memory attributes, defined by the MemAttrHints type.
                     •    Cacheability attributes, defined by the MemAttr_NC, MemAttr_WT, and MemAttr_WB constants.
                     •    Allocation hints, defined by the MemHint_No, MemHint_WA, MemHint_RA, and MemHint_RWA constants.
                     •    Access permissions, defined by the Permissions type.

G3.8.2         Basic memory access
                     The two forms of the _Mem[] accessor, non-assignment (memory read) _Mem[] and assignment (memory write)
                     _Mem[], are the operations that perform single-copy atomic, aligned, little-endian memory accesses of size bytes to
                     or from the underlying physical memory array of bytes.

                     The functions address the array using desc.paddress, that supplies:
                     •     The physical address.
                     •     An NS bit that selects between the Secure and Non-secure parts of the array.

                     The attributes in desc.memattrs are used by the memory system to determine caching and ordering behaviors as
                     described in Memory types and attributes on page E2-3032, Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on
                     page E2-3011, and Atomicity in the ARM architecture on page E2-3006.

                     An additional parameter to the _Mem[] accessor defines the access type, for example normal, exclusive, or ordered,
                     and whether the access is made as part of a translation table walk.

                     The actual implemented array of memory might be smaller than the maximum address size that can be accessed
                     from AArch32 state. In this case the scheme for aliasing is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, or some parts of the address
                     space might give rise to External aborts or SErrors (System Errors).

                     PAMax() returns the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size of the physical address.

                             Note
                     A stage of address translation using VMSAv8-32 cannot generate an output address of more than 40 bits.

G3-4838                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                     G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
                                                                  G3.8 Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions

G3.8.3      Aligned memory access
                  The AArch32.MemSingle[] functions make atomic, little-endian accesses of size bytes.

G3.8.4      Unaligned memory access
                  See Unaligned data access on page E2-3027 for details of the SCTLR.A and HSCTLR.A controls on the generation
                  of alignment faults. The HSCTLR control applies to Normal memory accesses from Hyp mode, and the SCTLR
                  control applies to Normal memory accesses from all other modes.

                  The Mem_with_type[] functions make an access of the required type. If that access is naturally aligned, each form of
                  the function performs an atomic access by making a single call to AArch32.MemSingle[]. If that access is not aligned
                  but passes the AArch32.CheckAlignment() checks, each form of the function synthesizes the required access from
                  multiple calls to AArch32.MemSingle[]. It also reverses the byte order if the access is big-endian.

G3.8.5      Exclusives monitors operations
                  The AArch32.SetExclusiveMonitors() function sets the Exclusives monitors for a Load-Exclusive instruction, for a
                  block of bytes. The size of the blocks is determined by size, at the VA address. The ExclusiveMonitorsPass()
                  function checks whether a Store-Exclusive instruction still has possession of the Exclusives monitors and therefore
                  completes successfully.

                  The AArch32.ExclusiveMonitorsPass() function checks whether a Store-Exclusive instruction still has possession of
                  the Exclusives monitors, by checking whether the Exclusives monitors are set to include the location of the memory
                  block specified by size, at the virtual address defined by address. The atomic write that follows after the Exclusives
                  monitors have been set must be to the same physical address. It is permitted, but not required, for this function to
                  return FALSE if the virtual address is not the same as that used in the previous call to
                  AArch32.SetExclusiveMonitors().

                  The ExclusiveMonitorsStatus() function returns 0 if the previous atomic write was to the same physical memory
                  locations selected by ExclusiveMonitorsPass() and therefore succeeded. Otherwise the function returns 1, indicating
                  that the address translation delivered a different physical address.

                  The MarkExclusiveGlobal() procedure takes as arguments a FullAddress.paddress, the PE identifier processorid and
                  the size of the transfer. The procedure records that the PE processorid has requested exclusive access covering at
                  least size bytes from address paddress. The size of the location marked as exclusive is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED,
                  up to a limit of 2KB and no smaller than two words, and aligned in the address space to the size of the location. It
                  is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether this causes any previous request for exclusive access to any other address
                  by the same PE to be cleared.

                  The MarkExclusiveLocal() procedure takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid and
                  the size of the transfer. The procedure records in a local record that PE processorid has requested exclusive access
                  to an address covering at least size bytes from address paddress. The size of the location marked as exclusive is
                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and can at its largest cover the whole of memory but is no smaller than two words, and
                  is aligned in the address space to the size of the location. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this procedure
                  also performs a MarkExclusiveGlobal() using the same parameters.

                  The IsExclusiveGlobal() function takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid and the
                  size of the transfer. The function returns TRUE if the PE processorid has marked in a global record an address range
                  as exclusive access requested that covers at least size bytes from address paddress. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                  whether it returns TRUE or FALSE if a global record has marked a different address as exclusive access requested.
                  If no address is marked in a global record as exclusive access, IsExclusiveGlobal() returns FALSE.
                  The IsExclusiveLocal() function takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid and the
                  size of the transfer. The function returns TRUE if the PE processorid has marked an address range as exclusive
                  access requested that covers at least the size bytes from address paddress. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                  this function returns TRUE or FALSE if the address marked as exclusive access requested does not cover all of size
                  bytes from address paddress. If no address is marked as exclusive access requested, then this function returns
                  FALSE. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this result is ANDed with the result of IsExclusiveGlobal() with
                  the same parameters.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G3-4839
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G3 The AArch32 System Level Memory Model
G3.8 Pseudocode description of general memory system instructions

                     The ClearExclusiveByAddress() procedure takes as arguments a FullAddress paddress, the PE identifier processorid
                     and the size of the transfer. The procedure clears the global records of all PEs, other than processorid, for which an
                     address region including any of size bytes starting from paddress has had a request for an exclusive access. It is
                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the equivalent global record of the PE processorid is also cleared if any of size
                     bytes starting from paddress has had a request for an exclusive access, or if any other address has had a request for
                     an exclusive access.

                     The ClearExclusiveLocal() procedure takes as arguments the PE identifier processorid. The procedure clears the
                     local record of PE processorid for which an address has had a request for an exclusive access. It is IMPLEMENTATION
                     DEFINED whether this operation also clears the global record of PE processorid that an address has had a request for
                     an exclusive access.

G3.8.6         Access permission checking
                     The function AArch32.CheckPermission() is used by the architecture to perform access permission checking based
                     on attributes derived from the translation tables or location descriptors.

                     The interpretation of access permission is shown in Memory access control on page G4-4888.

G3.8.7         Abort exceptions
                     The function AArch32.Abort() generates a Data Abort exception or a Prefetch Abort exception by calling the
                     AArch32.TakeDataAbortException() or AArch32.TakePrefetchAbortException() function.

                     The FaultRecord type describes a fault. Functions that check for faults return a record of this type appropriate to the
                     type of fault. Pseudocode description of VMSAv8-32 memory system operations on page G4-4970 provides a
                     number of wrappers to generate a FaultRecord.

                     The function AArch32.NoFault() returns a null record that indicates no fault. The IsFault() function tests whether a
                     FaultRecord contains a fault.

G3.8.8         Memory barriers
                     The definition for the memory barrier functions is given by the enumerations MBReqDomain and MBReqTypes.

                     These enumerations define the required Shareability domains and required access types used as arguments for DMB
                     and DSB instructions.
                     The procedures DataMemoryBarrier(), DataSynchronizationBarrier(), and InstructionSynchronizationBarrier()
                     perform the memory barriers.

G3-4840                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
