Chapter G5
The Generic Timer in AArch32 state

                  This chapter describes the implementation of the ARM Generic Timer as an extension to an ARMv8
                  implementation. It includes an overview of the AArch32 System register interface to an ARM Generic Timer.

                  It contains the following sections:
                  •      About the Generic Timer in AArch32 state on page G5-4980.
                  •      The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer on page G5-4984.

                  Chapter D8 The Generic Timer in AArch64 state describes the AArch64 view of the Generic Timer, including an
                  additional timer that can be implemented in AArch64 state, and Chapter I2 System Level Implementation of the
                  Generic Timer describes the system level implementation of the Generic Timer.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  G5-4979
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
G5.1 About the Generic Timer in AArch32 state

G5.1         About the Generic Timer in AArch32 state
                     Figure G5-1 shows an example system-on-chip that uses the Generic Timer as a system timer. In this figure:
                     •     This manual defines the architecture of the individual PEs in the multiprocessor blocks.
                     •     The ARM Generic Interrupt Controller Architecture Specification defines a possible architecture for the
                           interrupt controllers.
                     •     Generic Timer functionality is distributed across multiple components.

                                                                          System-on-Chip
                         Always-powered
                             domain

                           System                                                   System Timer Bus
                           counter

                                                      Counter interface                                       Counter interface
                           Power
                                                           Interrupt                                                Interrupt
                          controller
                                                           Controller                                               Controller
                                                                                         System
                                                             nFIQ,                       events                       nFIQ,
                                                Timer_0      nIRQ         Timer_1                      Timer_0        nIRQ       Timer_1
                                       APB
                                                 PE_0                     PE_1                            PE_0                   PE_1
                                                 Cache                    Cache                         Cache                    Cache

                                                          Shared cache                                           Shared cache
                                                                 Multiprocessor A                                         Multiprocessor B

                                                                        Memory interconnect and memory controller

                                                                                                  Figure G5-1 Generic Timer example

                     The Generic Timer:

                     •       Provides a system counter, that measures the passing of time in real-time.

                                       Note
                             The Generic Timer can also provide other components at a system level, but Figure G5-1 does not show any
                             such components.

                     •       Supports virtual counters that measure the passing of virtual-time. That is, a virtual counter can measure the
                             passing of time on a particular virtual machine.

                     •       Timers, that can trigger events after a period of time has passed. The timers:
                             —     Can be used as count-up or as count-down timers.
                             —     Can operate in real-time or in virtual-time.

                     This chapter describes an instance of the Generic Timer component that Figure G5-1 shows as Timer_0 or Timer_1
                     within the Multiprocessor A or Multiprocessor B block. This component can be accessed from AArch64 state or
                     AArch32 state, and this chapter describes access from AArch32 state. Chapter D8 The Generic Timer in AArch64
                     state describes access to this component from AArch64 state.

                               Note
                     The reset requirements of Generic Timer registers are more strict when they are accessed from AArch32 state than
                     when they are accessed from AArch64 state.

G5-4980                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                             G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
                                                                                       G5.1 About the Generic Timer in AArch32 state

                  A Generic Timer implementation must also include a memory-mapped system component, see The full set of
                  Generic Timer components.

G5.1.1      The full set of Generic Timer components
                  Within a system that might include multiple PEs, a full set of Generic Timer components is as follows:

                  The system counter
                                 This provides a uniform view of system time, see The system counter on page G5-4982. Because
                                 this must be implemented at the system level, it is accessed through The system level
                                 memory-mapped implementation of the Generic Timer. However, during initialization, a status
                                 register in each implemented timer in the system must be programmed with the frequency of the
                                 system counter, so that software can read this frequency.

                  PE implementations of the Generic Timer
                                 Each PE implementation of the Generic Timer provides the following components:
                                 •      A physical counter, that gives access to the count value of the system counter.
                                 •      A virtual counter, that gives access to virtual time. In AArch32 state, the CNTVOFF register
                                        defines the offset between physical time, as defined by the value of the system counter, and
                                        virtual time.
                                 •      A number of timers. In an implementation where all Exception levels are implemented and
                                        can use AArch32 state, the timers that are accessible from AArch64 state are:
                                        —     A Secure PL1 physical timer.
                                        —     A Non-secure EL1 physical timer.
                                        —     An EL2 physical timer.
                                        —     A virtual timer.
                                                 Note
                                        The Secure PL1 physical timer uses the Secure banked instances of the CNTP_CTL,
                                        CNTP_CVAL, and CNTP_TVAL registers, and the Non-secure EL1 physical timer uses the
                                        Non-secure instances of the same registers.

                                 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer on page G5-4984 describes these components.

                  The system level memory-mapped implementation of the Generic Timer
                                 The memory-mapped registers that control the components of the system level implementation of
                                 the Generic Timer are grouped into frames. The Generic Timer architecture defines the offset of
                                 each register within its frame, but the base address of each frame is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, and
                                 defined by the system.
                                 Each system level component has one or two register frames. The possible system level components
                                 are:
                                 The memory-mapped counter module, required
                                         This module controls the system counter. It has two frames:
                                         •     A control frame, CNTControlBase.
                                         •     A status frame, CNTReadBase.
                                 The memory-mapped timer control module, required
                                         The system level implementation of the Generic Timer can provide up to eight timers,
                                         and the memory-mapped timer control module identifies:
                                         •     Which timers are implemented.
                                         •     The features of each implemented timer.
                                         This module has a single frame, CNTCTLBase.
                                 Memory-mapped timers, optional
                                         An implemented memory-mapped timer:
                                             •      Must provide a privileged view of the timer, in the CNTBaseN frame.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G5-4981
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
G5.1 About the Generic Timer in AArch32 state

                                                 •      Optionally. provides an unprivileged view of the timer in the CNTEL0BaseN
                                                        frame.
                                                 N is the timer number, and the corresponding frame number, in the range 0-7.
                                     Chapter I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer describes these components.

G5.1.2         The system counter
                     The Generic Timer provides a system counter with the following specification:
                     Width         At least 56 bits wide.
                                   The value returned by any 64-bit read of the counter is zero-extended to 64 bits.
                     Frequency     Increments at a fixed frequency, typically in the range 1-50MHz.
                                   Can support one or more alternative operating modes in which it increments by larger amounts at a
                                   lower frequency, typically for power-saving.
                     Roll-over     Roll-over time of not less than 40 years.
                     Accuracy      ARM does not specify a required accuracy, but recommends that the counter does not gain or lose
                                   more than ten seconds in a 24-hour period.
                                   Use of lower-frequency modes must not affect the implemented accuracy.
                     Start-up      Starts operating from zero.

                     The system counter, once configured and running, must provide a uniform view of system time. More precisely, it
                     must be impossible for the following sequence of events to show system time going backwards:
                     1.    Device A reads the time from the system counter.
                     2.    Device A communicates with another agent in the system, Device B.
                     3.    After recognizing the communication from Device A, Device B reads the time from the system counter.

                     The system counter must be implemented in an always-on power domain.

                     To support lower-power operating modes, the counter can increment by larger amounts at a lower frequency. For
                     example, a 10MHz system counter might either increment:
                     •     By 1 at 10MHz.
                     •     By 500 at 20kHz, when the system lowers the clock frequency, to reduce power consumption.

                     In this case, the counter must support transitions between high-frequency, high-precision operation, and
                     lower-frequency, lower-precision operation, without any impact on the required accuracy of the counter.

                     The CNTFRQ register is intended to hold a copy of the current clock frequency to allow fast reference to this
                     frequency by software running on the PE. For more information see Initializing and reading the system counter
                     frequency.

                     The mechanism by which the count from the system counter is distributed to system components is
                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, but each PE with a System register interface to the system counter must have a counter
                     input that can capture each increment of the counter.

                              Note
                     So that the system counter can be clocked independently from the PE hardware, the count value might be distributed
                     using a Gray code sequence. Gray-count scheme for timer distribution scheme on page K5-6470 gives more
                     information about this possibility.

                     Initializing and reading the system counter frequency
                     The CNTFRQ register must be programmed to the clock frequency of the system counter. Typically, this is done
                     only during the system boot process, by using the System register interface to write the system counter frequency
                     to the CNTFRQ register. Only software executing at the highest implemented Exception level can write to
                     CNTFRQ.

G5-4982                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                             G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
                                                                                       G5.1 About the Generic Timer in AArch32 state

                          Note
                  The CNTFRQ register is UNKNOWN at reset, and therefore the counter frequency must be set as part of the system
                  boot process.

                  Software can read the CNTFRQ register, to determine the current system counter frequency, in the following states
                  and modes:
                  •     Hyp mode.
                  •     Secure PL1 modes and Non-secure EL1 modes.
                  •     When CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN is set to 1, Secure and Non-secure EL0 modes.

                  Memory-mapped controls of the system counter
                  Some system counter controls are accessible only through the memory-mapped interface to the system counter.
                  These controls are:
                  •     Enabling and disabling the counter.
                  •     Setting the counter value.
                  •     Changing the operating mode, to change the update frequency and increment value.
                  •     Enabling Halt-on-debug, that a debugger can then use to suspend counting.

                  For descriptions of these controls, see Chapter I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G5-4983
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
G5.2 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer

G5.2         The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer
                     The following sections describe the components and features of a PE implementation of the Generic Timer, as seen
                     from AArch32 state:
                     •     The physical counter.
                     •     The virtual counter.
                     •     Event streams on page G5-4985.
                     •     Timers on page G5-4986.

G5.2.1        The physical counter
                     The PE includes a physical counter that contains the count value of the system counter. The CNTPCT register holds
                     the current physical counter value.

                     Accessing the physical counter
                     Software with sufficient privilege can read CNTPCT using a 64-bit System register read.

                     CNTPCT:

                     •      Is always accessible from Secure PL1 modes and from Non-secure Hyp mode.

                     •      Is accessible from Non-secure EL1 modes when the value of CNTHCTL.PL1PCTEN is 1. When the value
                            of CNTHCTL.PL1PCTEN is 0, any attempt to access CNTPCT from Non-secure EL1 modes is trapped to
                            Hyp mode.

                     •      Is accessible from Secure User mode when the value of CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN is 1. When the value of
                            CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN is 0, any attempt to access CNTPCT generates an UNDEFINED exception.

                     •      Is accessible from Non-secure User mode when the value of CNTHCTL.PL1PCTEN is 1 and the value of
                            CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN is 1. Otherwise:
                            —     When the value of CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN is 0, any attempt to access CNTPCT from Non-secure
                                  User mode generates an UNDEFINED exception.
                            —     When the value of CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN is 1 and the value of CNTHCTL.PL1PCTEN is 0, any
                                  attempt to access CNTPCT from Non-secure User mode is trapped to Hyp mode.

                     Reads of CNTPCT can occur speculatively and out of order relative to other instructions executed on the same PE.

                     For example, if a read from memory is used to obtain a signal from another agent that indicates that CNTPCT must
                     be read, an ISB is used to ensure that the read of CNTPCT occurs after the signal has been read from memory, as
                     shown in the following code sequence:

                     loop                  ; polling for some communication to indicate a requirement to read the timer
                         LDR R1, [R2]
                         CMP R1, #1
                         BNE loop
                         ISB               ; without this, the CNTPCT could be read before the memory location in [R2]
                                           ; has had the value 1 written to it
                         MRS R1, CNTPCT

G5.2.2        The virtual counter
                     An implementation of the Generic Timer always includes a virtual counter, that indicates virtual time.

                     The virtual counter contains the value of the physical counter minus a 64-bit virtual offset. When executing in a
                     Non-secure EL1 or EL0 mode, the virtual offset value relates to the current virtual machine.

                     The CNTVOFF register contains the virtual offset. CNTVOFF is only accessible:
                     •    From Hyp mode.
                     •    From Monitor mode only when SCR.NS is set to 1.

                     For more information see Status of the CNTVOFF register on page G5-4985.

G5-4984                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                               G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
                                                                                          G5.2 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer

                  The CNTVCT register holds the current virtual counter value.

                  Accessing the virtual counter
                  Software with sufficient privilege can read CNTVCT using a 64-bit System register read.

                  CNTVCT is always accessible from Secure PL1 modes and from Non-secure EL1 and EL2 modes.

                  In addition, when CNTKCTL.PL0VCTEN is set to 1, CNTVCT is accessible from EL0.

                  When CNTKCTL.PL0VCTEN is set to 0, any attempt to access CNTVCT from EL0 is UNDEFINED.

                  Reads of CNTVCT can occur speculatively and out of order relative to other instructions executed on the same PE.

                  For example, if a read from memory is used to obtain a signal from another agent that indicates that CNTVCT must
                  be read, an ISB is used to ensure that the read of CNTVCT occurs after the signal has been read from memory, as
                  shown in the following code sequence:

                  loop                  ; polling for some communication to indicate a requirement to read the timer
                      LDR R1, [R2]
                      CMP R1, #1
                      BNE loop
                      ISB               ; without this, the CNTVCT could be read before the memory location in [R2]
                                        ; has had the value 1 written to it
                      MRS R1, CNTVCT

                  Status of the CNTVOFF register
                  All implementations of the Generic Timer include the virtual counter. Therefore, conceptually, all implementations
                  include the CNTVOFF register that defines the virtual offset between the physical count and the virtual count.
                  CNTVOFF is only accessible at EL2 or above. If EL2 is not implemented, the virtual counter uses a fixed virtual
                  offset of zero.

G5.2.3      Event streams
                  Any implementation of the Generic Timer can use the system counter to generate one or more event streams, to
                  generate periodic wake-up events as part of the mechanism described in Wait for Event mechanism and Send event
                  on page D1-1954.

                           Note
                  An event stream might be used:
                  •     To impose a time-out on a Wait For Event polling loop.
                  •     To safeguard against any programming error that means an expected event is not generated.

                  An event stream is configured by:

                  •      Selecting which bit, from the bottom 16 bits of a counter, triggers the event. This determines the frequency
                         of the events in the stream.

                  •      Selecting whether the event is generated on each 0 to 1 transition, or each 1 to 0 transition, of the selected
                         counter bit.

                  The CNTKCTL.{EVNTEN, EVNTDIR, EVNTI} fields define an event stream that is generated from the virtual
                  counter.

                  In all implementations the CNTHCTL.{EVNTEN, EVNTDIR, EVNTI} fields define an event stream that is
                  generated from the physical counter.

                  The operation of an event stream is as follows:

                  •      The pseudocode variables PreviousCNTVCT and PreviousCNTPCT are initialized as:
                         // Variables used for generation of the timer event stream.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G5-4985
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
G5.2 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer

                           bits(64) PreviousCNTVCT = bits(64) UNKNOWN;
                           bits(64) PreviousCNTPCT = bits(64) UNKNOWN;

                     •     The pseudocode functions TestEventCNTV() and TestEventCNTP() are called on each cycle of the PE clock.

                     •     The TestEventCNTx() pseudocode template defines the functions TestEventCNTV() and TestEventCNTP():
                           // TestEventCNTx()
                           // ===============

                           // Template for the TestEventCNTV() and TestEventCNTP() functions
                           // Describes operation when all Exception Levels are using AArch32:
                           //   CNTxCT         is CNTVCT           or CNTPCT           64-bit count value
                           //   CNTx_CTL       is CNTV_CTL         or CNTP_CTL         Control register
                           //   PreviousCNTxCT is PreviousCNTVCT or PreviousCNTPCT

                           TestEventCNTx()
                               if CNTx_CTL.EVNTEN == '1' then
                                   n = UInt(CNTx_CTL.EVNTI);
                                   SampleBit   = CNTxCT<n>;
                                   PreviousBit = PreviousCNTxCT<n>;

                                    if CNTx_CTL.EVNTDIR == '0' then
                                         if PreviousBit == '0' && SampleBit == '1' then EventRegisterSet();
                                    else
                                         if PreviousBit == '1' && SampleBit == '0' then EventRegisterSet();

                               PreviousCNTxCT = CNTxCT;

                               return;

G5.2.4        Timers
                     In an implementation that includes EL3, in any implementation of the Generic Timer, the following timers are
                     accessible from AArch32 state, provided the appropriate Exception level can use AArch32:

                     •     A Non-secure EL1 physical timer. A Non-secure EL1 control determines whether this register is accessible
                           from Non-secure EL0.

                     •     A Secure PL1 physical timer. This timer:
                           —     Is accessible from Secure EL1 using AArch32 when EL3 is using AArch64.
                           —     Is accessible from Secure EL3 when EL3 is using AArch32.
                           A Secure PL1 control determines whether this register is accessible from Secure EL0.

                     •     A Non-secure EL2 physical timer.

                     •     A virtual timer.

                     The output of each implemented timer:

                     •     Provides an output signal to the system.

                     •     If the PE interfaces to a Generic Interrupt Controller (GIC), signals a Private Peripheral Interrupt (PPI) to
                           that GIC. In a multiprocessor implementation, each PE must use the same interrupt number for each timer.

                     Each timer:

                     •     Is based around a 64-bit CompareValue that provides a 64-bit unsigned upcounter.

                     •     Provides an alternative view of the CompareValue, called the TimerValue, that appears to operate as a 32-bit
                           downcounter.

                     •     Has, in addition, a 32-bit Control register.

G5-4986                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                     G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
                                                                                                G5.2 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer

                   In all implementations, the AArch32 System registers for the EL1 (or PL1) physical timer are banked, to provide
                   the Secure and Non-secure implementations of the timer. Table G5-1 shows the Timer registers.

                                                                     Table G5-1 Timer registers summary for the Generic Timer

                                              Secure PL1 or Non-secure EL1
              Timer register                                                              EL2 physical timer            Virtual timer
                                              physical timer

              CompareValue register           CNTP_CVAL a                                 CNTHP_CVAL                    CNTV_CVAL

              TimerValue register             CNTP_TVAL a                                 CNTHP_TVAL                    CNTV_TVAL

              Control register                CNTP_CTL a                                  CNTHP_CTL                     CNTV_CTL

                  a. In AArch32 state, these registers are banked to provide the Non-secure EL1 physical timer and the Secure PL1 physical
                     timer.

                   The following sections describe:
                   •     Accessing the timer registers
                   •     Operation of the CompareValue views of the timers on page G5-4988
                   •     Operation of the TimerValue views of the timers on page G5-4988.

                   Accessing the timer registers
                   For each timer, all timer registers have the same access permissions, as follows:

                   Secure PL1 and Non-secure EL1 physical timer
                                              The Secure PL1 physical timer is accessible from Secure PL1 modes.
                                              Non-secure software executing at EL2 controls access to the Non-secure EL1 physical timer
                                              from Non-secure EL1 modes. The Non-secure EL1 physical timer is accessible from
                                              Monitor mode when the value of SCR.NS is 1.
                                              When access from PL1 or EL1 modes is permitted, CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN determines
                                              whether the registers are accessible from EL0. If an access is not permitted because
                                              CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN is set to 0, an attempted access from EL0 is UNDEFINED.
                                              In all implementations:
                                              •      Except for accesses from Monitor mode, accesses are to the registers for the current
                                                     Security state.
                                              •      For accesses from Monitor mode, the value of SCR.NS determines whether accesses
                                                     are to the Secure or the Non-secure registers.
                                                              Note
                                                     Monitor mode is present only when EL3 is using AArch32.

                                              •      The Non-secure registers are accessible from Hyp mode.
                                              •      CNTHCTL.PL1PCEN determines whether the Non-secure registers are accessible
                                                     from Non-secure EL1 modes. If this bit is set to 1, to enable access from Non-secure
                                                     EL1 modes, CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN determines whether the registers are accessible
                                                     from Non-secure EL0.
                                                     If an access is not permitted because CNTHCTL.PL1PCEN is set to 0, an attempted
                                                     access from a Non-secure EL1 or EL0 mode generates a Hyp Trap exception.
                                                     However, if CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN is set to 0, this control takes priority, and an
                                                     attempted access from EL0 is UNDEFINED.

                   EL2 physical timer         Accessible from Hyp mode, and from Secure Monitor mode when SCR_EL3.NS is set to 1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G5-4987
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
G5.2 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer

                     Virtual timer             Accessible from Secure PL1 modes and Non-secure EL1 modes, and from Hyp mode.
                                               CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN determines whether the registers are accessible from EL0 modes. If
                                               an access is not permitted because CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN is set to 0, an attempted access
                                               from EL0 is UNDEFINED.

                     Operation of the CompareValue views of the timers
                     The CompareValue view of a timer operates as a 64-bit upcounter. The timer condition is met when the appropriate
                     counter reaches the value programmed into its CompareValue register. When the timer condition is met an interrupt
                     is generated if the interrupt is not masked in the corresponding timer control register, CNTP_CTL, CNTHP_CTL,
                     or CNTV_CTL. For CNTP_CTL, the interrupt is the same as the interrupt asserted by the Non-secure instance of
                     the AArch64 register CNTP_CTL_EL0.

                     The operation of this view of a timer is:

                         TimerConditionMet = (((Counter[63:0] – Offset[63:0])[63:0] - CompareValue[63:0]) >= 0)

                     Where:

                     TimerConditionMet         Is TRUE if the timer condition for this counter is met, and FALSE otherwise.

                     Counter                   The physical counter value, that can be read from the CNTPCT register.

                                                        Note
                                               The virtual counter value, that can be read from the CNTVCT register, is the value:
                                                   (Counter - Offset)

                     Offset                    For a physical timer it is zero, and for the virtual timer it is the virtual offset, held in the
                                               CNTVOFF register.

                     CompareValue              The value of the appropriate CompareValue register, CNTP_CVAL, CNTHP_CVAL, or
                                               CNTV_CVAL.

                     In this view of a timer, Counter, Offset, and CompareValue are all 64-bit unsigned values.

                               Note
                     This means that a timer with a CompareValue of, or close to, 0xFFFF_FFFF_FFFF_FFFF might never meet its timer
                     condition. However, there is no practical requirement to use values close to the counter wrap value.

                     Operation of the TimerValue views of the timers
                     The TimerValue view of a timer appears to operate as a signed 32-bit downcounter. A TimerValue register is
                     programmed with a count value. This value decrements on each increment of the appropriate counter, and the timer
                     condition is met when the value reaches zero. When the timer condition is met, an interrupt is generated if the
                     interrupt is not masked in the corresponding timer control register, CNTP_CTL, CNTHP_CTL, or CNTV_CTL.

                     This view of a timer depends on the following behavior of accesses to TimerValue registers:
                     Reads           TimerValue = (CompareValue – (Counter - Offset))[31:0]
                     Writes          CompareValue = ((Counter - Offset)[63:0] + SignExtend(TimerValue))[63:0]

                     Where the arguments other than TimerValue have the definitions used in Operation of the CompareValue views of
                     the timers, and in addition:

                     TimerValue        The value of a TimerValue register, CNTP_TVAL, CNTHP_TVAL, or CNTV_TVAL.

                     In this view of a timer, values are signed, in standard two’s complement form.

                     A read of a TimerValue register after the timer condition has been met indicates the time since the timer condition
                     was met.

G5-4988                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                            G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
                                                                                       G5.2 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer

                        Note
                  •   Operation of the CompareValue views of the timers on page G5-4988 gives a strict definition of
                      TimerConditionMet. However, provided that the TimerValue is not expected to wrap as a 32-bit signed value
                      when decremented from 0x80000000, the TimerValue view can be used as giving an effect equivalent to:
                      TimerConditionMet = (TimerValue ≤ 0)

                  •   Programming TimerValue to a negative number with magnitude greater than (Counter–Offset) can lead to
                      an arithmetic overflow that causes the CompareValue to be an extremely large positive value. This potentially
                      delays meeting the timer condition for an extremely long period of time.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G5-4989
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state
G5.2 The AArch32 view of the Generic Timer

G5-4990                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
