Chapter G7
AArch32 System Register Descriptions

                  This chapter describes each of the AArch32 System registers.

                  It contains the following sections:
                  •      About the AArch32 System registers on page G7-5012.
                  •      General system control registers on page G7-5027.
                  •      Debug registers on page G7-5502.
                  •      Performance Monitors registers on page G7-5594.
                  •      Generic Timer registers on page G7-5646.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   G7-5011
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

G7.1         About the AArch32 System registers
                    For general information about the AArch32 System registers, see:

                    In Chapter G4:
                                   •      About the System registers for VMSAv8-32 on page G4-4972.
                                   •      Functional grouping of VMSAv8-32 System registers on page G4-4977.

                    In Chapter G6:
                                   •      VMSAv8-32 organization of registers in the (coproc==0b1110) encoding space on
                                          page G6-4993.
                                   •      VMSAv8-32 organization of registers in the (coproc==0b1111) encoding space on
                                          page G6-4996.

                    In this chapter:
                                   •      Fixed values in the System register descriptions.
                                   •      General behavior of System registers.
                                   •      Principles of the ID scheme for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.
                                   •      About AArch32 System register accesses on page G7-5024.

                    The remainder of this chapter describes the AArch32 System registers, in the following sections:
                    •     General system control registers on page G7-5027.
                    •     Debug registers on page G7-5502.
                    •     Performance Monitors registers on page G7-5594.
                    •     Generic Timer registers on page G7-5646.

G7.1.1        Fixed values in the System register descriptions
                    See Fixed values in AArch32 instruction and System register descriptions on page F2-3108. This section defines
                    how the glossary terms RAZ, RES0, RAO, and RES1 can be represented in the System register descriptions.

G7.1.2        General behavior of System registers
                    Except where indicated, System registers are 32-bits wide. As stated in About the System registers for VMSAv8-32
                    on page G4-4972, there are some 64-bit registers, and these include cases where software can access either a 32-bit
                    view or a 64-bit view of a register. The register summaries, and the individual register descriptions, identify the
                    64-bit registers and how they can be accessed.
                    The following sections give information about the general behavior of these registers:
                    •     Register names.
                    •     Read-only bits in read/write registers on page G7-5013.
                    •     The CPUID identification scheme on page G7-5013.
                    •     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED performance monitors on page G7-5013.
                    •     UNPREDICTABLE, CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and UNDEFINED behavior for AArch32 System
                          register accesses on page G7-5013.
                    •     Read-only and write-only register encodings on page G7-5015.
                    •     Reset behavior of AArch32 System registers on page G7-5016.
                    •     Synchronization of changes to AArch32 System registers on page G7-5016.

                    Unless otherwise indicated, information in the listed sections applies to all AArch32 System registers

                    See also About AArch32 System register accesses on page G7-5024.

                    Register names
                    The ARM architecture guarantees not to define any register name prefixed with IMP_ as part of the standard ARM
                    architecture.

G7-5012                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                       G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                       G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                                  Note
                        ARM strongly recommends that any register names created in the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED register spaces be
                        prefixed with IMP_, where appropriate.

                        Read-only bits in read/write registers
                        Some read/write registers include bits that are read-only. These bits ignore writes.

                        An example of this is the SCTLR.NMFI bit, SCTLR[27].

                        The CPUID identification scheme
                        The ID_* registers were originally called the CPUID identification scheme registers. However, functionally, there
                        is no value in separating these registers from the slightly larger Identification registers functional group. See
                        Table K13-19 on page K13-6627 for a list of the ID_ * registers.

                        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED performance monitors
                        VMSAv8-32 reserves some additional System register encodings in the (coproc == 0b1111) encoding space for
                        optional additional IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED performance monitors. Table G7-1 shows the allocation of these
                        encodings:

                                                        Table G7-1 Performance Monitors System register encoding allocations

 CRn       opc1      CRm          opc2     Name                                                                          Width     Type

 c9        0-7       c12-c14      0-7      Performance Monitors Extension registers, see Table K13-20 on                 32-bit    RW or RO a
                                           page K13-6629

                     c15          0-7      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED                                                        32-bit    b

      a. The table referenced in the Name entry shows the type of each of the OPTIONAL Performance Monitors Extension registers.
      b. Access depends on the register or operation, and is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                        UNPREDICTABLE, CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and UNDEFINED behavior for
                        AArch32 System register accesses
                        This section defines UNPREDICTABLE and UNDEFINED behaviors for accesses to System registers, including those
                        cases where the ARMv8 behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE.
                        In AArch32 state the following operations are UNDEFINED:

                        •       All LDC and STC accesses, except for the LDC access to DBGDTRTXint and the STC access to DBGDTRRXint
                                specified in Table G6-2 on page G6-4995.

                        •       All MCRR and MRRC operations to the (coproc == 0b111x) encoding space, except for those explicitly defined as
                                accessing 64-bit System registers specified in Table G6-1 on page G6-4994 and Table G6-3 on
                                page G6-5000.

                        Unless otherwise indicated in the individual register descriptions:
                        •     Reserved fields in registers are RES0.
                        •     Assigning a reserved value to a field has a CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE effect, see Reserved values in
                              System and memory-mapped registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                        The following subsections give more information about UNPREDICTABLE, CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and
                        UNDEFINED behavior for accesses to the (coproc == 0b111x) encoding space:
                        •       Accesses to unallocated encodings in the (coproc==0b111x) encoding space on page G7-5014.
                        •       Additional rules for MCR and MRC accesses to System registers on page G7-5014.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                     Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G7-5013
ID121917                                                    Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                    •      Effects of EL3 and EL2 on System register accesses.

                    Accesses to unallocated encodings in the (coproc==0b111x) encoding space

                    In ARMv8-A, accesses to unallocated register encodings in the (coproc == 0b111x) encoding space are UNDEFINED.

                             Note
                    In ARMv7, except for 32-bit registers encoded with a CRn value of c12, accesses to unallocated 32-bit registers were
                    UNPREDICTABLE. The ARMv8 CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior of these accesses is that they are
                    UNDEFINED, see Unallocated System register access instructions on page K1-6394.

                    Additional rules for MCR and MRC accesses to System registers

                    The following operations are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE for all encodings in the (coproc == 0b111x) encoding
                    space:
                    •      All MCR operations from the PC.
                    •      All MRC operations to APSR_nzcv, except for the (coproc == 0b1110) MRC operation to APSR_nzcv from
                           DBGDSCRint.

                    The CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior of these operations is that they are UNDEFINED, see Unallocated
                    System register access instructions on page K1-6394.

                    For registers and operations that are accessible from a particular Privilege level, any attempt to access those registers
                    from a lower Privilege level is UNDEFINED.
                    Some individual registers can be made inaccessible by setting configuration bits, possibly including
                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED configuration bits, to disable access to the register. The effects of the
                    architecturally-defined configuration bits are defined individually in this manual. Unless explicitly stated otherwise
                    in this manual, setting a configuration bit to disable access to a register results in the register becoming UNDEFINED
                    for MRC and MCR accesses.

                    See also Read-only and write-only register encodings on page G7-5015.

                    Effects of EL3 and EL2 on System register accesses

                    EL2 and EL3 introduce classes of System registers, described in Classification of System registers on
                    page G4-4972. Some of these classes of register are either:
                    •     Accessible only from certain modes or states.
                    •     Accessible from certain modes or states only when configuration settings permit the access.

                    Accesses to these registers that are not permitted are UNDEFINED, meaning execution of the register access
                    instruction generates an Undefined Instruction exception.

                             Note
                    This section applies only to registers that are accessible from some modes and states. That is, it applies only to
                    register access instructions using an encoding that, under some circumstances, would perform a valid register
                    access.

                    The following register classes restrict access in this way:

                    Restricted access System registers
                                    This register class is defined in any implementation that includes EL3.
                                    Restricted access registers other than the NSACR are accessible only from Secure EL3 modes. All
                                    other accesses to these registers are UNDEFINED.
                                    The NSACR is a special case of a Restricted access register and:
                                    •    The NSACR is:
                                         —    Read/write accessible from Secure PL1 modes.
                                         —    Is Read-only accessible from Non-secure PL2 and PL1 modes.

G7-5014                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                                   •      All other accesses to the NSACR are UNDEFINED.
                                   For more information, including behavior when EL3 is using AArch64 or is not implemented, see
                                   Restricted access System registers on page G4-4973.

                  Configurable access System registers
                                   This register class is defined in any implementation that includes EL3.
                                   Most Configurable access registers are accessible from Non-secure state only if control bits in the
                                   NSACR permit Non-secure access to the register. Otherwise, a Non-secure access to the register is
                                   UNDEFINED.

                                   For other Configurable access registers, control bits in the NSACR control the behavior of bits or
                                   fields in the register when it is accessed from Non-secure state. That is, Non-secure accesses to the
                                   register are permitted, but the NSACR controls how they behave. The only architecturally-defined
                                   register of this type is the CPACR.
                                   For more information, see Configurable access System registers on page G4-4973.

                  EL2-mode System registers
                                   This register class is defined only in an implementation that includes EL2.
                                   EL2-mode registers are accessible only from:
                                   •    The Non-secure EL2 mode, Hyp mode.
                                   •    Secure Monitor mode when SCR.NS is set to 1.
                                   All other accesses to these registers are UNDEFINED.
                                   For more information, see Hyp mode read/write registers in the (coproc==0b1111) encoding space
                                   on page G4-4974 and Hyp mode encodings for shared (coproc==0b1111) System registers on
                                   page G4-4974.

                  EL2-mode write-only operations
                                   This register class is defined only in an implementation that includes EL2.
                                   EL2-mode write-only operations are accessible only from:
                                   •    The Non-secure EL2 mode, Hyp mode.
                                   •    Secure Monitor mode, regardless of the value of SCR.NS.
                                   Write accesses to these operations are:
                                   •     CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE in Secure EL3 modes other than Monitor mode.
                                   •     UNDEFINED in Non-secure modes other than Hyp mode.

                                   For more information, see Hyp mode (coproc==0b1111) write-only System instructions on
                                   page G4-4975.

                  In addition, in any implementation that includes EL3, when EL3 is using AArch32, if write access to a register is
                  disabled by the CP15SDISABLE signal then any MCR access to that register is UNDEFINED.

                  Read-only and write-only register encodings
                  Some System registers are read-only (RO) or write-only (WO). For example:
                  •    Most identification registers are read-only.
                  •    Most encodings that perform an operation, such as a cache maintenance instruction, are write-only.

                  If a particular Privilege level defines a register to be:

                  •      RO, then any attempt to write to that register, at that Privilege level, is UNDEFINED. This means that any access
                         to that register with L == 0 is UNDEFINED.

                  •      WO, then any attempt to read from that register, at that Privilege level, is UNDEFINED. This means that any
                         access to that register with L== 1 is UNDEFINED.
                  For IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED encoding spaces, the treatment of the encodings is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5015
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                             Note
                    This section applies only to registers that this manual defines as RO or WO. It does not apply to registers for which
                    other access permissions are explicitly defined.

                    Reset behavior of AArch32 System registers
                    Reset values apply only to RW registers and fields, however:

                    •      Some RO registers or fields, including feature ID registers and some status registers or register fields, always
                           return a known value.

                    •      Some RW and RO registers or register fields return status information about the PE. Unless the register
                           description indicates that the value is UNKNOWN on reset, a read of the register immediately after a reset
                           returns valid information.

                    •      Some RW and RO registers and fields are aliases of other registers or fields. In these cases, the reset behavior
                           of the aliased register or field determines the value returned by a read of the register immediately after a reset.

                    •      WO registers that only have an effect on writes do not have meaningful reset values. However, an access to
                           a WO register might affect underlying state, and that state might have a defined reset value.

                    •      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED registers have IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED reset behavior.

                    After a reset, only a limited subset of the PE state is guaranteed to be set to defined values. Also, for debug and trace
                    System registers, reset requirements must take account of different levels of reset. For more information about the
                    reset behavior of System registers when the PE resets into an Exception level that is using AArch32, see:
                    •      PE state on reset into AArch32 state on page G1-4685.
                    •      The appropriate Trace architecture specification, for the Trace System registers.

                    When the PE resets into an Exception level that is using AArch64, PE state that relates to execution in AArch32
                    state, including the System register values, is UNKNOWN. The only exception to this is state that applies to execution
                    in both AArch64 state and AArch32 state and that has a defined reset value on the reset into AArch64 state. An
                    example of such PE state is the EDPRSR.SR bit.

                    For a PE reset into an Exception level that is using AArch32, the architecture defines which AArch32 System
                    registers have a defined reset value, and when that defined reset value applies. The register descriptions include this
                    information, and PE state on reset into AArch32 state on page G1-4685 summarizes these architectural
                    requirements. Otherwise, RW registers reset to an architecturally unknown value.

                             Note
                    In an implementation that includes EL3, unless this manual explicitly states otherwise, only the Secure instance of
                    a banked register is reset to the defined value. This means that software must program the Non-secure instance of
                    the register with the required values. Typically, this programming is part of the PE boot sequence.

                    Pseudocode description of resetting System registers

                    The AArch32.ResetControlRegisters() pseudocode function resets all System registers, and register fields, that have
                    defined reset values, as described in this section and PE state on reset into AArch32 state on page G1-4685.

                             Note
                    For debug and trace System registers, this function resets registers as defined for the appropriate level of reset.

                    Synchronization of changes to AArch32 System registers
                    In this section, this PE means the PE on which accesses are being synchronized.

G7-5016                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                               G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                           Note
                  See Definitions of direct and indirect reads and writes and their side-effects on page G7-5021 for definitions of the
                  terms direct write, direct read, indirect write, and indirect read.

                  A direct write to a System register might become visible at any point after the change to the register, but without a
                  Context synchronization event there is no guarantee that the change becomes visible.

                  Any direct write to a System register is guaranteed not to affect any instruction that appears, in program order, before
                  the instruction that performed the direct write, and any direct write to a System register must be synchronized before
                  any instruction that appears after the direct write, in program order, can rely on the effect of that write. The only
                  exceptions to this are:

                  •      All direct writes to the same register, using the same encoding, are guaranteed to occur in program order.

                  •      All direct writes to a register are guaranteed to occur in program order relative to all direct reads of the same
                         register using the same encoding.

                  •      Any System register access that an ARM Architecture Specification or equivalent specification defines as not
                         requiring synchronization.

                  •      If an instruction that appears in program order before the direct write performs a memory access, such as a
                         memory-mapped register access, that causes an indirect read or write to a register, that memory access is
                         subject to the memory order model. In this case, if permitted by the memory order model, the instruction that
                         appears in program order before the direct write can be affected by the direct write. For information about
                         the memory order model, see Definition of the ARMv8 memory model on page E2-3011.

                  These rules mean that an instruction that writes to one of the address translation instructions described in Address
                  translation instructions on page G4-4963 must be explicitly synchronized to guarantee that the result of the address
                  translation instruction is visible in the PAR.

                           Note
                  In this case, the direct write to the encoding of the address translation instruction causes an indirect write to the PAR.
                  Without a Context synchronization event after the direct write, there is no guarantee that the indirect write to the
                  PAR is visible.

                  Conceptually, the explicit synchronization occurs as the first step of any Context synchronization event. This means
                  that if the operation uses the state that had been changed but not synchronized before the operation occurred, the
                  operation is guaranteed to use the state as if it had been synchronized.

                           Note
                  •      This explicit synchronization is applied as the first step of the execution of any instruction that causes the
                         synchronization operation. This means it does not synchronize any effect of changes to the System registers
                         that might affect the fetch and decode of the instructions that cause the operation, such as breakpoints or
                         changes to translation tables.

                  •      For a synchronous exception, the control state in use at the time the exception is generated determines the
                         exception syndrome information, and this syndrome information is not changed by this synchronization at
                         the start of taking the exception.

                  Except for the register reads listed in Registers with some architectural guarantee of ordering or observability on
                  page G7-5019, if no Context synchronization event is performed, direct reads of System registers can occur in any
                  order.

                  Table G7-2 on page G7-5018 shows the synchronization requirement between two reads or writes that access the
                  same System register. In the column headings, First and Second refer to:

                  •      Program order, for any read or write caused by the execution of an instruction by this PE, other than a read
                         or write caused by a memory access made by that instruction.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G7-5017
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                    •       The order of arrival of asynchronous reads or writes made by this PE relative to the execution of instructions
                            by this PE.

                    In addition:

                    •       For indirect reads or writes caused by an external agent, such as a debugger, the mechanism that determines
                            the order of the reads or writes is defined by that external agent. The external agent can provide mechanisms
                            that ensure that any read or write it makes arrives at the PE. These indirect reads and writes are asynchronous
                            to software execution on the PE.

                    •       For indirect reads or writes caused by memory-mapped reads or writes made by this PE, the ordering of the
                            memory accesses is subject to the memory order model, including the effect of the memory type of the
                            accessed memory address. This applies, for example, if this PE reads or writes one of its registers in a
                            memory-mapped register interface.
                            The mechanism for ensuring completion of these memory accesses, including ensuring the arrival of the
                            asynchronous read or write at the PE, is defined by the system.

                                        Note
                            Such accesses are likely to be given a Device memory attribute, but requiring this is outside the scope of the
                            architecture.

                    •       For indirect reads or writes caused by autonomous asynchronous events that are counted, for example events
                            caused by the passage of time, the events are ordered so that:
                            —      Counts progress monotonically.
                            —      The events arrive at the PE in finite time and without undue delay.

                                                 Table G7-2 Synchronization requirements for updates to System registers

                        First read or write        Second read or write            Context synchronization event required

                        Direct read                Direct read                     No

                                                   Direct write                    No

                                                   Indirect read                   No a

                                                   Indirect write                  No a, but see text in this section for exceptions

                        Direct write               Direct read                     No

                                                   Direct write                    No

                                                   Indirect read                   Yes a

                                                   Indirect write                  No, but see text in this section for exceptions

                        Indirect read              Direct read                     No

                                                   Direct write                    No

                                                   Indirect read                   No

                                                   Indirect write                  No

                        Indirect write             Direct read                     Yes, but see text in this section for exceptions

                                                   Direct write                    No, but see text in this section for exceptions

                                                   Indirect read                   Yes, but see text in this section for exceptions

                                                   Indirect write                  No, but see text in this section for exceptions

G7-5018                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                   G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                        a. Although no synchronization is required between a Direct write and a Direct read, or between a Direct read and
                           an Indirect write, this does not imply that a Direct read causes synchronization of a previous Direct write. This
                           means that the sequence Direct write followed by Direct read followed by Indirect read, with no intervening
                           context synchronization, does not guarantee that the Indirect read observes the result of the Direct write.

                  If the indirect write is to a register that Registers with some architectural guarantee of ordering or observability
                  shows as having some guarantee of the visibility of an indirect write, synchronization might not be required.

                  If a direct read or a direct write to a register is followed by an indirect write to that register that is caused by an
                  external agent, or by an autonomous asynchronous event, or as a result of a memory-mapped write, then
                  synchronization is required to guarantee the ordering of the indirect write relative to the direct read or direct write.

                  If an indirect write caused by a direct write is followed by an indirect write caused by an external agent, or by an
                  autonomous asynchronous event, or as a result of a memory-mapped write, then synchronization is required to
                  guarantee the ordering of the two indirect writes.

                  Where an indirect write occurs as a side-effect of an access, this happens atomically with the access, meaning no
                  other accesses are allowed between the register access and its side-effect. For other information about indirect writes
                  after a direct read or a direct write, see Definitions of direct and indirect reads and writes and their side-effects on
                  page G7-5021

                           Note
                  Where a register has more that one encoding, a direct write to the register using a particular encoding is not an
                  indirect write to the same register with a different encoding.

                  Where an indirect write is caused by the action of an external agent, such as a debugger, or by a memory-mapped
                  read or write by the PE, then an indirect write by that agent to a register using a particular access mechanism,
                  followed by an indirect read by that agent to the same register using the same access mechanism and address does
                  not need synchronization.

                  Without explicit synchronization to guarantee the order of the accesses, where the same register is accessed by two
                  or more of a System register access instruction, and external agent, and autonomous asynchronous event, or as a
                  result of a memory-mapped access, the behavior must be as if the accesses occurred atomically and in any order.
                  This applies even if the accesses occur simultaneously.

                  For information about the additional synchronization requirements for memory-mapped registers, see
                  Synchronization requirements for AArch64 System registers on page D10-2349.

                  To guarantee the visibility of changes to some registers, additional operations might be required before the Context
                  synchronization event. For such a register, the definition of the register identifies these additional requirements.

                  In this manual, unless the context indicates otherwise:
                  •       Accessing a System register refers to a direct read or write of the register.
                  •       Using a System register refers to an indirect read or write of the register.

                  Registers with some architectural guarantee of ordering or observability

                  For the registers for which Table G7-3 on page G7-5020 shows that the ordering of direct reads is guaranteed,
                  multiple direct reads of a single register, using the same encoding, occur in program order without any explicit
                  ordering.

                  For the registers for which Table G7-3 on page G7-5020 shows that some observability of indirect writes is
                  guaranteed, an indirect write to the register caused by an external agent, an autonomous asynchronous event, or as
                  a result of a memory-mapped write, is both:
                  •      Observable to direct reads of the register, in finite time, without explicit synchronization.
                  •      Observable to subsequent indirect reads of the register without explicit synchronization.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5019
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                    These two sets of registers are similar, as Table G7-3 shows:

                                           Table G7-3 Registers with a guarantee of ordering or observability, VMSAv8-32

                                    Ordering of         Observability of
       Register                                                                 Notes
                                    direct reads        indirect writes

       ISR                          Guaranteed          Guaranteed              Interrupt Status Register

       DBGCLAIMCLR                  Guaranteed          Guaranteed              Debug CLAIM registers

       DBGCLAIMSET                  -                   Guaranteed

       DBGDTRRXint                  Guaranteed          Guaranteed              Debug Communication Channel registers

       DBGDTRTXint                  -                   Guaranteed

       The DCC flags in             Guaranteed          Guaranteed
       DBGDSCRint

       CNTPCT                       Guaranteed          Guaranteed              Generic Timer registers

       CNTP_TVAL                    Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       CNTVCT                       Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       CNTV_TVAL                    Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       CNTHP_TVAL                   Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       PMCCNTR                      Guaranteed          Guaranteed              Performance Monitors Extension registers, if the
                                                                                implementation includes the extension
       PMEVCNTR<n>                  Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       PMXEVCNTR                    Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       PMOVSSET                     Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       PMOVSR                       Guaranteed          Guaranteed

       EDSCR.PipeAdv and the        -                   Guaranteed              Fields of the External Debug Status and Control
       DCC flags in EDSCR                                                       Register

                    In addition to the requirements shown in Table G7-3:

                    •      Indirect writes to the following registers as a result of memory-mapped writes, including accesses by external
                           agents, are required to be observable to the indirect read made in determining the response to a subsequent
                           memory-mapped access without explicit synchronization:
                           —      OSLAR_EL1. OSLAR_EL1 is indirectly read to determine whether the subsequent access is
                                  permitted.
                                           Note
                                  OSLAR_EL1 maps to the AArch32 System register DBGOSLAR.

                           —      EDLAR, if implemented. EDLAR is indirectly read to determine whether a subsequent write or
                                  side-effect of an access is ignored.

                                    Note
                           This requirement is stricter than the general requirement for the observability of indirect writes.

                    •      The requirement that an indirect write to the registers in Table G7-3 is observable to direct reads in finite time
                           does not imply that all observers will observe the indirect write at the same time.

G7-5020                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                        For example, an increment of the system counter is an autonomous asynchronous event that performs an
                        indirect write to the counter. This asynchronous event might generate a timer interrupt request, resulting in a
                        Context synchronization event. When a GIC is used, the timer interrupt might arrive at the GIC after the PE
                        has taken an interrupt request from another source, but before software reads the current interrupt ID from
                        the GIC. This means that the GIC might identify the timer interrupt as the current interrupt. Software must
                        not assume that a subsequent direct read of the counter register is guaranteed to observe the updated value of
                        that register.
                        Although this example uses the counter-timer registers, it applies equally to other registers that might be
                        linked to interrupt requests, including the PMU and Statistical Profiling status registers.

                  •     When the PE is in Debug state, there are synchronization requirements for the Debug Communication
                        Channel and Instruction Transfer registers. See DCC and ITR access in Debug state on page H4-5776.

                  The possibility that direct reads can occur early, in the absence of context synchronization, described in Ordering
                  of reads of System registers on page G7-5024, still applies to the registers listed in Table G7-3 on page G7-5020.

                  Definitions of direct and indirect reads and writes and their side-effects

                  Direct and indirect reads and writes are defined as follows:

                  Direct read     Is a read of a register, using an MRC, MRRC, or STC instruction, that the architecture permits for the
                                  current PE state.
                                  If a direct read of a register has a side-effect of changing the value of a register, the effect of a direct
                                  read on that register is defined to be an indirect write, and has the synchronization requirements of
                                  an indirect write. This means the indirect write is guaranteed to have occurred, and to be visible to
                                  subsequent direct or indirect reads and writes only if synchronization is performed after the direct
                                  read.

                                           Note
                                  The indirect write described here can affect either the register written to by the direct write, or some
                                  other register. The synchronization requirement is the same in both cases.

                  Direct write    Is a write to a register, using an MCR, MCRR, or LDC instruction, that the architecture permits for the
                                  current PE state.
                                  In the following cases, the side-effect of the direct write is defined to be an indirect write of the
                                  affected register, and has the synchronization requirements of an indirect write:
                                  •      If the direct write has a side-effect of changing the value of a register other than the register
                                         accessed by the direct write.
                                  •      If the direct write has a side-effect of changing the value of the register accessed by the direct
                                         write, so that the value in that register might not be the value that the direct write wrote to the
                                         register.
                                  In both cases, this means that the indirect write is not guaranteed to be visible to subsequent direct
                                  or indirect reads and writes unless synchronization is performed after the direct write.

                                           Note
                                  •      As an example of a direct write to a register having an effect that is an indirect write of that
                                         register, writing 1 to a PMCNTENCLR.Px bit is also an indirect write, because if the Px bit
                                         had the value 1 before the direct write, the side-effect of the write changes the value of that
                                         bit to 0.
                                  •      The indirect write described here can affect either the register written to by the direct write,
                                         or some other register. The synchronization requirement is the same in both cases.
                                         For example, writing 1 to a PMCNTENCLR.Px bit that is set to 1 also changes the
                                         corresponding PMCNTENSET.Px bit from 1 to 0. This means that the direct write to the
                                         PMCNTENCLR defines indirect writes to both itself and to the PMCNTENSET.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G7-5021
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                    Indirect read Is a use of the register by an instruction to establish the operating conditions for the instruction.
                                  Examples of operating conditions that might be determined by an indirect read are the translation
                                  table base address, or whether memory accesses are forced to be Non-cacheable.
                                    Indirect reads include situations where the value of one register determines what value is returned
                                    by a second register. This means that any read of the second register is an indirect read of the register
                                    that determines what value is returned.
                                    Indirect reads also include:
                                    •      Reads of the System registers by external agents, such as debuggers, as described in Debug
                                           registers on page G7-5502.
                                    •      Memory-mapped reads of the System registers made by the PE on which the System registers
                                           are implemented.
                                    Where an indirect read of a register has a side-effect of changing the value of a register, that change
                                    is defined to be an indirect write, and has the synchronization requirements of an indirect write.

                    Indirect write Is an update to the value of a register as a consequence of either:
                                   •      An exception, operation, or execution of an instruction that is not a direct write to that
                                          register.
                                   •      The asynchronous operation of an external agent.
                                    This can include:
                                    •     The passage of time, as seen in counters or timers, including performance counters.
                                    •     The assertion of an interrupt.
                                    •     A write from an external agent, such as a debugger.
                                    However, for some registers, the architecture gives some guarantee of visibility without any explicit
                                    synchronization, see Registers with some architectural guarantee of ordering or observability on
                                    page G7-5019.

                                             Note
                                    Taking an exception is a context-synchronizing operation. Therefore, any indirect write performed
                                    as part of an exception entry does not require additional synchronization. This includes the indirect
                                    writes to the registers that report the exception, as described in Exception reporting in a VMSAv8-32
                                    implementation on page G4-4944.

G7.1.3        Principles of the ID scheme for fields in ID registers
                    The ARM architecture specifies a number of ID registers that are characterized as comprising a set of 4-bit ID fields,
                    Each ID field identifies the presence, and possibly the level of support for, a particular feature in an implementation
                    of the architecture. These fields follow an architectural model that aids their use by software and provides future
                    compatibility. This section describes that model. AArch32 ID registers to which this scheme applies on
                    page G7-5023 identifies the set of ID registers that are accessible from AArch32 state.

                    A small number of ID fields do not follow the scheme described in this section. In these cases, the field description
                    states that it does not follow this scheme.

                             Note
                    •      The ID fields described here are distinct from register fields that enumerate the number of resources, such as
                           the number of breakpoints, watchpoints, or performance monitors, or the amount of memory.

                    •      ID fields that do not follow this scheme include the ID_AA64DFR0_EL1.PMUVer,
                           ID_DFR0_EL1.PerfMon, ID_DFR0.PerfMon and EDDFR.PMUVer fields, see Alternative ID scheme used
                           for the Performance Monitors Extension version on page G7-5024.

                    •      The presence of an ID field for a feature does not imply that the feature is optional.

                    To provide forward compatibility, software can rely on the features of these fields that are described in this section.

G7-5022                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                  The ID fields, which are either signed or unsigned, use increasing numerical values to indicate increases in
                  functionality. Therefore, if a value of 0x1 indicates the presence of some instructions, then the value 0x2 will indicate
                  the presence of those instructions plus some additional instructions or functionality. This means software can be
                  written in the form:

                  if (value >= number) {        // do something that relies on the value of the feature}

                  For ID fields where the value 0x0 defines that a feature is not present, the field holds an unsigned value. This covers
                  the vast majority of such fields.

                  In a few cases, the architecture has been changed to permit implementations to exclude a feature that has previously
                  been required and for which no ID field has been defined. In these cases, a new ID field is defined and:
                  •      The field holds a signed value.
                  •      The field value 0xF indicates that the feature is not implemented.
                  •      The field value 0x0 indicates that the feature is implemented.
                  •      Software that depends on the feature can use the test:
                             if value >= 0 {             // Software features that depend on the presence of the hardware
                         feature    }

                  In some cases, it has been decided retrospectively that the increase in functionality between two consecutive
                  numerical values is too great, and it is desirable to permit an intermediate degree of functionality, and the means to
                  discover this. This is done by the introduction of a fractional field that both:
                  •     Is referred to in the definition of the original field.
                  •     Applies only when the original field is at the lower value of the step.

                  In principle, a fractional field can be used for two different fractional steps, with different meanings associated with
                  each of these steps. For this reason, a fractional field must be interpreted in the context of the field to which it relates
                  and the value of that field. Example G7-1 shows the use of such a field.

                                                                         Example G7-1 Example of the use of a fractional field

                  For a field describing some class of functionality:
                  •      The value 0x1 was defined as indicating that item A is present.
                  •      The value 0x2 was defined as indicating that items B and C are present, in addition to item A.
                  Subsequently, it might be necessary to introduce a second ID field to indicate that A and B only are present. This
                  new field is a fractional field, and might be defined as having the value 0x1 when A and B only are present. This
                  fractional field is valid only when the original ID field has the value 0x1.
                  This approach means that:
                  •     Software that depends on the test if (value >= 0x2) can rely on features A, B, and C being present,
                  •     Software that depends on the test if (value >= 0x1) can rely on feature A being present.
                  •     If new software needs to check only that features A and B are present, then it can test:
                             if (value >= 0x2 || (value == 0x1 && fractional_value >= 0x1)) {                     // Software features
                         that depend on A and B only    }

                  A fractional field uses the same approach of increasing numerical values indicating increasing functionality, and the
                  fractional approach can also be applied recursively to fractional fields.

                  Unused ID fields, and fractional fields that are not applicable, are RES0 to allow their future use when features, or
                  fractional implementation options, are added.

                  AArch32 ID registers to which this scheme applies
                  •      The Auxiliary Feature register ID_AFR0.

                  •      The Processor Feature registers ID_PFR0 and ID_PFR1.

                  •      The Debug Feature register ID_DFR0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G7-5023
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                    •      The Memory Model Feature registers ID_MMFR0, ID_MMFR1, ID_MMFR2, ID_MMFR3, and
                           ID_MMFR4.

                    •      The Instruction Set Attribute registers ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR3, ID_ISAR4, and
                           ID_ISAR5.

                    •      The Media and VFP Feature registers MVFR0, MVFR1, and MVFR2.

                             Note
                    Principles of the ID scheme for fields in ID registers on page D10-2354 includes information about the AArch64
                    System registers and the memory-mapped registers to which this scheme applies.

                    Alternative ID scheme used for the Performance Monitors Extension version
                    The ID_AA64DFR0_EL1.PMUVer, ID_DFR0_EL1.PerfMon, ID_DFR0.PerfMon, and EDDFR.PMUVer fields,
                    which identify the version of the Performance Monitors Extension, do not follow the standard ID scheme. Software
                    must treat these fields as follows:
                    •      The value 0xF indicates that the ARM-architected Performance Monitors Extension is not implemented.
                    •      If the field value is not 0xF the field is treated as an unsigned value, as described for the standard ID scheme.
                    This means that software that depends on the implementation of a particular version of the ARM Performance
                    Monitors Extension must be written in the form:

                        if (value != 0xF and value >= number) {              // do something that relies on version 'number' of the
                    feature    }

                    For these fields, ARM deprecates use of the value 0xF in new implementations.

G7.1.4        About AArch32 System register accesses
                    The following subsections give more information about accesses to the AArch32 System registers:
                    •     Ordering of reads of System registers.
                    •     Accessing 32-bit System registers on page G7-5025.
                    •     Accessing 64-bit System registers on page G7-5026.

                    Ordering of reads of System registers
                    Reads of the System registers can occur out of order with respect to earlier instructions executed on the same PE,
                    provided that both:

                    •      Any data dependencies between the instructions, as specified in Synchronization of changes to AArch32
                           System registers on page G7-5016, including read-after-read dependencies, are respected.

                    •      The reads to the register do not occur earlier than the most recent Context synchronization event to its
                           architectural position in the instruction stream.

                             Note
                    In particular, the values read from System registers that hold self-incrementing counts, such as the Performance
                    Monitors counters or the Generic Timer counter or timers, could be accessed from any time after the previous
                    Context synchronization event. For example, where a memory access is used to communicate a read of such a
                    counter, an ISB must be inserted between the read of the memory location that is known to have returned its data,
                    either as a result of a condition on that data or of the read having completed, and the read of the counter, if it is
                    necessary that the counter returns a count value after the memory communication.

G7-5024                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                             G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                  Accessing 32-bit System registers
                  Software accesses most 32-bit System registers using the generic MCR and MRC System register access instructions,
                  specifying some or all of the parameters {coproc, CRn, opc1, CRm, opc2}, where:
                  coproc         Identifies the primary region of the System register encoding space. Takes one of the values:
                                 p14          Encoded as 0b1110.
                                 p15          Encoded as 0b1111.
                  CRn            Takes a value in the range c0- c15, encoded the corresponding 4-bit binary value, 0b0000 - 0b1111.
                                 In the (coproc == 0b1110) encoding space, the opc1 value identifies the System register functional
                                 group, and CRn is the most significant identifier for the required register within that group.
                                 In the (coproc == 0b1111) encoding space, CRn is the most significant identifier for the required
                                 register.
                  opc1           Takes a value in the range 0-7, encoded as its 3-bit binary value.
                                 In the (coproc == 0b1110) encoding space, the opc1 value identifies the System register functional
                                 group, and can take the following values:
                                 0            Debug System registers.
                                 1            Trace System registers.
                                 7            Legacy Jazelle System registers.
                                 In the (coproc == 0b1111) encoding space, opc1 can take any value in the range 0-7.
                  CRm            Takes a value in the range c0- c15, encoded the corresponding 4-bit binary value, 0b0000 - 0b1111.
                  opc2           Takes a value in the range 0-7, encoded as its 3-bit binary value.
                                 opc2 is optional in the MCR and MRC instruction syntax, and if no value is specified the encoding
                                 defaults to 0b000.
                  Rt             A general-purpose register to hold a 32-bit value to transfer to or from the System register. Takes a
                                 value in the range R0 - R14, encoded as the corresponding 4-bit binary value, 0b0000 - 0b1110.

                  This means an MCR or MRC access to a specific 32-bit System register uses:
                  •     A unique combination of coproc, CRn, opc1, CRm, and opc2, to specify the required System register.
                  •     A general-purpose register, Rt, for the transferred 32-bit value.

                  See also:
                  •      MCR on page F5-3503.
                  •      MRC on page F5-3525.

                  A small number of AArch32 debug System registers are accessed using LDC or STC instructions. In these cases, the
                  register to be accessed is identified in the instruction syntax by the use of p14, c5 where:
                  p14              Identifies that the access is to the (coproc == 0b1110) encoding space.
                  c5               Identifies the target debug System register.

                  See the instruction descriptions:
                  •     LDC (immediate) on page F5-3394.
                  •     LDC (literal) on page F5-3396.
                  •     STC on page F5-3732.

                  The only uses of LDC and STC permitted in ARMv8-A are:

                  •     An LDC access to load data from memory to DBGDTRTXint, see LDC (immediate) on page F5-3394 and LDC
                        (literal) on page F5-3396.

                  •     An STC access to store data to memory from DBGDTRRXint, see STC on page F5-3732.
                  A small number of AArch32 System registers are accessed using MRS, MSR, VMRS, or VMSR instructions, see the
                  appropriate register and instruction description for more information, see:
                  •     MRS on page F5-3529.
                  •     MSR (immediate) on page F5-3539,
                  •     MSR (register) on page F5-3541.
                  •     VMRS on page F6-4291.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5025
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.1 About the AArch32 System registers

                    •      VMSR on page F6-4294.

                             Note
                    •      For example:
                           —     The APSR, CPSR, and SPSR are accessed using MRS or MSR instructions.
                           —     The MVFR0, MVFR1, and MVFR2 are accessed using VMRS or VMSR instructions.

                    •      In addition, the banked register forms of the MRS and MSR instructions can be used to access some System
                           registers associated with PE modes other than the mode in which the PE is currently executing, see MRS
                           (Banked register) on page F5-3531 and MSR (Banked register) on page F5-3535.

                    Accessing 64-bit System registers
                    Software accesses a 64-bit System register using the generic MCRR and MRRC System register access instructions,
                    specifying the parameters {coproc, CRm, opc1}, where:
                    coproc          Identifies the primary region of the System register encoding space. Takes one of the values:
                                    p14          Encoded as 0b1110.
                                    p15          Encoded as 0b1111.
                    CRm             Takes a value in the range c0- c15, encoded the corresponding 4-bit binary value, 0b0000 - 0b1111.
                                    In the (coproc == 0b1110) encoding space, the opc1 value identifies the System register functional
                                    group, and CRm is the most significant identifier for the required register within that group.
                                    In the (coproc == 0b1111) encoding space, CRm is the most significant identifier for the required
                                    register.
                    opc1            Takes a value in the range 0-15, encoded as its 3-bit binary value.
                                    In the (coproc == 0b1110) encoding space, the opc1 value identifies the System register functional
                                    group, and can take the following values:
                                    0            Debug System registers.
                                    1            Trace System registers.
                                    In the (coproc == 0b1111) encoding space, opc1 can take any value in the range 0-15.
                    Rt              A general-purpose register to hold bits[31:0] of the value to transfer to or from the System register.
                                    Takes a value in the range R0 - R14, encoded as the corresponding 4-bit binary value, 0b0000 - 0b1110.
                    Rt2             A general-purpose register to hold bits[63:32] of the value to transfer to or from the System register.
                                    Takes a value in the range R0 - R14, encoded as the corresponding 4-bit binary value, 0b0000 - 0b1110.

                    This means an MCRR or MRRC access to a specific 64-bit System register uses:
                    •     A unique combination of coproc, CRm and opc1, to specify the required 64-bit System register.
                    •     Two general-purpose registers, each holding 32 bits of the value to transfer.

                    This means a PE can access a 64-bit System register using:
                    •     An MCRR instruction to write to a System register, see MCRR on page F5-3505.
                    •     An MRRC instruction to read a System register, see MCRR on page F5-3505.
                    When using an MCRR or MRRC instruction the System register access is 64-bit atomic.

                    Some 64-bit registers also have an MCR and MRC encoding. The MCR and MRC encodings for these registers access the
                    least significant 32 bits of the register. For example, to access the PAR, software can:
                    •       Use the following instructions to access all 64 bits of the register:
                           MRRC p15, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c7        ; Read 64-bit PAR into Rt (low word) and Rt2 (high word)
                           MCRR p15, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c7        ; Write Rt (low word) and Rt2 (high word) to 64-bit PAR
                    •      Use the following instructions to access the least-significant 32 bits of the register:
                           MRC p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c4, 0        ; Read PAR[31:0] into Rt
                           MCR p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c4, 0        ; Write Rt to PAR[31:0]

G7-5026                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2       General system control registers
                  This section lists the System registers in AArch32 state that are not part of one of the other listed groups.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G7-5027
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.1        ACTLR, Auxiliary Control Register
                    The ACTLR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED configuration and control options for execution at EL1 and
                                   EL0.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register ACTLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   ACTLR_EL1[31:0].
                                   Some bits might define global configuration settings, and be common to the Secure and Non-secure
                                   instances of the register.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   ACTLR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ACTLR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                             0

                                                      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the ACTLR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2   CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c0, 1    000       001    0001   1111       0000

G7-5028                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                Control                  Accessibility
                                   Configuration                                                                        Instance
                                                                E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1     EL2     EL3

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x       x        0       -       n/a     n/a     RW     ACTLR_s

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW      RW     ACTLR_ns

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      RW     ACTLR_ns

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x       x        0       -       RW      n/a     n/a    ACTLR

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x       0        1       -       RW      RW      n/a    ACTLR

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      n/a    ACTLR

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x       x        0       -       RW      n/a     n/a    ACTLR

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW      n/a    ACTLR

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      n/a    ACTLR

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TACR==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2 using
                               AArch64.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TACR==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2 using
                               AArch64.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TAC==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5029
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.2        ACTLR2, Auxiliary Control Register 2
                    The ACTLR2 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides additional space to the ACTLR register to hold IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED trap
                                   functionality for execution at EL1 and EL0.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register ACTLR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   ACTLR_EL1[63:32].
                                   In ARMv8.0 and ARMv8.1, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this register is implemented,
                                   or whether it causes UNDEFINED exceptions when accessed. The implementation of this register can
                                   be detected by examining ID_MMFR4.AC2.
                                   From ARMv8.2 this register must be implemented.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   ACTLR2 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ACTLR2 bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                             0

                                                      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the ACTLR2
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2   CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c0, 3    000       011    0001   1111       0000

G7-5030                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                              Control                  Accessibility
                                 Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                              E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1      EL2   EL3

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -        RW       n/a   n/a     ACTLR2

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -        RW       RW    n/a     ACTLR2

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -        n/a      RW    n/a     ACTLR2

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -        RW       n/a   n/a     ACTLR2

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -        RW       RW    n/a     ACTLR2

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -        n/a      RW    n/a     ACTLR2

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -        n/a      n/a   RW      ACTLR2_s

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -        RW       RW    RW      ACTLR2_ns

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -        n/a      RW    RW      ACTLR2_ns

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TACR==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2 using
                               AArch64.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TACR==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2 using
                               AArch64.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TAC==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5031
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.3        ADFSR, Auxiliary Data Fault Status Register
                    The ADFSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Provides additional IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault status information for Data Abort exceptions
                                    taken to EL1 modes, and EL3 modes when EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register ADFSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    AFSR0_EL1.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    ADFSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ADFSR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                   0

                                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the ADFSR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c5, c1, 0    000       000     0101     1111        0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                  Control                  Accessibility
                                     Configuration                                                                           Instance
                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1     EL2     EL3

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x       x        0       -       RW      n/a     n/a       ADFSR

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x       0        1       -       RW      RW      n/a       ADFSR

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      n/a       ADFSR

G7-5032                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                                               Control                  Accessibility
                                  Configuration                                                                        Instance
                                                               E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1     EL2     EL3

                                  EL3 is using AArch64.        x       x        0       -       RW      n/a     n/a    ADFSR

                                  EL3 is using AArch64.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW      n/a    ADFSR

                                  EL3 is using AArch64.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      n/a    ADFSR

                                  EL3 is using AArch32.        x       x        0       -       n/a     n/a     RW     ADFSR_s

                                  EL3 is using AArch32.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW      RW     ADFSR_ns

                                  EL3 is using AArch32.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      RW     ADFSR_ns

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5033
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.4        AIDR, Auxiliary ID Register
                    The AIDR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Provides IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED identification information.
                                    The value of this register must be used in conjunction with the value of MIDR.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register AIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register AIDR_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                    AIDR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The AIDR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the AIDR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                 <syntax>                  opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                 p15, 1, <Rt>, c0, c0, 7   001      111        0000         1111         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE     NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x       0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                  x        0       1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                  x        1       1       -          n/a          RO     RO

G7-5034                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5035
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.5        AIFSR, Auxiliary Instruction Fault Status Register
                    The AIFSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Provides additional IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault status information for Prefetch Abort
                                    exceptions taken to EL1 modes, and EL3 modes when EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register AIFSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    AFSR1_EL1.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    AIFSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The AIFSR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                    0

                                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the AIFSR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                  <syntax>                  opc1    opc2     CRn     coproc      CRm

                                                                  p15, 0, <Rt>, c5, c1, 1   000     001      0101    1111        0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                     Control                 Accessibility
                                      Configuration                                                                           Instance
                                                                     E2H      TGE      NS    EL0    EL1      EL2    EL3

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.          x        x        0     -      n/a      n/a    RW        AIFSR_s

                                      EL3 is not implemented.        x        x        0     -      RW       n/a    n/a       AIFSR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.        x        0        1     -      RW       RW     n/a       AIFSR

G7-5036                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                                                Control                  Accessibility
                                   Configuration                                                                          Instance
                                                                E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1     EL2     EL3

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a     AIFSR

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -        RW      n/a     n/a     AIFSR

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -        RW      RW      n/a     AIFSR

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a     AIFSR

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -        RW      RW      RW      AIFSR_ns

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      RW      AIFSR_ns

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5037
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.6        AMAIR0, Auxiliary Memory Attribute Indirection Register 0
                    The AMAIR0 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    When using the Long-descriptor format translation tables for stage 1 translations, provides
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes for the memory regions specified by MAIR0.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register AMAIR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    AMAIR_EL1[31:0].
                                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to AMAIR0(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                    signal is asserted HIGH.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    AMAIR0 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The AMAIR0 bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                               0

                                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    This register is RES0 in the following cases:

                    •      When an implementation does not provide any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes.

                    •      When the Long-descriptor translation table format is not used.

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32:

                    •      AMAIR0(S) gives the value for memory accesses from Secure state.

                    •      AMAIR0(NS) gives the value for memory accesses from Non-secure states other than Hyp mode.

                    Any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes are additional qualifiers for the memory locations and must not
                    change the architected behavior specified by MAIR0 and MAIR1.

                    In a typical implementation, AMAIR0 and AMAIR1 split into eight one-byte fields, corresponding to the
                    MAIRn.Attr<n> fields, but the architecture does not require them to do so.

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the AMAIR0
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5038                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                 G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                     G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1         opc2     CRn          coproc      CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c10, c3, 0       000       000      1010         1111        0011

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                              Control                  Accessibility
                                 Configuration                                                                                    Instance
                                                              E2H      TGE      NS     EL0         EL1      EL2      EL3

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -           RW       n/a      n/a          AMAIR0

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -           RW       RW       n/a          AMAIR0

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -           n/a      RW       n/a          AMAIR0

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -           RW       n/a      n/a          AMAIR0

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -           RW       RW       n/a          AMAIR0

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -           n/a      RW       n/a          AMAIR0

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -           RW       RW       RW           AMAIR0_ns

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -           n/a      RW       RW           AMAIR0_ns

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -           n/a      n/a      RW           AMAIR0_s

                  When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to AMAIR0_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is
                  asserted HIGH.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                G7-5039
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.7        AMAIR1, Auxiliary Memory Attribute Indirection Register 1
                    The AMAIR1 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    When using the Long-descriptor format translation tables for stage 1 translations, provides
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes for the memory regions specified by MAIR1.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register AMAIR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    AMAIR_EL1[63:32].
                                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to AMAIR1(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                    signal is asserted HIGH.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    AMAIR1 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The AMAIR1 bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                               0

                                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    This register is RES0 in the following cases:

                    •      When an implementation does not provide any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes.

                    •      When the Long-descriptor translation table format is not used.

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32:

                    •      AMAIR1(S) gives the value for memory accesses from Secure state.

                    •      AMAIR1(NS) gives the value for memory accesses from Non-secure states other than Hyp mode.

                    Any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes are additional qualifiers for the memory locations and must not
                    change the architected behavior specified by MAIR0 and MAIR1.

                    In a typical implementation, AMAIR0 and AMAIR1 split into eight one-byte fields, corresponding to the
                    MAIRn.Attr<n> fields, but the architecture does not require them to do so.

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the AMAIR1
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5040                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                 G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                     G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1         opc2     CRn          coproc      CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c10, c3, 1       000       001      1010         1111        0011

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                              Control                  Accessibility
                                 Configuration                                                                                    Instance
                                                              E2H      TGE      NS     EL0         EL1      EL2      EL3

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -           RW       n/a      n/a          AMAIR1

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -           RW       RW       n/a          AMAIR1

                                 EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -           n/a      RW       n/a          AMAIR1

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -           RW       n/a      n/a          AMAIR1

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -           RW       RW       n/a          AMAIR1

                                 EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -           n/a      RW       n/a          AMAIR1

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -           RW       RW       RW           AMAIR1_ns

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -           n/a      RW       RW           AMAIR1_ns

                                 EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -           n/a      n/a      RW           AMAIR1_s

                  When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to AMAIR1_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is
                  asserted HIGH.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                G7-5041
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.8        APSR, Application Program Status Register
                    The APSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Hold program status and control information.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                    Attributes
                                       APSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The APSR bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26                      20 19         16 15                                 5 4 3             0

                    N Z C V Q                 RES0                  GE                     RES0                          RES0

                                                                                                                                            RES1

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Negative condition flag. Set to bit[31] of the result of the last flag-setting instruction. If the result is
                                       regarded as a two's complement signed integer, then N is set to 1 if the result was negative, and N
                                       is set to 0 if the result was positive or zero.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Zero condition flag. Set to 1 if the result of the last flag-setting instruction was zero, and to 0
                                       otherwise. A result of zero often indicates an equal result from a comparison.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Carry condition flag. Set to 1 if the last flag-setting instruction resulted in a carry condition, for
                                       example an unsigned overflow on an addition.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Overflow condition flag. Set to 1 if the last flag-setting instruction resulted in an overflow condition,
                                       for example a signed overflow on an addition.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Cumulative saturation bit. Set to 1 to indicate that overflow or saturation occurred in some
                                       instructions.

                    Bits [26:20]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    GE, bits [19:16]
                                       Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                    Bits [15:5]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    Bit [4]
                                       Reserved, RES1.

G7-5042                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  Bits [3:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5043
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.9        ATS12NSOPR, Address Translate Stages 1 and 2 Non-secure Only PL1 Read
                    The ATS12NSOPR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 and 2 address translations as defined for PL1 and the Non-secure state, with
                                    permissions as if reading from the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS12NSOPR is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS12NSOPR input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                        Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. The resulting address is the PA that is the output address of the
                                    stage 2 translation.

                    Executing the ATS12NSOPR instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 4    000      100        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0      -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                  x        0        1      -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                  x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, execution of ATS12NSOPR in Secure EL1 using AArch32 is trapped
                    as an exception to EL3.

G7-5044                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5045
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.10       ATS12NSOPW, Address Translate Stages 1 and 2 Non-secure Only PL1 Write
                    The ATS12NSOPW characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 and 2 address translations as defined for PL1 and the Non-secure state, with
                                    permissions as if writing to the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS12NSOPW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS12NSOPW input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                        Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. The resulting address is the PA that is the output address of the
                                    stage 2 translation.

                    Executing the ATS12NSOPW instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 5    000      101        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0      -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                  x        0        1      -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                  x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, execution of ATS12NSOPW in Secure EL1 using AArch32 is trapped
                    as an exception to EL3.

G7-5046                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5047
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.11       ATS12NSOUR, Address Translate Stages 1 and 2 Non-secure Only Unprivileged Read
                    The ATS12NSOUR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 and 2 address translations as defined for PL0 and the Non-secure state, with
                                    permissions as if reading from the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS12NSOUR is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS12NSOUR input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                        Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. The resulting address is the PA that is the output address of the
                                    stage 2 translation.

                    Executing the ATS12NSOUR instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 6    000      110        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0      -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                  x        0        1      -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                  x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, execution of ATS12NSOUR in Secure EL1 using AArch32 is trapped
                    as an exception to EL3.

G7-5048                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5049
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.12       ATS12NSOUW, Address Translate Stages 1 and 2 Non-secure Only Unprivileged Write
                    The ATS12NSOUW characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 and 2 address translations as defined for PL0 and the Non-secure state, with
                                    permissions as if writing to the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS12NSOUW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS12NSOUW input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                        Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. The resulting address is the PA that is the output address of the
                                    stage 2 translation.

                    Executing the ATS12NSOUW instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 7    000      111        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0      -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                  x        0        1      -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                  x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, execution of ATS12NSOUW in Secure EL1 using AArch32 is trapped
                    as an exception to EL3.

G7-5050                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5051
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.13       ATS1CPR, Address Translate Stage 1 Current state PL1 Read
                    The ATS1CPR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 address translation as defined for PL1 and the current Security state, with
                                    permissions as if reading from the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1CPR is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1CPR input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. In an implementation that includes EL2, when executed in
                                    Non-secure state, the resulting address is the IPA that is the output address of the stage 1 translation.
                                    Otherwise, the resulting address is a PA.

                    Executing the ATS1CPR instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 0     000      000        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0        1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5052                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5053
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.14       ATS1CPRP, Address Translate Stage 1 Current state PL1 Read PAN
                    The ATS1CPRP characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    When ARMv8.2-ATS1E1 is implemented, performs a stage 1 address translation at PL1 and in the
                                    current Security state, where the value of PSTATE.PAN determines if a read from a location will
                                    generate a permission fault for a privileged access.

                    Configurations
                                    This instruction is introduced in ARMv8.2.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1CPRP is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1CPRP input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. In an implementation that includes EL2, when executed in
                                    Non-secure state, the resulting address is the IPA that is the output address of the stage 1 translation.
                                    Otherwise, the resulting address is a PA.

                    Executing the ATS1CPRP instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c9, 0     000      000        0111         1111         1001

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0        1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5054                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5055
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.15       ATS1CPW, Address Translate Stage 1 Current state PL1 Write
                    The ATS1CPW characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 address translation as defined for PL1 and the current Security state, with
                                    permissions as if writing to the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1CPW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1CPW input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. In an implementation that includes EL2, when executed in
                                    Non-secure state, the resulting address is the IPA that is the output address of the stage 1 translation.
                                    Otherwise, the resulting address is a PA.

                    Executing the ATS1CPW instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 1     000      001        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0        1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5056                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5057
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.16       ATS1CPWP, Address Translate Stage 1 Current state PL1 Write PAN
                    The ATS1CPWP characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    When ARMv8.2-ATS1E1 is implemented, performs a stage 1 address translation at PL1 and in the
                                    current Security state, where the value of PSTATE.PAN determines if a write to the location will
                                    generate a permission fault for a privileged access.

                    Configurations
                                    This instruction is introduced in ARMv8.2.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1CPWP is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1CPWP input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. In an implementation that includes EL2, when executed in
                                    Non-secure state, the resulting address is the IPA that is the output address of the stage 1 translation.
                                    Otherwise, the resulting address is a PA.

                    Executing the ATS1CPWP instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c9, 1     000      001        0111         1111         1001

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0        1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5058                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5059
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.17       ATS1CUR, Address Translate Stage 1 Current state Unprivileged Read
                    The ATS1CUR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 address translation as defined for PL0 and the current Security state, with
                                    permissions as if reading from the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1CUR is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1CUR input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. In an implementation that includes EL2, when executed in
                                    Non-secure state, the resulting address is the IPA that is the output address of the stage 1 translation.
                                    Otherwise, the resulting address is a PA.

                    Executing the ATS1CUR instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 2     000      010        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0        1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5060                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5061
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.18       ATS1CUW, Address Translate Stage 1 Current state Unprivileged Write
                    The ATS1CUW characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 address translation as defined for PL0 and the current Security state, with
                                    permissions as if writing to the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1CUW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1CUW input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. In an implementation that includes EL2, when executed in
                                    Non-secure state, the resulting address is the IPA that is the output address of the stage 1 translation.
                                    Otherwise, the resulting address is a PA.

                    Executing the ATS1CUW instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 3     000      011        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0        1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5062                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5063
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.19       ATS1HR, Address Translate Stage 1 Hyp mode Read
                    The ATS1HR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 address translation as defined for PL2 and the Non-secure state, with permissions
                                    as if reading from the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1HR is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1HR input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                        Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. The resulting address is the PA that is the output address of the
                                    translation.

                    Executing the ATS1HR instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 4, <Rt>, c7, c8, 0    100      000        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0      -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                  x        0        1      -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                  x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5064                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5065
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.20       ATS1HW, Address Translate Stage 1 Hyp mode Write
                    The ATS1HW characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Performs stage 1 address translation as defined for PL2 and the Non-secure state, with permissions
                                    as if writing to the given virtual address.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    ATS1HW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ATS1HW input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                        Input address for translation

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Input address for translation. The resulting address can be read from the PAR.
                                    This instruction takes a VA as input. The resulting address is the PA that is the output address of the
                                    translation.

                    Executing the ATS1HW instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 4, <Rt>, c7, c8, 1    100      001        0111         1111         1000

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0      -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                  x        0        1      -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                  x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5066                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5067
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.21       BPIALL, Branch Predictor Invalidate All
                    The BPIALL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Invalidate all entries from branch predictors.

                    Configurations
                                    In an implementation where the branch predictors are architecturally invisible, this instruction can
                                    execute as a NOP.

                    Attributes
                                    BPIALL is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    BPIALL ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to the
                    register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the BPIALL instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c5, 6   000       110        0111         1111         0101

                    The PE ignores the value of <Rt>. Software does not have to write a value to this register before issuing this
                    instruction.

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a BPIALLIS.

G7-5068                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5069
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.22       BPIALLIS, Branch Predictor Invalidate All, Inner Shareable
                    The BPIALLIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Invalidate all entries from branch predictors Inner Shareable.

                    Configurations
                                     In an implementation where the branch predictors are architecturally invisible, this instruction can
                                     execute as a NOP.

                    Attributes
                                     BPIALLIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    BPIALLIS ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the BPIALLIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1        opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c1, 6   000         110        0111         1111         0001

                    The PE ignores the value of <Rt>. Software does not have to write a value to this register before issuing this
                    instruction.

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                     Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE         NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x           0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0           1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1           1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

G7-5070                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5071
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.23       BPIMVA, Branch Predictor Invalidate by VA
                    The BPIMVA characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Invalidate virtual address from branch predictors.

                    Configurations
                                    In an implementation where the branch predictors are architecturally invisible, this instruction can
                                    execute as a NOP.

                    Attributes
                                    BPIMVA is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The BPIMVA input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                       0

                                                              Virtual address to use

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Virtual address to use.

                    Executing the BPIMVA instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                 <syntax>                  opc1    opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                 p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c5, 7   000     111        0111         1111         0101

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H     TGE    NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x       x      0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x       0      1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x       1      1       -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5072                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5073
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.24       CCSIDR, Current Cache Size ID Register
                    The CCSIDR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Provides information about the architecture of the currently selected cache.
                                     When ARMv8.3-CCIDX is implemented, this register is used in conjunction with CCSIDR2.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register CCSIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     CCSIDR_EL1[31:0].
                                     The implementation includes one CCSIDR for each cache that it can access. CSSELR and the
                                     Security state select which Cache Size ID Register is accessible.

                    Attributes
                                     CCSIDR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CCSIDR bit assignments are:

                    When ID_MMFR4.CCIDX==0000:

                    31       28 27                                             13 12                             3 2       0

                    UNKNOWN                         NumSets                                 Associativity          LineSize

                    In ARMv8.0, ARMv8.1, and ARMv8.2, ID_MMFR4.CCIDX has an Effective value of 0000 and
                    ID_MMFR4_EL1.CCIDX has an Effective value of 0000.

                    UNKNOWN, bits [31:28]
                                     Reserved, UNKNOWN.

                    NumSets, bits [27:13]
                                     (Number of sets in cache) - 1, therefore a value of 0 indicates 1 set in the cache. The number of sets
                                     does not have to be a power of 2.

                    Associativity, bits [12:3]
                                     (Associativity of cache) - 1, therefore a value of 0 indicates an associativity of 1. The associativity
                                     does not have to be a power of 2.

                    LineSize, bits [2:0]
                                     (Log2(Number of bytes in cache line)) - 4. For example:
                                     For a line length of 16 bytes: Log2(16) = 4, LineSize entry = 0. This is the minimum line length.
                                     For a line length of 32 bytes: Log2(32) = 5, LineSize entry = 1.

                             Note
                    The parameters NumSets, Associativity, and LineSize in these registers define the architecturally visible parameters
                    that are required for the cache maintenance by Set/Way instructions. They are not guaranteed to represent the actual
                    microarchitectural features of a design. You cannot make any inference about the actual sizes of caches based on
                    these parameters.

G7-5074                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                          Note
                  The parameters NumSets, Associativity, and LineSize in these registers define the architecturally visible parameters
                  that are required for the cache maintenance by Set/Way instructions. They are not guaranteed to represent the actual
                  microarchitectural features of a design. You cannot make any inference about the actual sizes of caches based on
                  these parameters.

                  When ID_MMFR4.CCIDX==0001:

                  31                     24 23                                                                3 2        0

                          RES0                                         Associativity                               LineSize

                  In ARMv8.0, ARMv8.1, and ARMv8.2, ID_MMFR4.CCIDX has an Effective value of 0000 and
                  ID_MMFR4_EL1.CCIDX has an Effective value of 0000.

                  Bits [31:24]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Associativity, bits [23:3]
                                  (Associativity of cache) - 1, therefore a value of 0 indicates an associativity of 1. The associativity
                                  does not have to be a power of 2.

                  LineSize, bits [2:0]
                                  (Log2(Number of bytes in cache line)) - 4. For example:
                                  For a line length of 16 bytes: Log2(16) = 4, LineSize entry = 0. This is the minimum line length.
                                  For a line length of 32 bytes: Log2(32) = 5, LineSize entry = 1.

                          Note
                  The parameters NumSets, Associativity, and LineSize in these registers define the architecturally visible parameters
                  that are required for the cache maintenance by Set/Way instructions. They are not guaranteed to represent the actual
                  microarchitectural features of a design. You cannot make any inference about the actual sizes of caches based on
                  these parameters.

                          Note
                  The parameters NumSets, Associativity, and LineSize in these registers define the architecturally visible parameters
                  that are required for the cache maintenance by Set/Way instructions. They are not guaranteed to represent the actual
                  microarchitectural features of a design. You cannot make any inference about the actual sizes of caches based on
                  these parameters.

                  Accessing the CCSIDR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn        coproc    CRm

                                                             p15, 1, <Rt>, c0, c0, 0     001       000      0000       1111      0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5075
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RO    RO

                    If CSSELR.Level is programmed to a cache level that is not implemented, then on a read of the CCSIDR the
                    behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and can be one of the following:

                    •      The CCSIDR read is treated as NOP.

                    •      The CCSIDR read is UNDEFINED.

                    •      The CCSIDR read returns an UNKNOWN value.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5076                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.25     CCSIDR2, Current Cache Size ID Register 2
                  The CCSIDR2 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 When ARMv8.3-CCIDX is implemented, in conjunction with CCSIDR, provides information about
                                 the architecture of the currently selected cache.
                                 When ARMv8.3-CCIDX is not implemented, this register is not implemented.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register CCSIDR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CCSIDR_EL1[63:32].
                                 The implementation includes one CCSIDR2 for each cache that it can access. CSSELR and the
                                 Security state select which Cache Size ID Register is accessible.
                                 This register is introduced in ARMv8.3.

                  Attributes
                                 CCSIDR2 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CCSIDR2 bit assignments are:

                  31                   24 23                                                                          0

                          RES0                                              NumSets

                  Bits [31:24]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  NumSets, bits [23:0]
                                 (Number of sets in cache) - 1, therefore a value of 0 indicates 1 set in the cache. The number of sets
                                 does not have to be a power of 2.

                  Accessing the CCSIDR2
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                            p15, 1, <Rt>, c0, c0, 2    001       010      0000     1111        0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5077
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RO    RO

                    If CSSELR.Level is programmed to a cache level that is not implemented, then on a read of the CCSIDR2 the
                    behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and can be one of the following:

                    •      The CCSIDR2 read is treated as NOP.

                    •      The CCSIDR2 read is UNDEFINED.

                    •      The CCSIDR2 read returns an UNKNOWN value.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5078                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.26     CLIDR, Cache Level ID Register
                  The CLIDR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Identifies the type of cache, or caches, that are implemented at each level and can be managed using
                                  the architected cache maintenance instructions that operate by set/way, up to a maximum of seven
                                  levels. Also identifies the Level of Coherence (LoC) and Level of Unification (LoU) for the cache
                                  hierarchy.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register CLIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  CLIDR_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                  CLIDR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CLIDR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29     27 26    24 23      21 20     18 17     15 14    12 11     9 8       6 5       3 2      0

                  ICB    LoUU      LoC      LoUIS      Ctype7      Ctype6   Ctype5   Ctype4   Ctype3     Ctype2   Ctype1

                  ICB, bits [31:30]
                                  Inner cache boundary. This field indicates the boundary for caching Inner Cacheable memory
                                  regions.
                                  The possible values are:
                                  00            Not disclosed by this mechanism.
                                  01            L1 cache is the highest Inner Cacheable level.
                                  10            L2 cache is the highest Inner Cacheable level.
                                  11            L3 cache is the highest Inner Cacheable level.

                  LoUU, bits [29:27]
                                  Level of Unification Uniprocessor for the cache hierarchy.

                  LoC, bits [26:24]
                                  Level of Coherence for the cache hierarchy.

                  LoUIS, bits [23:21]
                                  Level of Unification Inner Shareable for the cache hierarchy.

                  Ctype<n>, bits [3(n-1)+2:3(n-1)], for n = 1 to 7
                                  Cache Type fields. Indicate the type of cache that is implemented and can be managed using the
                                  architected cache maintenance instructions that operate by set/way at each level, from Level 1 up to
                                  a maximum of seven levels of cache hierarchy. Possible values of each field are:
                                  000           No cache.
                                  001           Instruction cache only.
                                  010           Data cache only.
                                  011           Separate instruction and data caches.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5079
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     100         Unified cache.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     If software reads the Cache Type fields from Ctype1 upwards, once it has seen a value of 000, no
                                     caches that can be managed using the architected cache maintenance instructions that operate by
                                     set/way exist at further-out levels of the hierarchy. So, for example, if Ctype3 is the first Cache Type
                                     field with a value of 000, the values of Ctype4 to Ctype7 must be ignored.

                    Accessing the CLIDR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                  <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                  p15, 1, <Rt>, c0, c0, 1   001       001        0000         1111         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                   x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                   x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5080                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.27     CONTEXTIDR, Context ID Register
                  The CONTEXTIDR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Identifies the current Process Identifier and, when using the Short-descriptor translation table
                                 format, the Address Space Identifier.
                                 The value of the whole of this register is called the Context ID and is used by:
                                 •      The debug logic, for Linked and Unlinked Context ID matching.
                                 •      The trace logic, to identify the current process.
                                 The significance of this register is for debug and trace use only.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register CONTEXTIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CONTEXTIDR_EL1.
                                 The register format depends on whether address translation is using the Long-descriptor or the
                                 Short-descriptor translation table format.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CONTEXTIDR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CONTEXTIDR bit assignments are:

                  When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                  31                                                                        8 7                      0

                                                  PROCID                                                ASID

                  PROCID, bits [31:8]
                                 Process Identifier. This field must be programmed with a unique value that identifies the current
                                 process.

                  ASID, bits [7:0]
                                 Address Space Identifier. This field is programmed with the value of the current ASID.

                  When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                               PROCID

                  PROCID, bits [31:0]
                                 Process Identifier. This field must be programmed with a unique value that identifies the current
                                 process.

                  Accessing the CONTEXTIDR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5081
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc    CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c13, c0, 1    000       001     1101    1111      0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                          Control                  Accessibility
                             Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                          E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1     EL2     EL3

                             EL3 is using AArch32.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW      RW      CONTEXTIDR_ns

                             EL3 is using AArch32.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      RW      CONTEXTIDR_ns

                             EL3 is using AArch32.        x       x        0       -       n/a     n/a     RW      CONTEXTIDR_s

                             EL3 is not implemented.      x       x        0       -       RW      n/a     n/a     CONTEXTIDR

                             EL3 is not implemented.      x       0        1       -       RW      RW      n/a     CONTEXTIDR

                             EL3 is not implemented.      x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      n/a     CONTEXTIDR

                             EL3 is using AArch64.        x       x        0       -       RW      n/a     n/a     CONTEXTIDR

                             EL3 is using AArch64.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW      n/a     CONTEXTIDR

                             EL3 is using AArch64.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW      n/a     CONTEXTIDR

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5082                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                      G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                          G7.2 General system control registers

                  —     If HSTR.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5083
ID121917                                      Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.28       CP15DMB, Data Memory Barrier System instruction
                    The CP15DMB characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Performs a Data Memory Barrier.
                                     ARM deprecates any use of this operation, and strongly recommends that software use the DMB
                                     instruction instead.

                    Configurations
                                     There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                     CP15DMB is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    CP15DMB ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the CP15DMB instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c10, 5   000      101      0111         1111         1010

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                 Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H     TGE     NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x       x       0       WO       WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x       0       1       WO       WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x       1       1       WO       n/a          WO     WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —       If SCTLR.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL0 and PL1 is UNDEFINED.
                           —       If SCTLR_EL1.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL0 is UNDEFINED.
                           —       If HSCTLR.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL2 is UNDEFINED.

G7-5084                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5085
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.29       CP15DSB, Data Synchronization Barrier System instruction
                    The CP15DSB characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Performs a Data Synchronization Barrier.
                                     ARM deprecates any use of this operation, and strongly recommends that software use the DSB
                                     instruction instead.

                    Configurations
                                     There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                     CP15DSB is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    CP15DSB ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the CP15DSB instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c10, 4   000      100      0111         1111         1010

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                 Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H     TGE     NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x       x       0       WO       WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                   x       0       1       WO       WO           WO     WO

                                                                                   x       1       1       WO       n/a          WO     WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —       If SCTLR.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL0 and PL1 is UNDEFINED.
                           —       If SCTLR_EL1.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL0 is UNDEFINED.
                           —       If HSCTLR.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL2 is UNDEFINED.

G7-5086                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5087
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.30       CP15ISB, Instruction Synchronization Barrier System instruction
                    The CP15ISB characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Performs an Instruction Synchronization Barrier.
                                     ARM deprecates any use of this operation, and strongly recommends that software use the ISB
                                     instruction instead.

                    Configurations
                                     There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                     CP15ISB is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    CP15ISB ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the CP15ISB instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c5, 4   000       100      0111         1111         0101

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       WO       WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0        1       WO       WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1        1       WO       n/a          WO     WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —       If SCTLR.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL0 and PL1 is UNDEFINED.
                           —       If SCTLR_EL1.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL0 is UNDEFINED.
                           —       If HSCTLR.CP15BEN==0, execution of this instruction at PL2 is UNDEFINED.

G7-5088                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL0 and EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5089
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.31        CPACR, Architectural Feature Access Control Register
                    The CPACR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Controls access to trace, and to Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality from EL0, EL1,
                                     and EL3.
                                     In an implementation that includes EL2, the CPACR has no effect on instructions executed at EL2.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register CPACR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     CPACR_EL1.
                                     Bits in the NSACR control Non-secure access to the CPACR fields. See the field descriptions for
                                     more information.

                                              Note
                                     In the register field descriptions, controls are described as applying at specified Privilege levels.
                                     This is because, in Secure state, a PL1 control:
                                     •       Applies to execution in a Secure EL3 mode when EL3 is using AArch32.
                                     •       Applies to execution in a Secure EL1 mode when EL3 is using AArch64.
                                     See Security state, Exception levels, and AArch32 execution privilege on page G1-4600.

                                     Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                     into an Exception level that is using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to
                                     architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                     CPACR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CPACR bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27          24 23 22 21 20 19                                                              0

                                     RES0      cp11 cp10                                 RES0

      ASEDIS
      RES0
      TRCDIS

                    ASEDIS, bit [31]
                                     Disables PL0 and PL1 execution of Advanced SIMD instructions.
                                     0           This control permits execution of Advanced SIMD instructions at PL0 and PL1.
                                     1           All instruction encodings that are Advanced SIMD instruction encodings, but are not
                                                 also floating-point instruction encodings, are UNDEFINED at PL0 and PL1.
                                     If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                     is RES0. Otherwise, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this field is implemented as a RW field.
                                     If it is not implemented as a RW field, it is RAZ/WI.
                                     If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, and the value of NSACR.NSASEDIS is 1, this field
                                     behaves as RAO/WI in Non-secure state, regardless of its actual value. This applies even if the field
                                     is implemented as RAZ/WI.

G7-5090                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                 For the list of instructions affected by this field, see Controls of Advanced SIMD operation that do
                                 not apply to floating-point operation on page E1-2996.
                                 See the description of CPACR.cp10 for a list of other controls that can disable or trap execution of
                                 Advanced SIMD instructions in AArch32 state.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                 field, it resets to 0.

                  Bits [30:29]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  TRCDIS, bit [28]
                                 Traps PL0 and PL1 System register accesses to all implemented trace registers to Undefined mode.
                                 0           This control has no effect on PL0 and PL1 System register accesses to trace registers.
                                 1           PL0 and PL1 System register accesses to all implemented trace registers are trapped to
                                             Undefined mode.
                                 If the implementation does not include a trace macrocell, or does not include a System register
                                 interface to the trace macrocell registers, this field is RES0. Otherwise, it is IMPLEMENTATION
                                 DEFINED whether this field is implemented as a RW field. If it is not implemented as a RW field, it
                                 is RAZ/WI.
                                 If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, and the value of NSACR.NSTRCDIS is 1, this field
                                 behaves as RAO/WI in Non-secure state, regardless of its actual value. This applies even if the field
                                 is implemented as RAZ/WI.

                                          Note
                                 •      The ETMv4 architecture does not permit EL0 to access the trace registers. If the
                                        implementation includes an ETMv4 implementation, EL0 accesses to the trace registers are
                                        UNDEFINED.

                                 •      The architecture does not provide traps on trace register accesses through the optional
                                        memory-mapped external debug interface.

                                 System register accesses to the trace registers can have side-effects. When a System register access
                                 is trapped, any side-effects that are normally associated with the access do not occur before the
                                 exception is taken.
                                 If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bits [27:24]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  cp11, bits [23:22]
                                 The value of this field is ignored. If this field is programmed with a different value to the cp10 field
                                 then this field is UNKNOWN on a direct read of the CPACR.
                                 If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                 is RES0.
                                 In Non-secure state, if EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, when the value of NSACR.cp10
                                 is 0, this field behaves as RAZ/WI, regardless of its actual value.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                 field, it resets to 0.

                  cp10, bits [21:20]
                                 Defines the access rights for the floating-point and Advanced SIMD functionality. Possible values
                                 of the field are:
                                 00          PL0 and PL1 accesses to floating-point and Advanced SIMD registers or instructions
                                             are UNDEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5091
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                   01          PL0 accesses to floating-point and Advanced SIMD registers or instructions are
                                               UNDEFINED.

                                   10          Reserved. The effect of programming this field to this value is CONSTRAINED
                                               UNPREDICTABLE. See Reserved values in System and memory-mapped registers and
                                               translation table entries on page K1-6411.
                                   11          This control permits full access to the floating-point and Advanced SIMD functionality
                                               from PL0 and PL1.
                                   The floating-point and Advanced SIMD features controlled by these fields are:
                                   •      Execution of any floating-point or Advanced SIMD instruction.
                                   •      Any access to the Advanced SIMD and floating-point registers D0-D31 and their views as
                                          S0-S31 and Q0-Q15.
                                   •      Any access to the FPSCR, FPSID, MVFR0, MVFR1, MVFR2, or FPEXC System registers.

                                            Note
                                   The CPACR has no effect on floating-point and Advanced SIMD accesses from PL2. These can be
                                   disabled by the HCPTR.TCP10 field.

                                   If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                   is RES0.
                                   In Non-secure state, if EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, when the value of NSACR.cp10
                                   is 0, this field behaves as RAZ/WI, regardless of its actual value.
                                   Execution of floating-point and Advanced SIMD instructions in AArch32 state can be disabled or
                                   trapped by the following controls:
                                   •      CPACR.cp10, or, if executing at EL0, CPACR_EL1.FPEN.
                                   •      FPEXC.EN.
                                   •      If executing in Non-secure state:
                                          —      HCPTR.TCP10, or if EL2 is using AArch64, CPTR_EL2.TFP.
                                          —      NSACR.cp10, or if EL3 is using AArch64, CPTR_EL3.TFP.
                                   •      For Advanced SIMD instructions only:
                                          —      CPACR.ASEDIS.
                                          —      If executing in Non-secure state, HCPTR.TASE and NSACR.NSTRCDIS.
                                   See the descriptions of the controls for more information.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                   field, it resets to 0.

                    Bits [19:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the CPACR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc      CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c0, 2    000       010     0001    1111        0000

G7-5092                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.TCPAC==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.TCPAC==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCPTR.TCPAC==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If CPTR_EL3.TCPAC==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5093
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.32         CPSR, Current Program Status Register
                    The CPSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds PE status and control information.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                    Attributes
                                       CPSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CPSR bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19               16 15               10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                     0

                    N Z C V Q                J                      GE            IT[7:2]        E A I F T               M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                               RES1
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Negative condition flag. Set to bit[31] of the result of the last flag-setting instruction. If the result is
                                       regarded as a two's complement signed integer, then N is set to 1 if the result was negative, and N
                                       is set to 0 if the result was positive or zero.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Zero condition flag. Set to 1 if the result of the last flag-setting instruction was zero, and to 0
                                       otherwise. A result of zero often indicates an equal result from a comparison.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Carry condition flag. Set to 1 if the last flag-setting instruction resulted in a carry condition, for
                                       example an unsigned overflow on an addition.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Overflow condition flag. Set to 1 if the last flag-setting instruction resulted in an overflow condition,
                                       for example a signed overflow on an addition.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Cumulative saturation bit. Set to 1 to indicate that overflow or saturation occurred in some
                                       instructions.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    Bit [23]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

G7-5094                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  PAN, bit [22]
                               In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    Privileged Access Never. When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, defined values are:
                                    0           The translation system is the same as ARMv8.0.
                                    1           Disables privileged read and write accesses to addresses accessible at EL0.
                                    The value of this bit is usually preserved on taking an exception, except in the following situations:
                                    •      When the target of the exception is EL1, and the value of the SCTLR.SPAN bit for the current
                                           Security state is 0, this bit is set to 1.
                                    •      When the target of the exception is EL3, from Secure state, and the value of the Secure
                                           SCTLR.SPAN is 0, this bit is set to 1.
                                    •      When the target of the exception is EL3, from Non-secure state, this bit is set to 0 regardless
                                           of the value of the Secure SCTLR.SPAN bit.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                               In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bits [21:20]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

                  I, bit [7]
                                    IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5095
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           Exception not masked.
                                      1           Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Bit [4]
                                      Reserved, RES1.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      Current PE mode. Possible values are:

                                                                                                             M[3:0]   Mode

                                                                                                             0b0000   User

                                                                                                             0b0001   FIQ

                                                                                                             0b0010   IRQ

                                                                                                             0b0011   Supervisor

                                                                                                             0b0110   Monitor

                                                                                                             0b0111   Abort

                                                                                                             0b1010   Hyp

                                                                                                             0b1011   Undefined

                                                                                                             0b1111   System

                                      Other values are reserved.

G7-5096                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.       ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                              ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.33     CSSELR, Cache Size Selection Register
                  The CSSELR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Selects the current Cache Size ID Register, CCSIDR, by specifying the required cache level and the
                                  cache type, which is either instruction cache or data cache.
                                  If ARMv8.3-CCIDX is implemented, CSSELR also selects the current CCSIDR2.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register CSSELR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  CSSELR_EL1.
                                  RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  CSSELR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CSSELR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                     4 3      1 0

                                                           RES0                                              Level

                                                                                                                                  InD

                  Bits [31:4]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Level, bits [3:1]
                                  Cache level of required cache. Permitted values are:
                                  000         Level 1 cache
                                  001         Level 2 cache
                                  010         Level 3 cache
                                  011         Level 4 cache
                                  100         Level 5 cache
                                  101         Level 6 cache
                                  110         Level 7 cache
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  If CSSELR.Level is programmed to a cache level that is not implemented, then the value for this
                                  field on a read of CSSELR is UNKNOWN.

                  InD, bit [0]
                                  Instruction not Data bit. Permitted values are:
                                  0           Data or unified cache.
                                  1           Instruction cache.
                                  If CSSELR.Level is programmed to a cache level that is not implemented, then the value for this
                                  field on a read of CSSELR is UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5097
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessing the CSSELR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc      CRm

                                                               p15, 2, <Rt>, c0, c0, 0    010       000      0000         1111        0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                 Control                  Accessibility
                                     Configuration                                                                               Instance
                                                                 E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1      EL2      EL3

                                     EL3 is not implemented.     x       x        0       -       RW       n/a      n/a          CSSELR

                                     EL3 is not implemented.     x       0        1       -       RW       RW       n/a          CSSELR

                                     EL3 is not implemented.     x       1        1       -       n/a      RW       n/a          CSSELR

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.       x       x        0       -       RW       n/a      n/a          CSSELR

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.       x       0        1       -       RW       RW       n/a          CSSELR

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.       x       1        1       -       n/a      RW       n/a          CSSELR

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.       x       x        0       -       n/a      n/a      RW           CSSELR_s

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.       x       0        1       -       RW       RW       RW           CSSELR_ns

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.       x       1        1       -       n/a      RW       RW           CSSELR_ns

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TID2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5098                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                      G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                          G7.2 General system control registers

                  —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5099
ID121917                                      Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.34       CTR, Cache Type Register
                    The CTR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Provides information about the architecture of the caches.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register CTR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register CTR_EL0.

                    Attributes
                                     CTR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CTR bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27         24 23         20 19         16 15 14 13                             4 3          0

                                     CWG           ERG        DminLine     L1Ip               RES0                  IminLine

      RES1
      RES0
      DIC
      IDC

                    Bit [31]
                                     Reserved, RES1.

                    Bit [30]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                    DIC, bit [29]
                                     Instruction cache invalidation requirements for instruction to data coherence. The meaning of this
                                     bit is:
                                     0             Instruction cache invalidation to the point of unification is required for instruction to
                                                   data coherence.
                                     1             Instruction cache cleaning to the point of unification is not required for instruction to
                                                   data coherence.

                    IDC, bit [28]
                                     Data cache clean requirements for instruction to data coherence. The meaning of this bit is:
                                     0             Data cache clean to the point of unification is required for instruction to data coherence,
                                                   unless the CLIDR.LoC == 0b000 or (CLIDR.LoUIS == 0b000 && CLIDR.LoUU ==
                                                   0b000).
                                     1             Data cache clean to the point of unification is not required for instruction to data
                                                   coherence.

                    CWG, bits [27:24]
                                     Cache writeback granule. Log2 of the number of words of the maximum size of memory that can be
                                     overwritten as a result of the eviction of a cache entry that has had a memory location in it modified.

G7-5100                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                 A value of 0b0000 indicates that this register does not provide Cache writeback granule information
                                 and either:
                                 •       The architectural maximum of 512 words (2KB) must be assumed.
                                 •       The Cache writeback granule can be determined from maximum cache line size encoded in
                                         the Cache Size ID Registers.
                                 Values greater than 0b1001 are reserved.
                                 ARM recommends that an implementation that does not support cache write-back implements this
                                 field as 0b0001. This applies, for example, to an implementation that supports only write-through
                                 caches.

                  ERG, bits [23:20]
                                 Exclusives reservation granule. Log2 of the number of words of the maximum size of the reservation
                                 granule that has been implemented for the Load-Exclusive and Store-Exclusive instructions.
                                 A value of 0b0000 indicates that this register does not provide Exclusives reservation granule
                                 information and the architectural maximum of 512 words (2KB) must be assumed.
                                 Values greater than 0b1001 are reserved.

                  DminLine, bits [19:16]
                                 Log2 of the number of words in the smallest cache line of all the data caches and unified caches that
                                 are controlled by the PE.

                  L1Ip, bits [15:14]
                                 Level 1 instruction cache policy. Indicates the indexing and tagging policy for the L1 instruction
                                 cache. Possible values of this field are:
                                 00          VMID aware Physical Index, Physical tag (VPIPT)
                                 01          ASID-tagged Virtual Index, Virtual Tag (AIVIVT)
                                 10          Virtual Index, Physical Tag (VIPT)
                                 11          Physical Index, Physical Tag (PIPT)
                                 The value 0b01 is reserved in ARMv8.
                                 The value 0b00 is permitted only in an implementation that includes ARMv8.2-VPIPT, otherwise
                                 the value is reserved.

                  Bits [13:4]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  IminLine, bits [3:0]
                                 Log2 of the number of words in the smallest cache line of all the instruction caches that are
                                 controlled by the PE.

                  Accessing the CTR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc        CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 1    000       001      0000     1111          0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5101
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RO    RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID2==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5102                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.35     DACR, Domain Access Control Register
                  The DACR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                   Defines the access permission for each of the sixteen memory domains.

                  Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register DACR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   DACR32_EL2.
                                   When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to DACR(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                   signal is asserted HIGH.
                                   This register has no function when TTBCR.EAE is set to 1, to select the Long-descriptor translation
                                   table format.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                   DACR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DACR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                  D15   D14    D13      D12   D11   D10   D9      D8     D7    D6    D5    D4      D3     D2     D1   D0

                  D<n>, bits [2n+1:2n], for n = 0 to 15
                                   Domain n access permission, where n = 0 to 15. Permitted values are:
                                   00          No access. Any access to the domain generates a Domain fault.
                                   01          Client. Accesses are checked against the permission bits in the translation tables.
                                   11          Manager. Accesses are not checked against the permission bits in the translation tables.
                                   The value 10 is reserved.

                  Accessing the DACR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c3, c0, 0   000       000        0011   1111       0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5103
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                  Accessibility
                                      Configuration                                                                      Instance
                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0     EL1     EL2   EL3

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    DACR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    DACR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    DACR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    DACR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    DACR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    DACR

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a   RW     DACR_s

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    RW     DACR_ns

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    RW     DACR_ns

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to DACR_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T3==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T3==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T3==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5104                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.36     DCCIMVAC, Data Cache line Clean and Invalidate by VA to PoC
                  The DCCIMVAC characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Clean and Invalidate data or unified cache line by virtual address to PoC.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System instruction DCCIMVAC performs the same function as AArch64 System
                                  instruction DC CIVAC.

                  Attributes
                                  DCCIMVAC is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DCCIMVAC input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Virtual address to use

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  Virtual address to use. No alignment restrictions apply to this VA.

                  Executing the DCCIMVAC instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c14, 1   000       001        0111         1111         1110

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x       x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x       0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x       1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  Execution of this instruction might require an address translation from VA to PA, and that translation might fault.
                  For more information, see AArch32 data cache maintenance instructions (DC*) on page G3-4822.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                   G7-5105
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5106                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.37     DCCISW, Data Cache line Clean and Invalidate by Set/Way
                  The DCCISW characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Clean and Invalidate data or unified cache line by set/way.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System instruction DCCISW performs the same function as AArch64 System instruction
                                  DC CISW.

                  Attributes
                                  DCCISW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DCCISW input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                      4 3      1 0

                                                          SetWay                                              Level

                                                                                                                                RES0

                  SetWay, bits [31:4]
                                  Contains two fields:
                                  •      Way, bits[31:32-A], the number of the way to operate on.
                                  •      Set, bits[B-1:L], the number of the set to operate on.
                                  Bits[L-1:4] are RES0.
                                  A = Log2(ASSOCIATIVITY), L = Log2(LINELEN), B = (L + S), S = Log2(NSETS).
                                  ASSOCIATIVITY, LINELEN (line length, in bytes), and NSETS (number of sets) have their usual
                                  meanings and are the values for the cache level being operated on. The values of A and S are
                                  rounded up to the next integer.

                  Level, bits [3:1]
                                  Cache level to operate on, minus 1. For example, this field is 0 for operations on L1 cache, or 1 for
                                  operations on L2 cache.

                  Bit [0]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Executing the DCCISW instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn        coproc   CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c14, 2    000       010      0111       1111     1110

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5107
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1      EL2        EL3

                                                                                  x       x        0       -       WO       n/a        WO

                                                                                  x       0        1       -       WO       WO         WO

                                                                                  x       1        1       -       n/a      WO         WO

                    If this instruction is executed with a set, way or level argument that is larger than the value supported by the
                    implementation then the behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE and one of the following occurs:

                    •      The instruction is UNDEFINED

                    •      The instruction performs cache maintenance on one of:
                           —     No cache lines.
                           —     A single arbitrary cache line.
                           —     Multiple arbitrary cache lines.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5108                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.38     DCCMVAC, Data Cache line Clean by VA to PoC
                  The DCCMVAC characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Clean data or unified cache line by virtual address to PoC.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System instruction DCCMVAC performs the same function as AArch64 System
                                  instruction DC CVAC.

                  Attributes
                                  DCCMVAC is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DCCMVAC input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Virtual address to use

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  Virtual address to use. No alignment restrictions apply to this VA.

                  Executing the DCCMVAC instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c10, 1   000       001        0111         1111         1010

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x       x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x       0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x       1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  Execution of this instruction might require an address translation from VA to PA, and that translation might fault.
                  For more information, see AArch32 data cache maintenance instructions (DC*) on page G3-4822.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                   G7-5109
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5110                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.39     DCCMVAU, Data Cache line Clean by VA to PoU
                  The DCCMVAU characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Clean data or unified cache line by virtual address to PoU.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System instruction DCCMVAU performs the same function as AArch64 System
                                  instruction DC CVAU.

                  Attributes
                                  DCCMVAU is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DCCMVAU input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                         0

                                                         Virtual address to use

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  Virtual address to use. No alignment restrictions apply to this VA.

                  Executing the DCCMVAU instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c11, 1   000       001        0111         1111         1011

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x       x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x       0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x       1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  Execution of this instruction might require an address translation from VA to PA, and that translation might fault.
                  For more information, see AArch32 data cache maintenance instructions (DC*) on page G3-4822.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                   G7-5111
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5112                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.40     DCCSW, Data Cache line Clean by Set/Way
                  The DCCSW characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Clean data or unified cache line by set/way.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System instruction DCCSW performs the same function as AArch64 System instruction
                                  DC CSW.

                  Attributes
                                  DCCSW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DCCSW input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                      4 3      1 0

                                                          SetWay                                              Level

                                                                                                                                RES0

                  SetWay, bits [31:4]
                                  Contains two fields:
                                  •      Way, bits[31:32-A], the number of the way to operate on.
                                  •      Set, bits[B-1:L], the number of the set to operate on.
                                  Bits[L-1:4] are RES0.
                                  A = Log2(ASSOCIATIVITY), L = Log2(LINELEN), B = (L + S), S = Log2(NSETS).
                                  ASSOCIATIVITY, LINELEN (line length, in bytes), and NSETS (number of sets) have their usual
                                  meanings and are the values for the cache level being operated on. The values of A and S are
                                  rounded up to the next integer.

                  Level, bits [3:1]
                                  Cache level to operate on, minus 1. For example, this field is 0 for operations on L1 cache, or 1 for
                                  operations on L2 cache.

                  Bit [0]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Executing the DCCSW instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn        coproc   CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c10, 2    000       010      0111       1111     1010

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5113
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1      EL2        EL3

                                                                                  x       x        0       -       WO       n/a        WO

                                                                                  x       0        1       -       WO       WO         WO

                                                                                  x       1        1       -       n/a      WO         WO

                    If this instruction is executed with a set, way or level argument that is larger than the value supported by the
                    implementation then the behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE and one of the following occurs:

                    •      The instruction is UNDEFINED

                    •      The instruction performs cache maintenance on one of:
                           —     No cache lines.
                           —     A single arbitrary cache line.
                           —     Multiple arbitrary cache lines.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5114                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.41     DCIMVAC, Data Cache line Invalidate by VA to PoC
                  The DCIMVAC characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Invalidate data or unified cache line by virtual address to PoC.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System instruction DCIMVAC performs the same function as AArch64 System
                                  instruction DC IVAC.

                  Attributes
                                  DCIMVAC is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DCIMVAC input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                        0

                                                         Virtual address to use

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  Virtual address to use. No alignment restrictions apply to this VA.

                  Executing the DCIMVAC instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c6, 1   000       001        0111         1111         0110

                  It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether, when this instruction is executed, it can generate a watchpoint. If this
                  instruction can generate a watchpoint this is prioritized in the same way as other watchpoints.

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5115
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    At EL1, this instruction performs a cache clean and invalidate, meaning it performs the same invalidation as a
                    DCCIMVAC instruction, if all of the following apply:

                    •      EL2 is implemented and either:
                           —     EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.VM is 1.
                           —     EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.VM is 1.

                    •      Execution is in Non-secure state, or EL3 is not implemented.

                    Execution of this instruction might require an address translation from VA to PA, and that translation might fault.
                    For more information, see AArch32 data cache maintenance instructions (DC*) on page G3-4822.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TPC==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5116                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.42     DCISW, Data Cache line Invalidate by Set/Way
                  The DCISW characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Invalidate data or unified cache line by set/way.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System instruction DCISW performs the same function as AArch64 System instruction
                                  DC ISW.

                  Attributes
                                  DCISW is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DCISW input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                      4 3      1 0

                                                          SetWay                                              Level

                                                                                                                                RES0

                  SetWay, bits [31:4]
                                  Contains two fields:
                                  •      Way, bits[31:32-A], the number of the way to operate on.
                                  •      Set, bits[B-1:L], the number of the set to operate on.
                                  Bits[L-1:4] are RES0.
                                  A = Log2(ASSOCIATIVITY), L = Log2(LINELEN), B = (L + S), S = Log2(NSETS).
                                  ASSOCIATIVITY, LINELEN (line length, in bytes), and NSETS (number of sets) have their usual
                                  meanings and are the values for the cache level being operated on. The values of A and S are
                                  rounded up to the next integer.

                  Level, bits [3:1]
                                  Cache level to operate on, minus 1. For example, this field is 0 for operations on L1 cache, or 1 for
                                  operations on L2 cache.

                  Bit [0]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Executing the DCISW instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn        coproc   CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c6, 2    000       010      0111       1111     0110

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5117
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1      EL2        EL3

                                                                                  x       x        0       -       WO       n/a        WO

                                                                                  x       0        1       -       WO       WO         WO

                                                                                  x       1        1       -       n/a      WO         WO

                    At EL1, this instruction performs a cache clean and invalidate, meaning it performs the same invalidation as a
                    DCCISW instruction, if all of the following apply:

                    •      EL2 is implemented and either:
                           —     EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.{SWIO, VM} is not {0, 0}.
                           —     EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.{SWIO, VM} is not {0, 0}.

                    •      Execution is in Non-secure state, or EL3 is not implemented.

                    If this instruction is executed with a set, way or level argument that is larger than the value supported by the
                    implementation then the behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE and one of the following occurs:

                    •      The instruction is UNDEFINED

                    •      The instruction performs cache maintenance on one of:
                           —     No cache lines.
                           —     A single arbitrary cache line.
                           —     Multiple arbitrary cache lines.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TSW==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5118                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.43     DFAR, Data Fault Address Register
                  The DFAR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Holds the virtual address of the faulting address that caused a synchronous Data Abort exception.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register DFAR(NS) is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 FAR_EL1[31:0].
                                 AArch32 System register DFAR(S) is architecturally mapped to AArch32 System register HDFAR
                                 when EL2 is implemented.
                                 AArch32 System register DFAR(S) is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 FAR_EL2[31:0] when EL2 is implemented.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 DFAR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DFAR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                  0

                                      VA of faulting address of synchronous Data Abort exception

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 VA of faulting address of synchronous Data Abort exception.

                  Accessing the DFAR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c6, c0, 0   000       000      0110     1111       0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5119
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                  Accessibility
                                      Configuration                                                                      Instance
                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1    EL2   EL3

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a   RW     DFAR_s

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    DFAR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    DFAR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    DFAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    DFAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    DFAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    DFAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    RW     DFAR_ns

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    RW     DFAR_ns

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5120                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.44     DFSR, Data Fault Status Register
                  The DFSR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Holds status information about the last data fault.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register DFSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register ESR_EL1.
                                  The current translation table format determines which format of the register is used.
                                  RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  DFSR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DFSR bit assignments are:

                  When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                  31                                           17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7              4 3             0

                                       RES0                          AET                         Domain         FS[3:0]

     FnV                                                                                                                       RES0
                                                                                                                               LPAE
                                                                                                                               FS[4]
                                                                                                                                WnR
                                                                                                                                 ExT
                                                                                                                                 CM

                  Bits [31:17]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  FnV, bit [16]
                                  FAR not Valid, for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on a
                                  translation table walk.
                                  0           DFAR is valid.
                                  1           DFAR is not valid, and holds an UNKNOWN value.
                                  This field is only valid for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on
                                  a translation table walk. It is RES0 for all other Data Abort exceptions.

                  AET, bits [15:14]
                                  Asynchronous Error Type. When the RAS Extension is implemented, this field describes the state
                                  of the PE after taking an asynchronous Data Abort exception. Possible values are:
                                  00          Uncontainable error (UC) or uncategorized.
                                  01          Unrecoverable error (UEU).
                                  10          Restartable error (UEO) or Corrected error (CE).
                                  11          Recoverable error (UER).
                                  When the RAS Extension is not implemented, or on a synchronous Data Abort, this field is RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5121
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                               Note
                                      ARMv8.2 requires the implementation of the RAS Extension.

                                      In the event of multiple errors taken as a single SError interrupt exception, the overall state of the
                                      PE is reported.

                                               Note
                                      Software can use this information to determine what recovery might be possible. The recovery
                                      software must also examine any implemented fault records to determine the location and extent of
                                      the error.

                    CM, bit [13]
                                      Cache maintenance fault. For synchronous faults, this bit indicates whether a cache maintenance
                                      instruction generated the fault. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           Abort not caused by execution of a cache maintenance instruction.
                                      1           Abort caused by execution of a cache maintenance instruction.
                                      On a synchronous Data Abort on a translation table walk, this bit is UNKNOWN.
                                      On an asynchronous fault, this bit is UNKNOWN.

                    ExT, bit [12]
                                      External abort type. This bit can be used to provide an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of
                                      External aborts.
                                      In an implementation that does not provide any classification of External aborts, this bit is RES0.
                                      For aborts other than External aborts this bit always returns 0.

                    WnR, bit [11]
                                      Write not Read bit. Indicates whether the abort was caused by a write or a read instruction. The
                                      possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           Abort caused by a read instruction.
                                      1           Abort caused by a write instruction.
                                      For faults on the cache maintenance and address translation System instructions in the
                                      (coproc==1111) encoding space this bit always returns a value of 1.

                    FS[4], bit [10]
                                      See FS[3:0], bits [3:0] for description of the FS field.

                    LPAE, bit [9]
                                      On taking a Data Abort exception, this bit is set as follows:
                                      0           Using the Short-descriptor translation table formats.
                                      1           Using the Long-descriptor translation table formats.
                                      Hardware does not interpret this bit to determine the behavior of the memory system, and therefore
                                      software can set this bit to 0 or 1 without affecting operation.

                    Bit [8]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Domain, bits [7:4]
                                      The domain of the fault address.
                                      ARM deprecates any use of this field, see The Domain field in the DFSR on page G4-4951.
                                      This field is UNKNOWN for certain faults where the DFSR is updated and reported using the
                                      Short-descriptor FSR encodings, see Table G4-30 on page G4-4954.

G7-5122                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  FS[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                  Fault status bits. Interpreted with bit [10]. Possible values of FS[4:0] are:
                                  00001        Alignment fault
                                  00010        Debug exception
                                  00011        Access flag fault, level 1
                                  00100        Fault on instruction cache maintenance
                                  00101        Translation fault, level 1
                                  00110        Access flag fault, level 2
                                  00111        Translation fault, level 2
                                  01000        Synchronous External abort, not on translation table walk
                                  01001        Domain fault, level 1
                                  01011        Domain fault, level 2
                                  01100        Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 1
                                  01101        Permission fault, level 1
                                  01110        Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 2
                                  01111        Permission fault, level 2
                                  10000        TLB conflict abort
                                  10100        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault (Lockdown fault)

                                  10101        IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault (Unsupported Exclusive access fault)

                                  10110        SError interrupt
                                  11000        SError interrupt, from a parity or ECC error on memory access
                                  11001        Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access, not on translation table walk
                                  11100        Synchronous parity or ECC error on translation table walk, level 1
                                  11110        Synchronous parity or ECC error on translation table walk, level 2
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  When the RAS Extension is implemented, 11000, 11001, 11100, and 11110, are reserved.
                                  For more information about the lookup level associated with a fault, see The level associated with
                                  MMU faults on a Short-descriptor translation table lookup on page G4-4950.

                  When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                  31                                           17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8          6 5              0

                                        RES0                           AET                    RES0          STATUS

     FnV                                                                                                                       LPAE
                                                                                                                               RES0
                                                                                                                                WnR
                                                                                                                                ExT
                                                                                                                                 CM

                  Bits [31:17]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5123
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    FnV, bit [16]
                                    FAR not Valid, for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on a
                                    translation table walk.
                                    0           DFAR is valid.
                                    1           DFAR is not valid, and holds an UNKNOWN value.
                                    This field is only valid for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on
                                    a translation table walk. It is RES0 for all other Data Abort exceptions.

                    AET, bits [15:14]
                                    Asynchronous Error Type. When the RAS Extension is implemented, this field describes the state
                                    of the PE after taking an asynchronous Data Abort exception. Possible values are:
                                    00          Uncontainable error (UC) or uncategorized.
                                    01          Unrecoverable error (UEU).
                                    10          Restartable error (UEO) or Corrected error (CE).
                                    11          Recoverable error (UER).
                                    When the RAS Extension is not implemented, or on a synchronous Data Abort, this field is RES0.

                                             Note
                                    ARMv8.2 requires the implementation of the RAS Extension.

                                    In the event of multiple errors taken as a single SError interrupt exception, the overall state of the
                                    PE is reported.

                                             Note
                                    Software can use this information to determine what recovery might be possible. The recovery
                                    software must also examine any implemented fault records to determine the location and extent of
                                    the error.

                    CM, bit [13]
                                    Cache maintenance fault. For synchronous faults, this bit indicates whether a cache maintenance
                                    instruction generated the fault. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Abort not caused by execution of a cache maintenance instruction.
                                    1           Abort caused by execution of a cache maintenance instruction.
                                    On a synchronous Data Abort on a translation table walk, this bit is UNKNOWN.
                                    On an asynchronous fault, this bit is UNKNOWN.

                    ExT, bit [12]
                                    External abort type. This bit can be used to provide an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of
                                    External aborts.
                                    In an implementation that does not provide any classification of External aborts, this bit is RES0.
                                    For aborts other than External aborts this bit always returns 0.

                    WnR, bit [11]
                                    Write not Read bit. Indicates whether the abort was caused by a write or a read instruction. The
                                    possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Abort caused by a read instruction.
                                    1           Abort caused by a write instruction.
                                    For faults on the cache maintenance and address translation System instructions in the
                                    (coproc==1111) encoding space this bit always returns a value of 1.

G7-5124                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  Bit [10]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  LPAE, bit [9]
                                    On taking a Data Abort exception, this bit is set as follows:
                                    0           Using the Short-descriptor translation table formats.
                                    1           Using the Long-descriptor translation table formats.
                                    Hardware does not interpret this bit to determine the behavior of the memory system, and therefore
                                    software can set this bit to 0 or 1 without affecting operation.

                  Bits [8:6]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  STATUS, bits [5:0]
                                    Fault status bits. Possible values of this field are:
                                    000000      Address size fault in TTBR0 or TTBR1
                                    000001      Address size fault, level 1
                                    000010      Address size fault, level 2
                                    000011      Address size fault, level 3
                                    000101      Translation fault, level 1
                                    000110      Translation fault, level 2
                                    000111      Translation fault, level 3
                                    001001      Access flag fault, level 1
                                    001010      Access flag fault, level 2
                                    001011      Access flag fault, level 3
                                    001101      Permission fault, level 1
                                    001110      Permission fault, level 2
                                    001111      Permission fault, level 3
                                    010000      Synchronous External abort, not on translation table walk
                                    010001      SError interrupt
                                    010101      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 1
                                    010110      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 2
                                    010111      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 3
                                    011000      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access, not on translation table walk
                                    011001      SError interrupt, from a parity or ECC error on memory access
                                    011101      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 1
                                    011110      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 2
                                    011111      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 3
                                    100001      Alignment fault
                                    100010      Debug exception
                                    110000      TLB conflict abort
                                    110100      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault (Lockdown fault)

                                    110101      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault (Unsupported Exclusive access fault)

                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    When the RAS Extension is implemented, 011000, 011001, 011101, 011110, and 011111, are reserved.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5125
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     For more information about the lookup level associated with a fault, see The level associated with
                                     MMU faults on a Long-descriptor translation table lookup on page G4-4952.

                    Accessing the DFSR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc      CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c5, c0, 0    000       000     0101    1111        0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                  Accessibility
                                       Configuration                                                                       Instance
                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1    EL2    EL3

                                       EL3 is not implemented.     x        x        0      -       RW      n/a    n/a     DFSR

                                       EL3 is not implemented.     x        0        1      -       RW      RW     n/a     DFSR

                                       EL3 is not implemented.     x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     n/a     DFSR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.       x        x        0      -       RW      n/a    n/a     DFSR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.       x        0        1      -       RW      RW     n/a     DFSR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.       x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     n/a     DFSR

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.       x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a    RW      DFSR_s

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.       x        0        1      -       RW      RW     RW      DFSR_ns

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.       x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     RW      DFSR_ns

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5126                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                      —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HSTR.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5127
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.45       DTLBIALL, Data TLB Invalidate All
                    The DTLBIALL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from data TLBs that are from any level of
                                    the translation table walk. The entries that are invalidated are as follows:
                                    •     If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, all entries that would be required for
                                          the Secure EL1&0 translation regime.
                                    •     If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, all entries that would be required for
                                          the Secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                    •     If executed at Non-secure EL1, all stage 1 translation table entries that would be required for
                                          the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and, if EL2 is implemented, they must match the
                                          current VMID.
                                    •     If executed at EL2, the stage 1 or stage 2 translation table entries that would be required for
                                          the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and matches the current VMID.
                                    The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.
                                    ARM deprecates the use of this instruction. It is only provided for backwards compatibility with
                                    earlier versions of the ARM architecture.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    DTLBIALL is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    DTLBIALL ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the DTLBIALL instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c6, 0   000      000        1000         1111         0110

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE     NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x       0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0       1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1       1       -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5128                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIALLIS operating on data TLBs only.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5129
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.46       DTLBIASID, Data TLB Invalidate by ASID match
                    The DTLBIASID characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from data TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used for the specified ASID, and either:
                                          —      Is from a level of lookup above the final level.
                                          —      Is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.
                                   ARM deprecates the use of this instruction. It is only provided for backwards compatibility with
                                   earlier versions of the ARM architecture.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   DTLBIASID is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DTLBIASID input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                        8 7                      0

                                                      RES0                                                   ASID

                    Bits [31:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries for non-global pages that match the ASID values will be
                                   affected by this operation.

                    Executing the DTLBIASID instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5130                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c6, 2   000       010        1000         1111         0110

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIASIDIS operating on data TLBs only.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5131
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.47       DTLBIMVA, Data TLB Invalidate by VA
                    The DTLBIMVA characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from data TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address, and one of the following applies:
                                          —      The entry is from a level of lookup above the final level and matches the specified
                                                 ASID.
                                          —      The entry is a global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                          —      The entry is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup that matches the
                                                 specified ASID.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.
                                   ARM deprecates the use of this instruction. It is only provided for backwards compatibility with
                                   earlier versions of the ARM architecture.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   DTLBIMVA is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DTLBIMVA input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11          8 7                    0

                                                 VA                                      RES0                ASID

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected by
                                   this operation.
                                   Global TLB entries that match the VA value will be affected by this operation, regardless of the
                                   value of the ASID field.

G7-5132                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Executing the DTLBIMVA instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c6, 1   000       001        1000         1111         0110

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIMVAIS operating on data TLBs only.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5133
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.48       ELR_hyp, Exception Link Register (Hyp mode)
                    The ELR_hyp characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    When taking an exception to Hyp mode, holds the address to return to.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register ELR_hyp is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    ELR_EL2.
                                    On a reset into an Exception level that is using AArch32 ELR_hyp is UNKNOWN.

                    Attributes
                                    ELR_hyp is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ELR_hyp bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                  0

                                                               Return address

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Return address.

                    Accessing the ELR_hyp
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                   <banked_reg>         R     M   M1

                                                                                                   ELR_hyp              0     1   1110

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1        EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -          n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -          RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a        RW    RW

G7-5134                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.49     FCSEIDR, FCSE Process ID register
                  The FCSEIDR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Identifies whether the Fast Context Switch Extension (FCSE) is implemented.
                                  In ARMv8, the FCSE is not implemented, so this register is RAZ/WI. Software can access this
                                  register to determine that the implementation does not include the FCSE.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                  Attributes
                                  FCSEIDR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The FCSEIDR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                        0

                                                                  RAZ/WI

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  Reserved, RAZ/WI. Hardware must implement this as RAZ/WI. Software must not rely on this
                                  property as the behavior of reserved values might change in a future revision of the architecture.

                  Accessing the FCSEIDR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c13, c0, 0    000       000        1101         1111         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5135
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5136                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.50     FPEXC, Floating-Point Exception Control register
                  The FPEXC characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                    Provides a global enable for the implemented Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, and
                                    reports floating-point status information.

                  Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register FPEXC is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    FPEXC32_EL2.
                                    Implemented only if the implementation includes the Advanced SIMD and floating-point
                                    functionality.
                                    Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                    into an Exception level that is using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to
                                    architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                    FPEXC is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The FPEXC bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25                                              11 10     8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                               VV                          RES0                        VECITR

     EX                                                                                                                            IOF
     EN                                                                                                                           DZF
     DEX                                                                                                                          OFF
     FP2V                                                                                                                         UFF
     TFV                                                                                                                           IXF
                                                                                                                                 RES0
                                                                                                                                   IDF

                  EX, bit [31]
                                    Exception bit. In ARMv8, this bit is RAZ/WI.

                  EN, bit [30]
                                    Enables access to the Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality from all Exception levels,
                                    except that setting this field to 0 does not disable the following:
                                    •     VMSR accesses to the FPEXC or FPSID.
                                    •     VMRS accesses from the FPEXC, FPSID, MVFR0, MVFR1, or MVFR2.
                                    0           Accesses to the FPSCR, and any of the SIMD and floating-point registers Q0-Q15,
                                                including their views as D0-D31 registers or S0-S31 registers, are UNDEFINED at all
                                                Exception levels.
                                    1           This control permits access to the Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality at
                                                all Exception levels.
                                    Execution of floating-point and Advanced SIMD instructions in AArch32 state can be disabled or
                                    trapped by the following controls:
                                    •     CPACR.cp10, or, if executing at EL0, CPACR_EL1.FPEN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5137
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     •      FPEXC.EN.
                                     •      If executing in Non-secure state:
                                            —      HCPTR.TCP10, or if EL2 is using AArch64, CPTR_EL2.TFP.
                                            —      NSACR.cp10, or if EL3 is using AArch64, CPTR_EL3.TFP.
                                     •      For Advanced SIMD instructions only:
                                            —      CPACR.ASEDIS.
                                            —      If executing in Non-secure state, HCPTR.TASE and NSACR.NSTRCDIS.
                                     See the descriptions of the controls for more information.

                                              Note
                                     When executing at EL0 using AArch32:
                                     •      If EL1 is using AArch64 then behavior is as if the value of FPEXC.EN is 1.
                                     •      In Non-secure state, if EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.{RW, TGE} is {1,
                                            1} then behavior is as if the value of FPEXC.EN is 1.
                                     •      In Non-secure state, if EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.{RW, TGE} is {0,
                                            1} then it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the behavior is:
                                            —      As if the value of FPEXC.EN is 1.
                                            —      Determined by the value of FPEXC.EN, as described in this field description.
                                                   However, ARM deprecates using the value of FPEXC.EN to determine behavior.

                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    DEX, bit [29]
                                     Defined synchronous exception on floating-point execution.
                                     This field identifies whether a synchronous exception generated by the attempted execution of an
                                     instruction was generated by an unallocated encoding. The instruction must be in the encoding space
                                     that is identified by the pseudocode function ExecutingCP10or11Instr() returning TRUE. This field
                                     also indicates whether the FPEXC.TFV field is valid.
                                     The meaning of this bit is:
                                     0           The exception was generated by the attempted execution of an unallocated instruction
                                                 in the encoding space that is identified by the pseudocode function
                                                 ExecutingCP10or11Instr(). If FPEXC.TFV is RW then it is invalid and UNKNOWN. If
                                                 FPEXC.{IDF, IXF, UFF, OFF, DZF, IOF} are RW then they are invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                     1           The exception was generated during the execution of an unallocated encoding.
                                                 FPEXC.TFV is valid and indicates the cause of the exception.
                                     On an exception that sets this bit to 1 the exception-handling routine must clear this bit to 0.
                                     On an implementation that both does not support trapping of floating-point exceptions and
                                     implements the FPSCR.{Stride, Len} fields as RAZ, this bit is RES0.
                                     If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    FP2V, bit [28]
                                     FPINST2 instruction valid bit. In ARMv8, this bit is RES0.

                    VV, bit [27]
                                     VECITR valid bit. In ARMv8, this bit is RES0.

G7-5138                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  TFV, bit [26]
                                    Trapped Fault Valid bit. Valid only when the value of FPEXC.DEX is 1. When valid, it indicates the
                                    cause of the exception and therefore whether the FPEXC.{IDF, IXF, UFF, OFF, DZF, IOF} bits are
                                    valid.
                                    0           The exception was caused by the execution of a floating-point VABS, VADD, VDIV,
                                                VFMA, VFMS, VFNMA, VFNMS, VMLA, VMLS, VMOV, VMUL, VNEG,
                                                VNMLA, VNMLS, VNMUL, VSQRT, or VSUB instruction when one or both of
                                                FPSCR.{Stride, Len} was non-zero. If the FPEXC.{IDF, IXF, UFF, OFF, DZF, IOF}
                                                bits are RW then they are invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                    1           FPEXC.{IDF, IXF, UFF, OFF, DZF, IOF} indicate the presence of trapped
                                                floating-point exceptions that had occurred at the time of the exception. Bits are set for
                                                all trapped exceptions that had occurred at the time of the exception.
                                    This bit returns a status value and ignores writes.
                                    When the value of FPEXC.DEX is 0 and this bit is RW, this bit is invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                    On an implementation that does not support the trapping of floating-point exceptions this bit is
                                    RAZ/WI.
                                    On an implementation that supports the trapping of floating-point exceptions and implements
                                    FPSCR.{Stride, Len} as RAZ, this bit is RAO/WI.

                  Bits [25:11]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  VECITR, bits [10:8]
                                    Vector iteration count. In ARMv8, this field is RES1.

                  IDF, bit [7]
                                    Input Denormal trapped exception bit. Valid only when the value of FPEXC.TFV is 1. When valid,
                                    it indicates whether an Input Denormal exception occurred while FPSCR.IDE was 1:
                                    0           Input Denormal exception has not occurred.
                                    1           Input Denormal exception has occurred.
                                    Input Denormal exceptions can occur only when FPSCR.FZ is 1.

                                             Note
                                    A half-precision floating-point value that is flushed to zero because the value of FPSCR.FZ16 is 1
                                    does not generate an Input Denormal exception.

                                    This bit must be cleared to 0 by the exception-handling routine.
                                    When the value of FPEXC.TFV is 0 and this bit is RW, this bit is invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                    On an implementation that does not support the trapping of floating-point exceptions this bit is
                                    RAZ/WI.
                                    If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bits [6:5]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IXF, bit [4]
                                    Inexact trapped exception bit. Valid only when the value of FPEXC.TFV is 1. When valid, it
                                    indicates whether an Inexact exception occurred while FPSCR.IXE was 1:
                                    0           Inexact exception has not occurred.
                                    1           Inexact exception has occurred.
                                    This bit must be cleared to 0 by the exception-handling routine.
                                    When the value of FPEXC.TFV is 0 and this bit is RW, this bit is invalid and UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5139
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                   On an implementation that does not support the trapping of floating-point exceptions this bit is
                                   RAZ/WI.
                                   If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    UFF, bit [3]
                                   Underflow trapped exception bit. Valid only when the value of FPEXC.TFV is 1. When valid, it
                                   indicates whether an Underflow exception occurred while FPSCR.UFE was 1:
                                   0           Underflow exception has not occurred.
                                   1           Underflow exception has occurred.
                                   Underflow trapped exceptions can occur:
                                   •      On half-precision data-processing instructions only when FPSCR.FZ16 is 0.
                                   •      Otherwise only when FPSCR.FZ is 0.
                                   This bit must be cleared to 0 by the exception-handling routine.
                                   When the value of FPEXC.TFV is 0 and this bit is RW, this bit is invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                   On an implementation that does not support the trapping of floating-point exceptions this bit is
                                   RAZ/WI.
                                   If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    OFF, bit [2]
                                   Overflow trapped exception bit. Valid only when the value of FPEXC.TFV is 1. When valid, it
                                   indicates whether an Overflow exception occurred while FPSCR.OFE was 1:
                                   0           Overflow exception has not occurred.
                                   1           Overflow exception has occurred.
                                   This bit must be cleared to 0 by the exception-handling routine.
                                   When the value of FPEXC.TFV is 0 and this bit is RW, this bit is invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                   On an implementation that does not support the trapping of floating-point exceptions this bit is
                                   RAZ/WI.
                                   If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    DZF, bit [1]
                                   Divide by Zero trapped exception bit. Valid only when the value of FPEXC.TFV is 1. When valid,
                                   it indicates whether a Divide by Zero exception occurred while FPSCR.DZE was 1:
                                   0           Divide by Zero exception has not occurred.
                                   1           Divide by Zero exception has occurred.
                                   This bit must be cleared to 0 by the exception-handling routine.
                                   When the value of FPEXC.TFV is 0 and this bit is RW, this bit is invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                   On an implementation that does not support the trapping of floating-point exceptions this bit is
                                   RAZ/WI.
                                   If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    IOF, bit [0]
                                   Invalid Operation trapped exception bit. Valid only when the value of FPEXC.TFV is 1. When valid,
                                   it indicates whether an Invalid Operation exception occurred while FPSCR.IOE was 1:
                                   0           Invalid Operation exception has not occurred.
                                   1           Invalid Operation exception has occurred.
                                   This bit must be cleared to 0 by the exception-handling routine.
                                   When the value of FPEXC.TFV is 0 and this bit is RW, this bit is invalid and UNKNOWN.
                                   On an implementation that does not support the trapping of floating-point exceptions this bit is
                                   RAZ/WI.

G7-5140                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                  If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Accessing the FPEXC
                  This register can be read using VMRS with the following syntax:

                  VMRS <Rt>, <spec_reg>

                  This register can be written using VMSR with the following syntax:

                  VMSR <spec_reg>, <Rt>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                               <spec_reg>        reg

                                                                                                               FPEXC             1000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0    EL1      EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -      RW       n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -      RW       RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -      n/a      RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                        —      If CPACR.cp10==00, accesses to this register from PL1 are UNDEFINED.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.TFP==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==00, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==10, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL2 are UNDEFINED.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If NSACR.cp10==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are UNDEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5141
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If CPTR_EL3.TFP==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5142                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                             ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.51      FPSCR, Floating-Point Status and Control Register
                  The FPSCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Provides floating-point system status information and control.

                  Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     The named fields in this register map to the equivalent fields in the AArch64 FPCR and FPSR.
                                     It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the Len and Stride fields can be programmed to non-zero
                                     values, which will cause some AArch32 floating-point instruction encodings to be UNDEFINED, or
                                     whether these fields are RAZ.
                                     Implemented only if the implementation includes the Advanced SIMD and floating-point
                                     functionality.
                                     RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                     FPSCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The FPSCR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18              16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                  N Z C V                 FZ        Stride         Len

     QC                                                                                                                             IOC
     AHP                                                                                                                           DZC
     DN                                                                                                                            OFC
     RMode                                                                                                                         UFC
     FZ16                                                                                                                           IXC
                                                                                                                                  RES0
                                                                                                                                    IDC
                                                                                                                                    IOE
                                                                                                                                   DZE
                                                                                                                                   OFE
                                                                                                                                   UFE
                                                                                                                                    IXE
                                                                                                                                  RES0
                                                                                                                                    IDE

                  N, bit [31]
                                     Negative condition flag. This is updated by floating-point comparison operations.

                  Z, bit [30]
                                     Zero condition flag. This is updated by floating-point comparison operations.

                  C, bit [29]
                                     Carry condition flag. This is updated by floating-point comparison operations.

                  V, bit [28]
                                     Overflow condition flag. This is updated by floating-point comparison operations.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5143
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    QC, bit [27]
                                    Cumulative saturation bit, Advanced SIMD only. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that an Advanced
                                    SIMD integer operation has saturated since 0 was last written to this bit.

                    AHP, bit [26]
                                    Alternative half-precision control bit:
                                    0           IEEE half-precision format selected.
                                    1           Alternative half-precision format selected.
                                    This bit is only used for conversions between half-precision floating-point and other floating-point
                                    formats.
                                    The data-processing instructions added as part of the ARMv8.2-FP16 extension always use the
                                    IEEE half-precision format, and ignore the value of this bit.

                    DN, bit [25]
                                    Default NaN mode control bit:
                                    0           NaN operands propagate through to the output of a floating-point operation.
                                    1           Any operation involving one or more NaNs returns the Default NaN.
                                    The value of this bit only controls scalar floating-point arithmetic. Advanced SIMD arithmetic
                                    always uses the Default NaN setting, regardless of the value of the DN bit.

                    FZ, bit [24]
                                    Flush-to-zero mode control bit:
                                    0           Flush-to-zero mode disabled. Behavior of the floating-point system is fully compliant
                                                with the IEEE 754 standard.
                                    1           Flush-to-zero mode enabled.
                                    The value of this bit only controls scalar floating-point arithmetic. Advanced SIMD arithmetic
                                    always uses the Flush-to-zero setting, regardless of the value of the FZ bit.
                                    This bit has no effect on half-precision calculations.

                    RMode, bits [23:22]
                                    Rounding Mode control field. The encoding of this field is:
                                    00          Round to Nearest (RN) mode
                                    01          Round towards Plus Infinity (RP) mode
                                    10          Round towards Minus Infinity (RM) mode
                                    11          Round towards Zero (RZ) mode.
                                    The specified rounding mode is used by almost all scalar floating-point instructions. Advanced
                                    SIMD arithmetic always uses the Round to Nearest setting, regardless of the value of the RMode
                                    bits.

                    Stride, bits [21:20]
                                    It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this field is RW or RAZ.
                                    If this field is RW and is set to a value other than zero, some floating-point instruction encodings
                                    are UNDEFINED. The instruction pseudocode identifies these instructions.
                                    ARM strongly recommends that software never sets this field to a value other than zero.
                                    The value of this field is ignored when processing Advanced SIMD instructions.

G7-5144                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  FZ16, bit [19]
                             In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   When ARMv8.2-FP16 is implemented, flush-to-zero mode control bit on half-precision
                                   data-processing instructions:
                                   0           Flush-to-zero mode disabled. Behavior of the floating-point system is fully compliant
                                               with the IEEE 754 standard.
                                   1           Flush-to-zero mode enabled.
                                   The value of this bit applies to both scalar and Advanced SIMD floating-point half-precision
                                   calculations.
                                   When ARMv8.2-FP16 is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                             In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  Len, bits [18:16]
                                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this field is RW or RAZ.
                                   If this field is RW and is set to a value other than zero, some floating-point instruction encodings
                                   are UNDEFINED. The instruction pseudocode identifies these instructions.
                                   ARM strongly recommends that software never sets this field to a value other than zero.
                                   The value of this field is ignored when processing Advanced SIMD instructions.

                  IDE, bit [15]
                                   Input Denormal floating-point exception trap enable. Possible values are:
                                   0           Untrapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs then the
                                               IDC bit is set to 1.
                                   1           Trapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs, the PE does
                                               not update the IDC bit. The trap handling software can decide whether to set the IDC
                                               bit to 1.
                                   This bit is RW only if the implementation supports the trapping of floating-point exceptions. In an
                                   implementation that does not support floating-point exception trapping, this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                   When this bit is RW, it applies only to floating-point operations. Advanced SIMD operations always
                                   use untrapped floating-point exception handling in AArch32 state.

                  Bits [14:13]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  IXE, bit [12]
                                   Inexact floating-point exception trap enable. Possible values are:
                                   0           Untrapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs then the
                                               IXC bit is set to 1.
                                   1           Trapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs, the PE does
                                               not update the IXC bit. The trap handling software can decide whether to set the IXC
                                               bit to 1.
                                   This bit is RW only if the implementation supports the trapping of floating-point exceptions. In an
                                   implementation that does not support floating-point exception trapping, this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                   When this bit is RW, it applies only to floating-point operations. Advanced SIMD operations always
                                   use untrapped floating-point exception handling in AArch32 state.

                  UFE, bit [11]
                                   Underflow floating-point exception trap enable. Possible values are:
                                   0           Untrapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs then the
                                               UFC bit is set to 1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5145
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    1           Trapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs, the PE does
                                                not update the UFC bit. The trap handling software can decide whether to set the UFC
                                                bit to 1.
                                    This bit is RW only if the implementation supports the trapping of floating-point exceptions. In an
                                    implementation that does not support floating-point exception trapping, this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                    When this bit is RW, it applies only to floating-point operations. Advanced SIMD operations always
                                    use untrapped floating-point exception handling in AArch32 state.

                    OFE, bit [10]
                                    Overflow floating-point exception trap enable. Possible values are:
                                    0           Untrapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs then the
                                                OFC bit is set to 1.
                                    1           Trapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs, the PE does
                                                not update the OFC bit. The trap handling software can decide whether to set the OFC
                                                bit to 1.
                                    This bit is RW only if the implementation supports the trapping of floating-point exceptions. In an
                                    implementation that does not support floating-point exception trapping, this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                    When this bit is RW, it applies only to floating-point operations. Advanced SIMD operations always
                                    use untrapped floating-point exception handling in AArch32 state.

                    DZE, bit [9]
                                    Divide by Zero floating-point exception trap enable. Possible values are:
                                    0           Untrapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs then the
                                                DZC bit is set to 1.
                                    1           Trapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs, the PE does
                                                not update the DZC bit. The trap handling software can decide whether to set the DZC
                                                bit to 1.
                                    This bit is RW only if the implementation supports the trapping of floating-point exceptions. In an
                                    implementation that does not support floating-point exception trapping, this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                    When this bit is RW, it applies only to floating-point operations. Advanced SIMD operations always
                                    use untrapped floating-point exception handling in AArch32 state.

                    IOE, bit [8]
                                    Invalid Operation floating-point exception trap enable. Possible values are:
                                    0           Untrapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs then the
                                                IOC bit is set to 1.
                                    1           Trapped exception handling selected. If the floating-point exception occurs, the PE does
                                                not update the IOC bit. The trap handling software can decide whether to set the IOC
                                                bit to 1.
                                    This bit is RW only if the implementation supports the trapping of floating-point exceptions. In an
                                    implementation that does not support floating-point exception trapping, this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                    When this bit is RW, it applies only to floating-point operations. Advanced SIMD operations always
                                    use untrapped floating-point exception handling in AArch32 state.

                    IDC, bit [7]
                                    Input Denormal cumulative floating-point exception bit. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that the Input
                                    Denormal floating-point exception has occurred since 0 was last written to this bit.
                                    How VFP instructions update this bit depends on the value of the IDE bit.
                                    Advanced SIMD instructions set this bit if the Input Denormal floating-point exception occurs in
                                    one or more of the floating-point calculations performed by the instruction, regardless of the value
                                    of the IDE bit.

G7-5146                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                  Bits [6:5]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IXC, bit [4]
                                    Inexact cumulative floating-point exception bit. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that the Inexact
                                    floating-point exception has occurred since 0 was last written to this bit.
                                    How VFP instructions update this bit depends on the value of the IXE bit.
                                    Advanced SIMD instructions set this bit if the Inexact floating-point exception occurs in one or
                                    more of the floating-point calculations performed by the instruction, regardless of the value of the
                                    IXE bit.

                  UFC, bit [3]
                                    Underflow cumulative floating-point exception bit. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that the Underflow
                                    floating-point exception has occurred since 0 was last written to this bit.
                                    How VFP instructions update this bit depends on the value of the UFE bit.
                                    Advanced SIMD instructions set this bit if the Underflow floating-point exception occurs in one or
                                    more of the floating-point calculations performed by the instruction, regardless of the value of the
                                    UFE bit.

                  OFC, bit [2]
                                    Overflow cumulative floating-point exception bit. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that the Overflow
                                    floating-point exception has occurred since 0 was last written to this bit.
                                    How VFP instructions update this bit depends on the value of the OFE bit.
                                    Advanced SIMD instructions set this bit if the Overflow floating-point exception occurs in one or
                                    more of the floating-point calculations performed by the instruction, regardless of the value of the
                                    OFE bit.

                  DZC, bit [1]
                                    Divide by Zero cumulative floating-point exception bit. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that the Divide
                                    by Zero floating-point exception has occurred since 0 was last written to this bit.
                                    How VFP instructions update this bit depends on the value of the DZE bit.
                                    Advanced SIMD instructions set this bit if the Divide by Zero floating-point exception occurs in one
                                    or more of the floating-point calculations performed by the instruction, regardless of the value of
                                    the DZE bit.

                  IOC, bit [0]
                                    Invalid Operation cumulative floating-point exception bit. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that the
                                    Invalid Operation floating-point exception has occurred since 0 was last written to this bit.
                                    How VFP instructions update this bit depends on the value of the IOE bit.
                                    Advanced SIMD instructions set this bit if the Invalid Operation floating-point exception occurs in
                                    one or more of the floating-point calculations performed by the instruction, regardless of the value
                                    of the IOE bit.

                  Accessing the FPSCR
                  This register can be read using VMRS with the following syntax:

                  VMRS <Rt>, <spec_reg>

                  This register can be written using VMSR with the following syntax:

                  VMSR <spec_reg>, <Rt>

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5147
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                                 <spec_reg>      reg

                                                                                                                 FPSCR           0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RW    RW        n/a   RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       RW    RW        RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       RW    n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                           —     If CPACR.cp10==00, accesses to this register from PL0 and PL1 are UNDEFINED.
                           —     If CPACR.cp10==01, accesses to this register from PL0 are UNDEFINED.
                           —     If CPACR_EL1.FPEN==00, accesses to this register from PL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CPACR_EL1.FPEN==01, accesses to this register from PL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CPACR_EL1.FPEN==10, accesses to this register from PL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.TFP==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CPACR_EL1.FPEN==00, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CPACR_EL1.FPEN==01, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CPACR_EL1.FPEN==10, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==00, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==10, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==00, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==01, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==10, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.

G7-5148                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                      —     If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL2 are UNDEFINED.

                  •   When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If NSACR.cp10==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are UNDEFINED.

                  •   When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                      —     If CPTR_EL3.TFP==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5149
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.52       FPSID, Floating-Point System ID register
                    The FPSID characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides top-level information about the floating-point implementation.
                                   This register largely duplicates information held in the MIDR. ARM deprecates use of it.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   Implemented only if the implementation includes the Advanced SIMD and floating-point
                                   functionality.

                    Attributes
                                   FPSID is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The FPSID bit assignments are:

                    31                    24 23 22                     16 15                  8 7             4 3      0

                         Implementer                 Subarchitecture           PartNum              Variant     Revision

      SW

                    Implementer, bits [31:24]
                                   Implementer codes are the same as those used for the MIDR.
                                   For an implementation by ARM this field is 0x41, the ASCII code for A.

                    SW, bit [23]
                                   Software bit. Defined values are:
                                   0            The implementation provides a hardware implementation of the floating-point
                                                instructions.
                                   1            The implementation supports only software emulation of the floating-point instructions.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0.

                    Subarchitecture, bits [22:16]
                                   Subarchitecture version number. For an implementation by ARM, defined values are:
                                   0000000      VFPv1 architecture with an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED subarchitecture.
                                   0000001      VFPv2 architecture with Common VFP subarchitecture v1.
                                   0000010      VFPv3 architecture, or later, with Common VFP subarchitecture v2. The VFP
                                                architecture version is indicated by the MVFR0 and MVFR1 registers.
                                   0000011      VFPv3 architecture, or later, with Null subarchitecture. The entire floating-point
                                                implementation is in hardware, and no software support code is required. The VFP
                                                architecture version is indicated by the MVFR0 and MVFR1 registers. This value can
                                                be used only by an implementation that does not support the trap enable bits in the
                                                FPSCR.
                                   0000100      VFPv3 architecture, or later, with Common VFP subarchitecture v3, and support for
                                                trap enable bits in FPSCR. The VFP architecture version is indicated by the MVFR0 and
                                                MVFR1 registers.

G7-5150                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                  For a subarchitecture designed by ARM the most significant bit of this field, register bit[22], is 0.
                                  Values with a most significant bit of 0 that are not listed here are reserved.
                                  When the subarchitecture designer is not ARM, the most significant bit of this field, register bit[22],
                                  must be 1. Each implementer must maintain its own list of subarchitectures it has designed, starting
                                  at subarchitecture version number 0x40.
                                  In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000011 and 0000100.

                  PartNum, bits [15:8]
                                  An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED part number for the floating-point implementation, assigned by the
                                  implementer.

                  Variant, bits [7:4]
                                  An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED variant number. Typically, this field distinguishes between different
                                  production variants of a single product.

                  Revision, bits [3:0]
                                  An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED revision number for the floating-point implementation.

                  Accessing the FPSID
                  This register can be read using VMRS with the following syntax:

                  VMRS <Rt>, <spec_reg>

                  This register can be written using VMSR with the following syntax:

                  VMSR <spec_reg>, <Rt>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                                <spec_reg>         reg

                                                                                                                FPSID              0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                E2H      TGE      NS     EL0     EL1      EL2     EL3

                                                                                x        x        0      -       RW       n/a     RW

                                                                                x        0        1      -       RW       RW      RW

                                                                                x        1        1      -       n/a      RW      RW

                  When access to this register is permitted, write accesses are ignored.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5151
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                           —     If CPACR.cp10==00, accesses to this register from PL1 are UNDEFINED.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.TFP==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==00, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==10, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL2 are UNDEFINED.
                           —     If HCR.TID0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If NSACR.cp10==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are UNDEFINED.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If CPTR_EL3.TFP==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5152                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.53     HACR, Hyp Auxiliary Configuration Register
                  The HACR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Controls trapping to Hyp mode of IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED aspects of Non-secure EL1 or EL0
                                 operation.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HACR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 HACR_EL2.
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HACR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HACR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                  0

                                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Accessing the HACR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c1, 7   100       111      0001     1111       0001

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5153
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5154                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.54     HACTLR, Hyp Auxiliary Control Register
                  The HACTLR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Controls IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED features of Hyp mode operation.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register HACTLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  ACTLR_EL2[31:0].
                                  If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                  RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  HACTLR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HACTLR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                        0

                                                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Accessing the HACTLR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c0, 1    100       001        0001         1111         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          -            n/a    -

                                                                               x        0         1      -          -            RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5155
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5156                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.55     HACTLR2, Hyp Auxiliary Control Register 2
                  The HACTLR2 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides additional space to the HACTLR register to hold IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED trap
                                 functionality.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HACTLR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 ACTLR_EL2[63:32].
                                 In ARMv8.0 and ARMv8.1, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this register is implemented,
                                 or whether it causes UNDEFINED exceptions when accessed. The implementation of this register can
                                 be detected by examining ID_MMFR4.AC2.
                                 From ARMv8.2 this register must be implemented.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HACTLR2 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HACTLR2 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Accessing the HACTLR2
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                            p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c0, 3    100       011      0001     1111       0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5157
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5158                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.56     HADFSR, Hyp Auxiliary Data Fault Status Register
                  The HADFSR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides additional IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED syndrome information for Data Abort exceptions
                                 taken to Hyp mode.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HADFSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 AFSR0_EL2.
                                 This is an optional register. An implementation that does not require this register can implement it
                                 as RES0.
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HADFSR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HADFSR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Accessing the HADFSR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                            p15, 4, <Rt>, c5, c1, 0    100       000      0101     1111       0001

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5159
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5160                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.57     HAIFSR, Hyp Auxiliary Instruction Fault Status Register
                  The HAIFSR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides additional IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED syndrome information for Prefetch Abort
                                 exceptions taken to Hyp mode.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HAIFSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 AFSR1_EL2.
                                 This is an optional register. An implementation that does not require this register can implement it
                                 as RES0.
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HAIFSR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HAIFSR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Accessing the HAIFSR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                            p15, 4, <Rt>, c5, c1, 1    100       001      0101     1111       0001

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5161
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5162                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.58     HAMAIR0, Hyp Auxiliary Memory Attribute Indirection Register 0
                  The HAMAIR0 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes for the memory attribute encodings defined
                                 by HMAIR0. These IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED attributes can only provide additional qualifiers for
                                 the memory attribute encodings, and cannot change the memory attributes defined in HMAIR0.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HAMAIR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 AMAIR_EL2[31:0].
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HAMAIR0 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HAMAIR0 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                  If an implementation does not provide any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes, this register is RES0.

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Accessing the HAMAIR0
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                           <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                           p15, 4, <Rt>, c10, c3, 0    100       000      1010     1111       0011

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5163
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5164                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.59     HAMAIR1, Hyp Auxiliary Memory Attribute Indirection Register 1
                  The HAMAIR1 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes for the memory attribute encodings defined
                                 by HMAIR1. These IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED attributes can only provide additional qualifiers for
                                 the memory attribute encodings, and cannot change the memory attributes defined in HMAIR1.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HAMAIR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 AMAIR_EL2[63:32].
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HAMAIR1 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HAMAIR1 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                  If an implementation does not provide any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED memory attributes, this register is RES0.

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Accessing the HAMAIR1
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                           <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                           p15, 4, <Rt>, c10, c3, 1    100       001      1010     1111       0011

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5165
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5166                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.60      HCPTR, Hyp Architectural Feature Trap Register
                  The HCPTR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Controls:
                                 •      Trapping to Hyp mode of Non-secure access, at EL1 or EL0, to trace, and to Advanced SIMD
                                        and floating-point functionality.
                                 •      Hyp mode access to trace, and to Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality.

                                          Note
                                 Accesses to this functionality:
                                 •      From Non-secure modes other than Hyp mode are also affected by settings in the CPACR and
                                        NSACR.
                                 •      From Hyp mode are also affected by settings in the NSACR.
                                 Exceptions generated by the CPACR and NSACR controls are higher priority than those generated
                                 by the HCPTR controls.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HCPTR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CPTR_EL2.
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                 into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                 this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HCPTR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HCPTR bit assignments are:

                  31 30                          21 20 19          16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9                                 0

                                RES0                        RES0                                        RES1

     TCPAC                                                                                                                    TCP10
     TTA                                                                                                                      TCP11
                                                                                                                               RES1
                                                                                                                               RES0
                                                                                                                               TASE

                  TCPAC, bit [31]
                                 Traps Non-secure EL1 accesses to the CPACR to Hyp mode.
                                 0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                 1           Non-secure EL1 accesses to the CPACR are trapped to Hyp mode.

                                          Note
                                 The CPACR is not accessible at EL0.

                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5167
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Bits [30:21]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                    TTA, bit [20]
                                     Traps Non-secure System register accesses to all implemented trace registers to Hyp mode.
                                     0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                     1           Any Non-secure System register access to an implemented trace register is trapped to
                                                 Hyp mode, unless the access is trapped to EL1 by a CPACR or NSACR control, or the
                                                 access is from Non-secure EL0 and the definition of the register in the appropriate trace
                                                 architecture specification indicates that the register is not accessible from EL0. A
                                                 trapped instruction generates:
                                                 •     A Hyp Trap exception, if the exception is taken from Non-secure EL0 or EL1.
                                                 •     An Undefined Instruction exception taken to Hyp mode, if the exception is taken
                                                       from Hyp mode.
                                     If the implementation does not include a trace macrocell, or does not include a System register
                                     interface to the trace macrocell registers, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this bit:
                                     •     Is RES0.
                                     •     Is RES1.
                                     •     Can be written from Hyp mode, and from Secure Monitor mode when SCR.NS is 1.
                                     If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, and the value of NSACR.NSTRCDIS is 1, in
                                     Non-secure state this field behaves as RAO/WI, regardless of its actual value.

                                             Note
                                     •     The ETMv4 architecture does not permit EL0 to access the trace registers. If the
                                           implementation includes an ETMv4 implementation, EL0 accesses to the trace registers are
                                           UNDEFINED, and a resulting Undefined Instruction exception is higher priority than a
                                           HCPTR.TTA Hyp Trap exception.
                                     •     The architecture does not provide traps on trace register accesses through the optional
                                           memory-mapped external debug interface.

                                     System register accesses to the trace registers can have side-effects. When a System register access
                                     is trapped, any side-effects that are normally associated with the access do not occur before the
                                     exception is taken.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                     field, it resets to 0.

                    Bits [19:16]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                    TASE, bit [15]
                                     Traps Non-secure execution of Advanced SIMD instructions to Hyp mode when the value of
                                     HCPTR.TCP10 is 0.
                                     0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                     1           When the value of HCPTR.TCP10 is 0, any attempt to execute an Advanced SIMD
                                                 instruction in Non-secure state is trapped to Hyp mode, unless it is trapped to EL1 by a
                                                 CPACR or NSACR control. A trapped instruction generates:
                                                 •     A Hyp Trap exception, if the exception is taken from Non-secure EL0 or EL1.
                                                 •     An Undefined Instruction exception taken to Hyp mode, if the exception is taken
                                                       from Hyp mode.
                                     When the value of HCPTR.TCP10 is 1, the value of this field is ignored.

G7-5168                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                                    If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                    is RES1. Otherwise, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this field is implemented as a RW field.
                                    If it is not implemented as a RW field, then it is RAZ/WI.
                                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, and the value of NSACR.NSASEDIS is 1, in
                                    Non-secure state this field behaves as RAO/WI, regardless of its actual value. This applies even if
                                    the field is implemented as RAZ/WI.
                                    For the list of instructions affected by this field, see Controls of Advanced SIMD operation that do
                                    not apply to floating-point operation on page E1-2996.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                  Bit [14]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bits [13:12]
                                    Reserved, RES1.

                  TCP11, bit [11]
                                    The value of this field is ignored. If this field is programmed with a different value to the TCP10 bit
                                    then this field is UNKNOWN on a direct read of the HCPTR.
                                    If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                    is RES1.
                                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, and the value of NSACR.cp10 is 0, in Non-secure
                                    state this field behaves as RAO/WI, regardless of its actual value.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                  TCP10, bit [10]
                                    Trap Non-secure accesses to Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality to Hyp mode:
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Any attempted access to Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality from
                                                Non-secure state is trapped to Hyp mode, unless it is trapped to EL1 by a CPACR or
                                                NSACR control. A trapped instruction generates:
                                                •      A Hyp Trap exception, if the exception is taken from Non-secure EL0 or EL1.
                                                •      An Undefined Instruction exception taken to Hyp mode, if the exception is taken
                                                       from Hyp mode.
                                    The Advanced SIMD and floating-point features controlled by these fields are:
                                    •      Execution of any floating-point or Advanced SIMD instruction.
                                    •      Any access to the Advanced SIMD and floating-point registers D0-D31 and their views as
                                           S0-S31 and Q0-Q15.
                                    •      Any access to the FPSCR, FPSID, MVFR0, MVFR1, MVFR2, or FPEXC System registers.
                                    If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                    is RES1.
                                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32, and the value of NSACR.cp10 is 0, in Non-secure
                                    state this field behaves as RAO/WI, regardless of its actual value.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                  Bits [9:0]
                                    Reserved, RES1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5169
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessing the HCPTR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c1, 2    100       010        0001         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —       If CPTR_EL3.TCPAC==1, accesses to this register from EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5170                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.61      HCR, Hyp Configuration Register
                  The HCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Provides configuration controls for virtualization, including defining whether various Non-secure
                                  operations are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register HCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  HCR_EL2[31:0].
                                  If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                  Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                  into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                  this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  HCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HCR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                                                   BSU FB      VI

     RES0                                                                                                                         VM
     TRVM                                                                                                                      SWIO
     HCD                                                                                                                        PTW
     RES0                                                                                                                      FMO
     TGE                                                                                                                         IMO
     TVM                                                                                                                       AMO
     TTLB                                                                                                                         VF
     TPU                                                                                                                          VA
     TPC                                                                                                                          DC
     TSW                                                                                                                         TWI
     TAC                                                                                                                        TWE
     TIDCP                                                                                                                      TID0
     TSC
     TID3
     TID2
     TID1

                  Bit [31]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  TRVM, bit [30]
                                  Trap Reads of Virtual Memory controls. Traps Non-secure EL1 reads of the virtual memory control
                                  registers to Hyp mode. The registers for which read accesses are trapped are as follows:
                                  SCTLR, TTBR0, TTBR1, TTBCR, TTBCR2, DACR, DFSR, IFSR, DFAR, IFAR, ADFSR,
                                  AIFSR, PRRR, NMRR, MAIR0, MAIR1, AMAIR0, AMAIR1, CONTEXTIDR.
                                  0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5171
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    1           Non-secure EL1 read accesses to the specified Virtual Memory controls are trapped to
                                                Hyp mode.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    HCD, bit [29]
                                    HVC instruction disable. Disables Non-secure state execution of HVC instructions.
                                    0           HVC instruction execution is enabled at EL2 and Non-secure EL1.
                                    1           HVC instructions are UNDEFINED at EL2 and Non-secure EL1. The Undefined
                                                Instruction exception is taken to the Exception level at which the HVC instruction is
                                                executed.

                                             Note
                                    HVC instructions are always UNDEFINED at EL0.

                                    This bit is only implemented if EL3 is not implemented. Otherwise, it is RES0.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                    Bit [28]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    TGE, bit [27]
                                    Trap General Exceptions, from Non-secure EL0.
                                    0           This control has no effect on execution at EL0.
                                    1           When the value of SCR.NS is 0, this control has no effect on execution at EL0.
                                                When the value of SCR.NS is 1, then:
                                                •      All exceptions that would be routed to EL1 are routed to EL2.
                                                •      The SCTLR.M bit is treated as being 0 for all purposes other than returning the
                                                       result of a direct read of SCTLR.
                                                •      The HCR.{FMO, IMO, AMO} bits are treated as being 1 for all purposes other
                                                       than returning the result of a direct read of HCR.
                                                •      All virtual interrupts are disabled.
                                                •      Any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED mechanisms for signaling virtual interrupts are
                                                       disabled.
                                                •      An exception return to EL1 is treated as an illegal exception return.
                                                •      Monitor mode execution of an MSR or CPS instruction that changes CPSR.M to
                                                       a Non-secure EL1 mode is an illegal change to PSTATE.M. For more information
                                                       see Illegal changes to PSTATE.M on page G1-4618.
                                    Also, when HCR.TGE is 1:
                                    •      If EL3 is using AArch32, an attempt to change from a Secure PL1 mode to a Non-secure EL1
                                           mode by changing SCR.NS from 0 to 1 results in SCR.NS remaining as 0.
                                    •      The HDCR.{TDRA, TDOSA, TDA, TDE} bits are ignored and treated as being 1 other than
                                           for the purpose of a direct read of HDCR.
                                    In the following cases the field resets to 0:
                                    •      The PE resets into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32.
                                    •      The PE resets into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32.
                                    Otherwise, the field reset value is architecturally UNKNOWN.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

G7-5172                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  TVM, bit [26]
                                   Trap Virtual Memory controls. Traps Non-secure EL1 writes to the virtual memory control registers
                                   to Hyp mode. The registers for which write accesses are trapped are as follows:
                                   SCTLR, TTBR0, TTBR1, TTBCR, TTBCR2, DACR, DFSR, IFSR, DFAR, IFAR, ADFSR,
                                   AIFSR, PRRR, NMRR, MAIR0, MAIR1, AMAIR0, AMAIR1, CONTEXTIDR.
                                   0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   1           Non-secure EL1 write accesses to EL1 virtual memory control registers are trapped to
                                               Hyp mode.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TTLB, bit [25]
                                   Trap TLB maintenance instructions. Traps Non-secure EL1 execution of a TLBI instruction to Hyp
                                   mode. This applies to the following instructions:
                                   TLBIALLIS, TLBIMVAIS, TLBIASIDIS, TLBIMVAAIS, TLBIMVALIS, TLBIMVAALIS,
                                   ITLBIALL, ITLBIMVA, ITLBIASID, DTLBIALL, DTLBIMVA, DTLBIASID, TLBIALL,
                                   TLBIMVA, TLBIASID, TLBIMVAA, TLBIMVAL, TLBIMVAAL
                                   0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   1           Non-secure EL1 accesses to TLB maintenance instructions are trapped to Hyp mode.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TPU, bit [24]
                                   Trap cache maintenance instructions that operate to the Point of Unification. Traps Non-secure EL1
                                   execution of those cache maintenance instructions to Hyp mode. This applies to the following
                                   instructions:
                                   •      ICIMVAU, ICIALLU, ICIALLUIS, DCCMVAU.

                                            Note
                                   An Undefined Instruction exception generated at EL0 is higher priority than this trap to EL2, and
                                   these instructions are always UNDEFINED at EL0.

                                   0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   1           Non-secure EL1 execution of the specified instructions is trapped to Hyp mode.
                                   If the Point of Unification is before any level of data cache, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                                   the execution of any data or unified cache clean by VA to the point of unification instruction can be
                                   trapped when the value of this control is 1.
                                   If the Point of Unification is before any level of instruction cache, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                   whether the execution of any instruction cache invalidate to the point of unification instruction can
                                   be trapped when the value of this control is 1.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TPC, bit [23]
                                   Trap data or unified cache maintenance instructions that operate to the Point of Coherency. Traps
                                   Non-secure EL1 execution of those cache maintenance instructions to Hyp mode. This applies to
                                   the following instructions:
                                   •      DCIMVAC, DCCIMVAC, DCCMVAC.

                                            Note
                                   An Undefined Instruction exception generated at EL0 is higher priority than this trap to EL2, and
                                   these instructions are always UNDEFINED at EL0.

                                   0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   1           Non-secure execution of the specified instructions is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5173
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    If the Point of Coherency is before any level of data cache, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                                    the execution of any data or unified cache clean, invalidate, or clean and invalidate instruction that
                                    operates by VA to the point of coherency can be trapped when the value of this control is 1.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TSW, bit [22]
                                    Trap data or unified cache maintenance instructions that operate by Set/Way. Traps Non-secure EL1
                                    execution of those cache maintenance instructions by set/way to Hyp mode. This applies to the
                                    following instructions:
                                    •      DCISW, DCCSW, DCCISW.

                                             Note
                                    An Undefined Instruction exception generated at EL0 is higher priority than this trap to EL2, and
                                    these instructions are always UNDEFINED at EL0.

                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Non-secure execution of the specified instructions is trapped to Hyp mode.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TAC, bit [21]
                                    Trap Auxiliary Control Registers. Traps Non-secure EL1 accesses to the Auxiliary Control
                                    Registers to Hyp mode, from both Execution states. This applies to the following register accesses:
                                    ACTLR and, if implemented, ACTLR2.
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Non-secure EL1 accesses to the specified registers are trapped to Hyp mode.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TIDCP, bit [20]
                                    Trap IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED functionality. Traps Non-secure EL1 accesses to the encodings for
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED System Registers to Hyp mode.

                                    MCR and MRC instructions accessing the following encodings:
                                    •      All coproc==p15, CRn==c9, Opcode1 = {0-7}, CRm == {c0-c2, c5-c8}, opcode2 == {0-7}.
                                    •      All coproc==p15, CRn==c10, Opcode1 =={0-7}, CRm == {c0, c1, c4, c8}, opcode2 ==
                                           {0-7}.
                                    •      All coproc==p15, CRn==c11, Opcode1=={0-7}, CRm == {c0-c8, c15}, opcode2 == {0-7}.
                                    When HCR.TIDCP is set to 1, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether any of this functionality
                                    accessed from Non-secure EL0 is trapped to Hyp mode. If it is not, it is UNDEFINED, and the PE takes
                                    an Undefined Instruction exception to Non-secure Undefined mode.
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Non-secure EL1 accesses to the specified System register encodings for
                                                IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED functionality are trapped to Hyp mode.

                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TSC, bit [19]
                                    Trap SMC instructions. Traps Non-secure EL1 execution of SMC instructions to Hyp mode.
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Any attempt to execute an SMC instruction at Non-secure EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode,
                                                regardless of the value of SCR.SCD.
                                    The ARMv8-A architecture permits, but does not require, this trap to apply to conditional SMC
                                    instructions that fail their condition code check, in the same way as with traps on other conditional
                                    instructions.

G7-5174                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                            Note
                                   •      This trap is only implemented if the implementation includes EL3.
                                   •      SMC instructions are always UNDEFINED at PL0.
                                   •      This bit traps execution of the SMC instruction. It is not a routing control for the SMC
                                          exception. Hyp Trap exceptions and SMC exceptions have different preferred return
                                          addresses.

                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TID3, bit [18]
                                   Trap ID group 3. Traps Non-secure EL1 reads of the following registers to Hyp mode:
                                   ID_PFR0, ID_PFR1, ID_DFR0, ID_AFR0, ID_MMFR0, ID_MMFR1, ID_MMFR2, ID_MMFR3,
                                   ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR3, ID_ISAR4, ID_ISAR5, MVFR0, MVFR1,
                                   MVFR2, and ID_MMFR4, except that if ID_MMFR4 is implemented as RAZ/WI then it is
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether accesses to ID_MMFR4 are trapped.

                                   Also an MRC access to any of the following encodings:
                                   •      coproc==p15, opc1 == 0, CRn == c0, CRm == {c3-c7}, opc2 == {0,1}.
                                   •      coproc==p15, opc1 == 0, CRn == c0, CRm == c3, opc2 == 2.
                                   •      coproc==p15, opc1 == 0, CRn == c0, CRm == c5, opc2 == {4,5}.
                                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this bit traps MRC accesses to the following encodings:
                                   •      coproc==p15, opc1 == 0, CRn == c0, CRm == c2, opc2 == 7.
                                   •      coproc==p15, opc1 == 0, CRn == c0, CRm == c3, opc2 == {3-7}.
                                   •      coproc==p15, opc1 == 0, CRn == c0, CRm == {c4, c6, c7}, opc2 == {2-7}.
                                   •      coproc==p15, opc1 == 0, CRn == c0, CRm == c5, opc2 == {2, 3, 6, 7}.
                                   0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   1           The specified Non-secure EL1 read accesses to ID group 3 registers are trapped to Hyp
                                               mode.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TID2, bit [17]
                                   Trap ID group 2. Traps the following register accesses to Hyp mode:
                                   •      Non-secure EL1 and EL0 reads of the CTR, CCSIDR, CCSIDR2, CLIDR, and CSSELR.
                                   •      Non-secure EL1 and EL0 writes to the CSSELR.
                                   0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   1           The specified Non-secure EL1 and EL0 accesses to ID group 2 registers are trapped to
                                               Hyp mode.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TID1, bit [16]
                                   Trap ID group 1. Traps Non-secure EL1 reads of the following registers to Hyp mode:
                                   TCMTR, TLBTR, REVIDR, AIDR.
                                   0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   1           The specified Non-secure EL1 read accesses to ID group 1 registers are trapped to Hyp
                                               mode.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TID0, bit [15]
                                   Trap ID group 0. Traps the following register accesses to Hyp mode:
                                   •      Non-secure EL1 reads of the JIDR and FPSID.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5175
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    •      If the JIDR is RAZ from Non-secure EL0, Non-secure EL0 reads of the JIDR.

                                             Note
                                    •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the JIDR is RAZ or UNDEFINED at EL0. If it is
                                           UNDEFINED at EL0 then the Undefined Instruction exception takes precedence over this trap.

                                    •      The FPSID is not accessible at EL0.
                                    •      Writes to the FPSID are ignored, and not trapped by this control.

                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           The specified Non-secure EL1 read accesses to ID group 0 registers are trapped to Hyp
                                                mode.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TWE, bit [14]
                                    Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 execution of WFE instructions to Hyp mode:
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Any attempt to execute a WFE instruction at Non-secure EL0 or EL1 is trapped to Hyp
                                                mode, if the instruction would otherwise have caused the PE to enter a low-power state
                                                and it is not trapped by SCTLR.nTWE.
                                    The attempted execution of a conditional WFE instruction is only trapped if the instruction passes
                                    its condition code check.

                                             Note
                                    Since a WFE can complete at any time, even without a Wakeup event, the traps on WFE are not
                                    guaranteed to be taken, even if the WFE is executed when there is no Wakeup event. The only
                                    guarantee is that if the instruction does not complete in finite time in the absence of a Wakeup event,
                                    the trap will be taken.

                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TWI, bit [13]
                                    Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 execution of WFI instructions to Hyp mode.
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Any attempt to execute a WFI instruction at Non-secure EL0 or EL1 is trapped to Hyp
                                                mode, if the instruction would otherwise have caused the PE to enter a low-power state
                                                and it is not trapped by SCTLR.nTWI.
                                    The attempted execution of a conditional WFI instruction is only trapped if the instruction passes
                                    its condition code check.

                                             Note
                                    Since a WFI can complete at any time, even without a Wakeup event, the traps on WFI are not
                                    guaranteed to be taken, even if the WFI is executed when there is no Wakeup event. The only
                                    guarantee is that if the instruction does not complete in finite time in the absence of a Wakeup event,
                                    the trap will be taken.

                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    DC, bit [12]
                                    Default Cacheability.
                                    0           This control has no effect on the Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime.
                                    1           In Non-secure state:
                                                •      The SCTLR.M field behaves as 0 for all purposes other than a direct read of the
                                                       value of the field.

G7-5176                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                                 •      The HCR.VM field behaves as 1 for all purposes other than a direct read of the
                                                        value of the field.
                                                 •      The memory type produced by the first stage of the EL1&0 translation regime is
                                                        Normal Non-Shareable, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate, Outer
                                                        Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate.
                                     This field has no effect on the EL2 and EL3 translation regimes.
                                     This field is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  BSU, bits [11:10]
                                     Barrier Shareability upgrade. This field determines the minimum shareability domain that is applied
                                     to any barrier instruction executed from Non-secure EL1 or Non-secure EL0:
                                     00          No effect
                                     01          Inner Shareable
                                     10          Outer Shareable
                                     11          Full system
                                     This value is combined with the specified level of the barrier held in its instruction, using the same
                                     principles as combining the shareability attributes from two stages of address translation.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  FB, bit [9]
                                     Force broadcast. Causes the following instructions to be broadcast within the Inner Shareable
                                     domain when executed from Non-secure EL1:
                                     BPIALL, TLBIALL, TLBIMVA, TLBIASID, DTLBIALL, DTLBIMVA, DTLBIASID,
                                     ITLBIALL, ITLBIMVA, ITLBIASID, TLBIMVAA, ICIALLU, TLBIMVAL, TLBIMVAAL.
                                     0           This field has no effect on the operation of the specified instructions.
                                     1           When one of the specified instruction is executed at Non-secure EL1, the instruction is
                                                 broadcast within the Inner Shareable shareability domain.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  VA, bit [8]
                                     Virtual SError interrupt exception.
                                     0           This mechanism is not making a virtual SError interrupt pending.
                                     1           A virtual SError interrupt is pending because of this mechanism.
                                     The virtual SError interrupt is enabled only when the value of HCR.{TGE, AMO} is {0, 1}.
                                     The Guest OS cannot distinguish the virtual exception from the corresponding physical exception.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  VI, bit [7]
                                     Virtual IRQ exception.
                                     0           This mechanism is not making a virtual IRQ pending.
                                     1           A virtual IRQ is pending because of this mechanism.
                                     The virtual IRQ is enabled only when the value of HCR.{TGE, IMO} is {0, 1}.
                                     The Guest OS cannot distinguish the virtual exception from the corresponding physical exception.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  VF, bit [6]
                                     Virtual FIQ exception.
                                     0           This mechanism is not making a virtual FIQ pending.
                                     1           A virtual FIQ is pending because of this mechanism.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5177
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    The virtual FIQ is enabled only when the value of HCR.{TGE, FMO} is {0, 1}.
                                    The Guest OS cannot distinguish the virtual exception from the corresponding physical exception.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    AMO, bit [5]
                                    SError interrupt Mask Override. When this bit is set to 1, it overrides the effect of CPSR.A, and
                                    enables virtual exception signaling by the VA bit.
                                    If the value of HCR.TGE is 0, then virtual SError interrupts are enabled in Non-secure state.
                                    If the value of HCR.TGE is 1, then in Non-secure state the HCR.AMO bit behaves as 1 for all
                                    purposes other than a direct read of the value of the bit.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    IMO, bit [4]
                                    IRQ Mask Override. When this bit is set to 1, it overrides the effect of CPSR.I, and enables virtual
                                    exception signaling by the VI bit.
                                    If the value of HCR.TGE is 0, then Virtual IRQ interrupts are enabled in the Non-secure state.
                                    If the value of HCR.TGE is 1, then in Non-secure state the HCR.IMO bit behaves as 1 for all
                                    purposes other than a direct read of the value of the bit.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    FMO, bit [3]
                                    FIQ Mask Override. When this bit is set to 1, it overrides the effect of CPSR.F, and enables virtual
                                    exception signaling by the VF bit.
                                    If the value of HCR.TGE is 0, then Virtual FIQ interrupts are enabled in the Non-secure state.
                                    If the value of HCR.TGE is 1, then in Non-secure state the HCR.FMO bit behaves as 1 for all
                                    purposes other than a direct read of the value of the bit.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    PTW, bit [2]
                                    Protected Table Walk. In the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, a translation table access made
                                    as part of a stage 1 translation table walk is subject to a stage 2 translation. The combining of the
                                    memory type attributes from the two stages of translation means the access might be made to a type
                                    of Device memory. If this occurs then the value of this bit determines the behavior:
                                    0           The translation table walk occurs as if it is to Normal Non-cacheable memory. This
                                                means it can be made speculatively.
                                    1           The memory access generates a stage 2 Permission fault.
                                    This field is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    SWIO, bit [1]
                                    Set/Way Invalidation Override. Causes Non-secure EL1 execution of the data cache invalidate by
                                    set/way instructions to perform a data cache clean and invalidate by set/way.
                                    0           This control has no effect on the operation of data cache invalidate by set/way
                                                instructions.
                                    1           Data cache invalidate by set/way instructions perform a data cache clean and invalidate
                                                by set/way.
                                    When this bit is set to 1, DCISW performs the same invalidation as a DCCISW instruction.
                                    As a result of changes to the behavior of DCISW, this bit is redundant in ARMv8. This bit can be
                                    implemented as RES1.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

G7-5178                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                  VM, bit [0]
                                   Virtualization enable. Enables stage 2 address translation for the Non-secure EL1&0 translation
                                   regime. Possible values of this bit are:
                                   0           Non-secure EL1&0 stage 2 address translation disabled.
                                   1           Non-secure EL1&0 stage 2 address translation enabled.
                                   If the HCR.DC bit is set to 1, then the behavior of the PE when executing in a Non-secure mode
                                   other than Hyp mode is consistent with HCR.VM being 1, regardless of the actual value of
                                   HCR.VM, other than the value returned by an explicit read of HCR.VM.
                                   When the value of this bit is 1, data cache invalidate instructions executed at Non-secure EL1
                                   perform a data cache clean and invalidate. For the invalidate by set/way instruction this behavior
                                   applies regardless of the value of the HCR.SWIO bit.
                                   This bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Accessing the HCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c1, 0    100       000        0001         1111         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x       x         0      -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                  x       0         1      -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                  x       1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                   G7-5179
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5180                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.       ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                              ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.62     HCR2, Hyp Configuration Register 2
                  The HCR2 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides additional configuration controls for virtualization.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HCR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 HCR_EL2[63:32].
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                 into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                 this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HCR2 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HCR2 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                           7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                     RES0                                                         ID

                                                                                                                                CD
                                                                                                                              RES0
                                                                                                                              TERR
                                                                                                                               TEA
                                                                                                                           MIOCNCE

                  Bits [31:7]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  MIOCNCE, bit [6]
                                 Mismatched Inner/Outer Cacheable Non-Coherency Enable, for the Non-secure PL1&0 translation
                                 regime.
                                 0           For the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, for permitted accesses to a memory
                                             location that use a common definition of the Shareability and Cacheability of the
                                             location, there must be no loss of coherency if the Inner Cacheability attribute for those
                                             accesses differs from the Outer Cacheability attribute.
                                 1           For the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, for permitted accesses to a memory
                                             location that use a common definition of the Shareability and Cacheability of the
                                             location, there might be a loss of coherency if the Inner Cacheability attribute for those
                                             accesses differs from the Outer Cacheability attribute.
                                 For more information see Mismatched memory attributes on page E2-3042.
                                 The value of this field has no effect on translation regimes other than the Non-secure PL1&0
                                 translation regime.
                                 This field can be implemented as RAZ/WI.
                                 If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5181
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    TEA, bit [5]
                                       Route synchronous External abort exceptions to EL2. If the RAS Extension is implemented, the
                                       possible values of this bit are:
                                       0           Does not route synchronous External abort exceptions from Non-secure EL0 and EL1
                                                   to EL2.
                                       1           Route synchronous External abort exceptions from Non-secure EL0 and EL1 to EL2, if
                                                   not routed to EL3.
                                       This bit resets to zero on a Warm reset into AArch32 state.
                                       When the RAS Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TERR, bit [4]
                                       Trap Error record accesses. If the RAS Extension is implemented, the possible values of this bit are:
                                       0           Does not trap accesses to error record registers from Non-secure EL1 to EL2.
                                       1           Accesses to the ER* registers from Non-secure EL1 generate a Trap exception to EL2.
                                       This bit resets to zero on a Warm reset into AArch32 state.
                                       When the RAS Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bits [3:2]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    ID, bit [1]
                                       Stage 2 Instruction access cacheability disable. For the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, when
                                       HCR.VM==1, this control forces all stage 2 translations for instruction accesses to Normal memory
                                       to be Non-cacheable.
                                       0           This control has no effect on stage 2 of the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                       1           For the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, forces all stage 2 translations for
                                                   instruction accesses to Normal memory to be Non-cacheable.
                                       This bit has no effect on the EL2 translation regime.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    CD, bit [0]
                                       Stage 2 Data access cacheability disable. When HCR.VM==1, this forces all stage 2 translations for
                                       data accesses and translation table walks to Normal memory to be Non-cacheable for the
                                       Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                       0           This control has no effect on stage 2 of the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime for
                                                   data accesses and translation table walks.
                                       1           For the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, forces all stage 2 translations for data
                                                   accesses and translation table walks to Normal memory to be Non-cacheable.
                                       This bit has no effect on the EL2 translation regime.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Accessing the HCR2
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5182                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c1, 4    100       100        0001         1111         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          -            n/a    -

                                                                               x        0         1      -          -            RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5183
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.63       HDFAR, Hyp Data Fault Address Register
                    The HDFAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Holds the virtual address of the faulting address that caused a synchronous Data Abort exception
                                   that is taken to Hyp mode.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register HDFAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   FAR_EL2[31:0].
                                   AArch32 System register HDFAR is architecturally mapped to AArch32 System register DFAR (S)
                                   when EL2 is implemented.
                                   If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   HDFAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HDFAR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              0

                              VA of faulting address of synchronous Data Abort exception taken to Hyp mode

                    Bits [31:0]
                                   VA of faulting address of synchronous Data Abort exception taken to Hyp mode.
                                   On a Prefetch Abort exception, this register is UNKNOWN.
                                   Any execution in a Non-secure EL1 or Non-secure EL0 mode makes this register UNKNOWN.

                    Accessing the HDFAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2   CRn    coproc      CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c6, c0, 0    100       000    0110   1111        0000

G7-5184                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    -

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5185
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.64       HIFAR, Hyp Instruction Fault Address Register
                    The HIFAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Holds the virtual address of the faulting address that caused a synchronous Prefetch Abort exception
                                    that is taken to Hyp mode.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register HIFAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    FAR_EL2[63:32].
                                    AArch32 System register HIFAR is architecturally mapped to AArch32 System register IFAR (S)
                                    when EL2 is implemented.
                                    If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    HIFAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HIFAR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                 0

                             VA of faulting address of synchronous Prefetch Abort exception taken to Hyp mode

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    VA of faulting address of synchronous Prefetch Abort exception taken to Hyp mode.
                                    On a Data Abort exception, this register is UNKNOWN.
                                    Any execution in a Non-secure EL1 or Non-secure EL0 mode makes this register UNKNOWN.

                    Accessing the HIFAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc      CRm

                                                               p15, 4, <Rt>, c6, c0, 2    100       010     0110    1111        0000

G7-5186                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    -

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5187
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.65       HMAIR0, Hyp Memory Attribute Indirection Register 0
                    The HMAIR0 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Along with HMAIR1, provides the memory attribute encodings corresponding to the possible
                                       AttrIndx values in a Long-descriptor format translation table entry for stage 1 translations for
                                       memory accesses from Hyp mode.
                                       AttrIndx[2] indicates the HMAIR register to be used:
                                       •     When AttrIndx[2] is 0, HMAIR0 is used.
                                       •     When AttrIndx[2] is 1, HMAIR1 is used.

                    Configurations
                                       AArch32 System register HMAIR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       MAIR_EL2[31:0].
                                       If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                       RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                       HMAIR0 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HMAIR0 bit assignments are:

                    When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                    31                       24 23                    16 15                      8 7                      0

                              Attr3                       Attr2                    Attr1                     Attr0

                    Attr<n>, bits [8n+7:8n], for n = 0 to 3
                                       The memory attribute encoding for an AttrIndx[2:0] entry in a Long descriptor format translation
                                       table entry, where:
                                       •     AttrIndx[2:0] gives the value of <n> in Attr<n>.
                                       •     AttrIndx[2] defines which MAIR to access. Attr7 to Attr4 are in MAIR1, and Attr3 to Attr0
                                             are in MAIR0.
                                       Bits [7:4] are encoded as follows:

                                      Attr<n>[7:4]       Meaning

                                      0000               Device memory. See encoding of Attr<n>[3:0] for the type of Device memory.

                                      00RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Transient

                                      0100               Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable

                                      01RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Transient

                                      10RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Non-transient

                                      11RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Non-transient

                                       R = Outer Read-Allocate policy, W = Outer Write-Allocate policy.

G7-5188                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                 G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                     G7.2 General system control registers

                                     The meaning of bits [3:0] depends on the value of bits [7:4]:

      Attr<n>[3:0]       Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is 0000                Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is not 0000

      0000               Device-nGnRnE memory                             UNPREDICTABLE

      00RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Transient

      0100               Device-nGnRE memory                              Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable

      01RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Transient

      1000               Device-nGRE memory                               Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient (RW=00)

      10RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient

      1100               Device-GRE memory                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient (RW=00)

      11RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient

                                     R = Inner Read-Allocate policy, W = Inner Write-Allocate policy.
                                     The R and W bits in some Attr<n> fields have the following meanings:

                                                                                                                  R or W            Meaning

                                                                                                                  0                 No Allocate

                                                                                                                  1                 Allocate

                     Accessing the HMAIR0
                     This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                     MRC <syntax>

                     This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                     MCR <syntax>

                     This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 4, <Rt>, c10, c2, 0    100       000        1010         1111         0010

                     Accessibility
                     The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x       x         0      -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                   x       0         1      -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                   x       1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5189
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5190                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.66     HMAIR1, Hyp Memory Attribute Indirection Register 1
                  The HMAIR1 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Along with HMAIR0, provides the memory attribute encodings corresponding to the possible
                                     AttrIndx values in a Long-descriptor format translation table entry for stage 1 translations for
                                     memory accesses from Hyp mode.
                                     AttrIndx[2] indicates the HMAIR register to be used:
                                     •     When AttrIndx[2] is 0, HMAIR0 is used.
                                     •     When AttrIndx[2] is 1, HMAIR1 is used.

                  Configurations
                                     AArch32 System register HMAIR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     MAIR_EL2[63:32].
                                     If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                     RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                     HMAIR1 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HMAIR1 bit assignments are:

                  When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                  31                       24 23                    16 15                      8 7                      0

                            Attr7                       Attr6                    Attr5                     Attr4

                  Attr<n>, bits [8(n-4)+7:8(n-4)], for n = 4 to 7
                                     The memory attribute encoding for an AttrIndx[2:0] entry in a Long descriptor format translation
                                     table entry, where:
                                     •     AttrIndx[2:0] gives the value of <n> in Attr<n>.
                                     •     AttrIndx[2] defines which MAIR to access. Attr7 to Attr4 are in MAIR1, and Attr3 to Attr0
                                           are in MAIR0.
                                     Bits [7:4] are encoded as follows:

                                    Attr<n>[7:4]       Meaning

                                    0000               Device memory. See encoding of Attr<n>[3:0] for the type of Device memory.

                                    00RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Transient

                                    0100               Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable

                                    01RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Transient

                                    10RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Non-transient

                                    11RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Non-transient

                                     R = Outer Read-Allocate policy, W = Outer Write-Allocate policy.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5191
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                      The meaning of bits [3:0] depends on the value of bits [7:4]:

       Attr<n>[3:0]       Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is 0000                Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is not 0000

       0000               Device-nGnRnE memory                             UNPREDICTABLE

       00RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Transient

       0100               Device-nGnRE memory                              Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable

       01RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Transient

       1000               Device-nGRE memory                               Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient (RW=00)

       10RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient

       1100               Device-GRE memory                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient (RW=00)

       11RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                    Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient

                                      R = Inner Read-Allocate policy, W = Inner Write-Allocate policy.
                                      The R and W bits in some Attr<n> fields have the following meanings:

                                                                                                                   R or W            Meaning

                                                                                                                   0                 No Allocate

                                                                                                                   1                 Allocate

                      Accessing the HMAIR1
                      This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                      MRC <syntax>

                      This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                      MCR <syntax>

                      This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 4, <Rt>, c10, c2, 1    100       001        1010         1111         0010

                      Accessibility
                      The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                    Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                    E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                    x       x         0      -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                    x       0         1      -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                    x       1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

G7-5192                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5193
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.67       HPFAR, Hyp IPA Fault Address Register
                    The HPFAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                      Holds the faulting IPA for some aborts on a stage 2 translation taken to Hyp mode.

                    Configurations
                                      AArch32 System register HPFAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                      HPFAR_EL2[31:0].
                                      If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                      RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                      HPFAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HPFAR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                       4 3          0

                                                            FIPA[39:12]                                            RES0

                    Execution in any Non-secure mode other than Hyp mode makes this register UNKNOWN.

                    FIPA[39:12], bits [31:4]
                                      Bits [39:12] of the faulting intermediate physical address.

                    Bits [3:0]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the HPFAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                 <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc   CRm

                                                                 p15, 4, <Rt>, c6, c0, 4    100       100     0110    1111     0000

G7-5194                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    -

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5195
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.68       HRMR, Hyp Reset Management Register
                    The HRMR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    If EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level and this register is implemented:
                                    •     A write to the register at EL2 can request a Warm reset.
                                    •     If EL2 can use AArch32 and AArch64, this register specifies the Execution state that the PE
                                          boots into on a Warm reset.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register HRMR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register RMR_EL2.
                                    Only implemented if EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level. In this case:
                                    •     If EL2 can use AArch32 and AArch64 then this register must be implemented.
                                    •     If EL2 cannot use AArch64 then it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the register is
                                          implemented.
                                    See the field descriptions for the reset values. These apply whenever the register is implemented.

                    Attributes
                                    HRMR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HRMR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                          2 1 0

                                                                 RES0                                             RR

                                                                                                                                AA64

                    Bits [31:2]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    RR, bit [1]
                                    Reset Request. Setting this bit to 1 requests a Warm reset.
                                    This field resets to 0 on a Warm or Cold reset.

                    AA64, bit [0]
                                    When EL2 can use AArch64, determines which Execution state the PE boots into after a Warm
                                    reset:
                                    0           AArch32.
                                    1           AArch64.
                                    On coming out of the Warm reset, execution starts at the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED reset vector
                                    address of the specified Execution state.
                                    If EL2 cannot use AArch64 this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                    When implemented as a RW field, this field resets to 0 on a Cold reset.

                    Accessing the HRMR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

G7-5196                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 4, <Rt>, c12, c0, 2    100       010        1100         1111         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility
                          Configuration
                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                          EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        0         1      -          -            RW     n/a

                          EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     n/a

                  When HRMR is not implemented, the encoding for this register is UNDEFINED.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HSTR.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5197
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.69       HSCTLR, Hyp System Control Register
                    The HSCTLR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Provides top level control of the system operation in Hyp mode.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register HSCTLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    SCTLR_EL2.
                                    If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                    Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                    into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to architecturally
                                    UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    HSCTLR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HSCTLR bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15       13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                       TE                                               RES0      I                             C A M

      RES0                                                                                                                    nTLSMD
      RES1                                                                                                                   LSMAOE
      RES0                                                                                                                  CP15BEN
      EE                                                                                                                        RES0
      RES0                                                                                                                        ITD
      RES1                                                                                                                       SED
      RES0                                                                                                                      RES0
      WXN                                                                                                                       RES1
      RES1
      RES0
      RES1

                    Bit [31]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    TE, bit [30]
                                    T32 Exception Enable. This bit controls whether exceptions to EL2 are taken to A32 or T32 state:
                                    0           Exceptions, including reset, taken to A32 state.
                                    1           Exceptions, including reset, taken to T32 state.
                                    This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [29:28]
                                    Reserved, RES1.

                    Bits [27:26]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

G7-5198                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                  EE, bit [25]
                                     The value of the PSTATE.E bit on entry to Hyp mode, the endianness of stage 1 translation table
                                     walks in the EL2 translation regime, and the endianness of stage 2 translation table walks in the
                                     PL1&0 translation regime.
                                     The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0           Little-endian. PSTATE.E is cleared to 0 on entry to Hyp mode. Stage 1 translation table
                                                 walks in the EL2 translation regime, and stage 2 translation table walks in the PL1&0
                                                 translation regime are little-endian.
                                     1           Big-endian. PSTATE.E is set to 1 on entry to Hyp mode. Stage 1 translation table walks
                                                 in the EL2 translation regime, and stage 2 translation table walks in the PL1&0
                                                 translation regime are big-endian.
                                     If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support at Exception Levels higher than EL0, this
                                     bit is RES0.
                                     If an implementation does not provide Little-endian support at Exception Levels higher than EL0,
                                     this bit is RES1.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                     field, it resets to an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED value.

                  Bit [24]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  Bits [23:22]
                                     Reserved, RES1.

                  Bits [21:20]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  WXN, bit [19]
                                     Write permission implies XN (Execute-never). For the EL2 translation regime, this bit can force all
                                     memory regions that are writable to be treated as XN. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0           This control has no effect on memory access permissions.
                                     1           Any region that is writable in the EL2 translation regime is forced to XN for accesses
                                                 from software executing at EL2.
                                     The WXN bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bit [18]
                                     Reserved, RES1.

                  Bit [17]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [16]
                                     Reserved, RES1.

                  Bits [15:13]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  I, bit [12]
                                     Instruction access Cacheability control, for accesses at EL2:
                                     0           All instruction access to Normal memory from EL2 are Non-cacheable for all levels of
                                                 instruction and unified cache.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5199
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                                If the value of HSCTLR.M is 0, instruction accesses from stage 1 of the EL2 translation
                                                regime are to Normal, Outer Shareable, Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable
                                                memory.
                                    1           All instruction access to Normal memory from EL2 can be cached at all levels of
                                                instruction and unified cache.
                                                If the value of HSCTLR.M is 0, instruction accesses from stage 1 of the EL2 translation
                                                regime are to Normal, Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Through, Outer Write-Through
                                                memory.
                                    This bit has no effect on the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bit [11]
                                    Reserved, RES1.

                    Bits [10:9]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    SED, bit [8]
                                    SETEND instruction disable. Disables SETEND instructions at EL2.
                                    0           SETEND instruction execution is enabled at EL2.
                                    1           SETEND instructions are UNDEFINED at EL2.
                                    If the implementation does not support mixed-endian operation at EL2, this bit is RES1.
                                    If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    ITD, bit [7]
                                    IT Disable. Disables some uses of IT instructions at EL2.
                                    0           All IT instruction functionality is enabled at EL2.
                                    1           Any attempt at EL2 to execute any of the following is UNDEFINED:
                                                •      All encodings of the IT instruction with hw1[3:0]!=1000.
                                                •      All encodings of the subsequent instruction with the following values for hw1:
                                                       11xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                    All 32-bit instructions, and the 16-bit instructions B, UDF, SVC,
                                                                    LDM, and STM.
                                                       1011xxxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                    All instructions in Miscellaneous 16-bit instructions on
                                                                    page F3-3137.
                                                       10100xxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                    ADD Rd, PC, #imm
                                                       01001xxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                    LDR Rd, [PC, #imm]
                                                       0100x1xxx1111xxx
                                                                    ADD Rdn, PC; CMP Rn, PC; MOV Rd, PC; BX PC; BLX PC.
                                                       010001xx1xxxx111
                                                                   ADD PC, Rm; CMP PC, Rm; MOV PC, Rm. This pattern also covers
                                                                   UNPREDICTABLE cases with BLX Rn.
                                                These instructions are always UNDEFINED, regardless of whether they would pass or fail
                                                the condition code check that applies to them as a result of being in an IT block.
                                                It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the IT instruction is treated as:
                                                •      A 16-bit instruction, that can only be followed by another 16-bit instruction.
                                                •      The first half of a 32-bit instruction.

G7-5200                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                             This means that, for the situations that are UNDEFINED, either the second 16-bit
                                             instruction or the 32-bit instruction is UNDEFINED.
                                             An implementation might vary dynamically as to whether IT is treated as a 16-bit
                                             instruction or the first half of a 32-bit instruction.
                                 If an instruction in an active IT block that would be disabled by this field sets this field to 1 then
                                 behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. For more information see Changes to an ITD control by
                                 an instruction in an IT block on page E1-2988
                                 ITD is optional, but if it is implemented in the SCTLR then it must also be implemented in the
                                 HSCTLR. If it is not implemented then this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                 If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bit [6]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  CP15BEN, bit [5]
                                 System instruction memory barrier enable. Enables accesses to the DMB, DSB, and ISB System
                                 instructions in the (coproc==1111) encoding space from EL2:
                                 0           EL2 execution of the CP15DMB, CP15DSB, and CP15ISB instructions is UNDEFINED.
                                 1           EL2 execution of the CP15DMB, CP15DSB, and CP15ISB instructions is enabled.
                                 CP15BEN is optional, but if it is implemented in the SCTLR then it must also be implemented in
                                 the HSCTLR. If it is not implemented then this bit is RAO/WI.
                                 If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  LSMAOE, bit [4]
                            In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                 Load Multiple and Store Multiple Atomicity and Ordering Enable. When the OPTIONAL feature
                                 ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented, defined values are:
                                 0           For all memory accesses at EL2, A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple can
                                             have an interrupt taken during the sequence memory accesses, and the memory accesses
                                             are not required to be ordered.
                                 1           The ordering and interrupt behavior of A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple
                                             at EL2 is as defined for ARMv8.0.
                                 This bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                 If this bit is not implemented, it is RES1.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 1.
                            In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                 Reserved, RES1.

                  nTLSMD, bit [3]
                            In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                 No Trap Load Multiple and Store Multiple to Device-nGRE/Device-nGnRE/Device-nGnRnE
                                 memory. When the OPTIONAL feature ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented, defined values are:
                                 0           All memory accesses by A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple at EL2 that are
                                             marked at stage 1 as Device-nGRE/Device-nGnRE/Device-nGnRnE memory are
                                             trapped and generate a stage 1 Alignment fault.
                                 1           All memory accesses by A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple at EL2 that are
                                             marked at stage 1 as Device-nGRE/Device-nGnRE/Device-nGnRnE memory are not
                                             trapped.
                                 This bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                 If this bit is not implemented, it is RES1.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5201
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                 In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                      Reserved, RES1.

                    C, bit [2]
                                      Cacheability control, for data accesses at EL2:
                                      0           All data access to Normal memory from EL2, and all accesses to the EL2 translation
                                                  tables, are Non-cacheable for all levels of data and unified cache.
                                      1           All data access to Normal memory from EL2, and all accesses to the EL2 translation
                                                  tables, can be cached at all levels of data and unified cache.
                                      This bit has no effect on the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                      When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    A, bit [1]
                                      Alignment check enable. This is the enable bit for Alignment fault checking at EL2:
                                      0           Alignment fault checking disabled when executing at EL2.
                                                  Instructions that load or store one or more registers, other than load/store exclusive and
                                                  load-acquire/store-release, do not check that the address being accessed is aligned to the
                                                  size of the data element or data elements being accessed.
                                      1           Alignment fault checking enabled when executing at EL2.
                                                  All instructions that load or store one or more registers have an alignment check that the
                                                  address being accessed is aligned to the size of the data element or data elements being
                                                  accessed. If this check fails it causes an Alignment fault, which is taken as a Data Abort
                                                  exception.
                                      Load/store exclusive and load-acquire/store-release instructions have an alignment check regardless
                                      of the value of the A bit.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    M, bit [0]
                                      MMU enable for EL2 stage 1 address translation. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           EL2 stage 1 address translation disabled.
                                                  See the HSCTLR.I field for the behavior of instruction accesses to Normal memory.
                                      1           EL2 stage 1 address translation enabled.
                                      When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Accessing the HSCTLR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                  <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                                  p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c0, 0    100       000      0001     1111       0000

G7-5202                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    -

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5203
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.70       HSR, Hyp Syndrome Register
                    The HSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Holds syndrome information for an exception taken to Hyp mode.

                    Configurations
                                     AArch32 System register HSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register ESR_EL2.
                                     If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                     RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                     HSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HSR bit assignments are:

                    31              26 25 24                                                                            0

                           EC          IL                                        ISS

                    Execution in any Non-secure PE mode other than Hyp mode makes this register UNKNOWN.

                    When an UNPREDICTABLE instruction is treated as UNDEFINED, and the exception is taken to EL2, the value of HSR
                    is UNKNOWN. The value written to HSR must be consistent with a value that could be created as a result of an
                    exception from the same Exception level that generated the exception as a result of a situation that is not
                    UNPREDICTABLE at that Exception level, in order to avoid the possibility of a privilege violation.

                    EC, bits [31:26]
                                     Exception Class. Indicates the reason for the exception that this register holds information about.
                                     Possible values of this field are:
                                     EC == 000000
                                              Unknown reason.
                                              See ISS encoding for exceptions with an unknown reason.
                                     EC == 000001
                                              Trapped WFI or WFE instruction execution.
                                              Conditional WFE and WFI instructions that fail their condition code check do not cause
                                              an exception.
                                              See ISS encoding for an exception from a WFI or WFE instruction.
                                     EC == 000011
                                              Trapped MCR or MRC access with (coproc==1111) that is not reported using EC
                                              0b000000.
                                              See ISS encoding for an exception from an MCR or MRC access.
                                     EC == 000100
                                              Trapped MCRR or MRRC access with (coproc==1111) that is not reported using EC
                                              0b000000.
                                              See ISS encoding for an exception from an MCRR or MRRC access.
                                     EC == 000101
                                              Trapped MCR or MRC access with (coproc==1110).
                                              See ISS encoding for an exception from an MCR or MRC access.

G7-5204                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                  G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                      G7.2 General system control registers

                       EC == 000110
                                Trapped LDC or STC access.
                                The only architected uses of these instructions are:
                                   •      An STC to write data to memory from DBGDTRRXint.
                                   •     An LDC to read data from memory to DBGDTRTXint.
                                   See ISS encoding for an exception from an LDC or STC instruction.
                       EC == 000111
                                Access to Advanced SIMD or floating-point functionality trapped by a HCPTR.{TASE,
                                TCP10} control.
                                Excludes exceptions generated because Advanced SIMD and floating-point are not
                                implemented. These are reported with EC value 0b000000.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from an access to SIMD or floating-point
                                functionality, resulting from HCPTR.
                       EC == 001000
                                Trapped VMRS access, from ID group trap, that is not reported using EC 0b000111.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from an MCR or MRC access.
                       EC == 001100
                                 Trapped MRRC access with (coproc==1110).
                                 See ISS encoding for an exception from an MCRR or MRRC access.
                       EC == 001110
                                 Illegal exception return to AArch32 state.
                                 See ISS encoding for an exception from an Illegal state or PC alignment fault.
                       EC == 010001
                                Exception on SVC instruction execution in AArch32 state routed to EL2.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from HVC or SVC instruction execution.
                       EC == 010010
                                HVC instruction execution in AArch32 state, when HVC is not disabled.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from HVC or SVC instruction execution.
                       EC == 010011
                                Trapped execution of SMC instruction in AArch32 state.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from SMC instruction execution.
                       EC == 100000
                                Prefetch Abort from a lower Exception level.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from a Prefetch Abort.
                       EC == 100001
                                Prefetch Abort taken without a change in Exception level.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from a Prefetch Abort.
                       EC == 100010
                                PC alignment fault exception.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from an Illegal state or PC alignment fault.
                       EC == 100100
                                Data Abort from a lower Exception level.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from a Data Abort.
                       EC == 100101
                                Data Abort taken without a change in Exception level.
                                See ISS encoding for an exception from a Data Abort.
                       All other EC values are reserved by ARM, and:
                       •      Unused values in the range 0b000000 - 0b101100 (0x00 - 0x2C) are reserved for future use for
                              synchronous exceptions.

ARM DDI 0487C.a   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5205
ID121917                                  Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                       •     Unused values in the range 0b101101 - 0b111111 (0x2D - 0x3F) are reserved for future use, and
                                             might be used for synchronous or asynchronous exceptions.
                                       The effect of programming this field to a reserved value is that behavior is CONSTRAINED
                                       UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped registers and
                                       translation table entries on page K1-6427.

                    IL, bit [25]
                                       Instruction length bit. Indicates the size of the instruction that has been trapped to Hyp mode. When
                                       this bit is valid, possible values of this bit are:
                                       0           16-bit instruction trapped.
                                       1           32-bit instruction trapped.
                                       This field is RES1 and not valid for the following cases:
                                       •     When the EC field is 0b000000, indicating an exception with an unknown reason.
                                       •     Prefetch Aborts.
                                       •     Data Aborts for which the HSR.ISS.ISV field is 0.
                                       •     When the EC value is 0b001110, indicating an Illegal state exception.

                                                 Note
                                       This is a change from the behavior in ARMv7, where the IL field is UNK/SBZP for the
                                       corresponding cases.

                                       The IL field is not valid and is UNKNOWN on an exception from a PC alignment fault.

                    ISS, bits [24:0]
                                       Instruction Specific Syndrome. Architecturally, this field can be defined independently for each
                                       defined Exception class. However, in practice, some ISS encodings are used for more than one
                                       Exception class.
                                       The following subsections describe each ISS format.

                    ISS encoding for exceptions with an unknown reason

                    This encoding is used by:

                    •      Unknown reason.

                    The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                            24                                                                             0

                                                                                  RES0

                    Bits [24:0]
                                       Reserved, RES0.
                    This EC code is used for all exceptions that are not covered by any other EC value. This includes exceptions that
                    are generated in the following situations:

                    •      The attempted execution of an instruction bit pattern that has no allocated instruction in the current PE mode
                           in the current Security state, including:
                           —       A read access using a System register encoding pattern that is not allocated for reads at the current
                                   Exception level and Security state.
                           —       A write access using a System register encoding pattern that is not allocated for writes at the current
                                   Exception level and Security state.
                           —       Instruction encodings for instructions not implemented in the implementation.

G7-5206                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  •     In Debug state, the attempted execution of an instruction bit pattern that is unallocated in Debug state.

                  •     In Non-debug state, the attempted execution of an instruction bit pattern that is unallocated in Non-debug
                        state.

                  •     The attempted execution of a short vector floating-point instruction.

                  •     In an implementation that does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, an attempted
                        access to Advanced SIMD or floating-point functionality under conditions where that access would be
                        permitted if that functionality was present. This includes the attempted execution of an Advanced SIMD or
                        floating-point instruction, and attempted accesses to Advanced SIMD and floating-point System registers.

                  •     An exception generated because of the value of one of the SCTLR.{ITD, SED, CP15BEN} control bits.

                  •     Attempted execution of:
                        —      An HVC instruction when disabled by HCR.HCD, SCR.HCE, or SCR_EL3.HCE.
                        —      An SMC instruction when disabled by SCR.SCD or SCR_EL3.SMD.
                        —      An HLT instruction when disabled by EDSCR.HDE.

                  •     An exception generated because of the attempted execution of an MSR (Banked register) or MRS (Banked
                        register) instruction that would access a Banked register that is not accessible from the Security state and PE
                        mode at which the instruction was executed.

                          Note
                  An exception is generated only if the CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior of the instruction is that it is
                  UNDEFINED, see MSR (banked register) and MRS (banked register) on page K1-6411.

                  •     Attempted execution, in Debug state, of:
                        —      A DCPS1 instruction in Non-secure state from EL0 when EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of
                               HCR.TGE is 1.
                        —      A DCPS2 instruction at EL1 or EL0 when EL2 is not implemented, or when EL3 is using AArch32
                               and the value of SCR.NS is 0, or when EL3 is using AArch64 and the value of SCR_EL3.NS is 0.
                        —      A DCPS3 instruction when EL3 is not implemented, or when the value of EDSCR.SDD is 1.

                  •     In Debug state when the value of EDSCR.SDD is 1, the attempted execution at EL2, EL1, or EL0 of an
                        instruction that is configured to trap to EL3.

                  Undefined Instruction exception, when the value of HCR.TGE is 1 on page G1-4639 describes the configuration
                  settings for a trap that returns an HSR.EC value of 0b000000.

                  ISS encoding for an exception from a WFI or WFE instruction

                  This encoding is used by:

                  •     Trapped WFI or WFE instruction execution.
                        Conditional WFE and WFI instructions that fail their condition code check do not cause an exception.

                  The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5207
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                            24 23          20 19                                                         1 0

                                                    COND                                 RES0                               TI

                           CV

                    CV, bit [24]
                                       Condition code valid. Possible values of this bit are:
                                       0            The COND field is not valid.
                                       1            The COND field is valid.
                                       When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1.
                                       When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether CV is set to 1 or set to
                                       0. See the description of the COND field for more information.

                    COND, bits [23:20]
                                       The condition code for the trapped instruction.
                                       When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1 and:
                                       •      If the instruction is conditional, COND is set to the condition code field value from the
                                              instruction.
                                       •      If the instruction is unconditional, COND is set to 0b1110.
                                       A conditional A32 instruction that is known to pass its condition code check can be presented either:
                                       •      With COND set to 0b1110, the value for unconditional.
                                       •      With the COND value held in the instruction.
                                       When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                       •      CV is set to 0 and COND is set to an UNKNOWN value. Software must examine the SPSR.IT
                                              field to determine the condition, if any, of the T32 instruction.
                                       •      CV is set to 1 and COND is set to the condition code for the condition that applied to the
                                              instruction.
                                       For an implementation that, for both A32 and T32 instructions, takes an exception on a trapped
                                       conditional instruction only if the instruction passes its condition code check, these definitions mean
                                       that when CV is set to 1 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the COND field is set to 0b1110,
                                       or to the value of any condition that applied to the instruction.

                    Bits [19:1]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    TI, bit [0]
                                       Trapped instruction. Possible values of this bit are:
                                       0            WFI trapped.
                                       1            WFE trapped.

                    Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL0 and EL1 execution of WFE and WFI instructions on page G1-4721 describes
                    the configuration settings for this trap.

                    ISS encoding for an exception from an MCR or MRC access

                    This encoding is used by:

                    •      Trapped MCR or MRC access with (coproc==1111) that is not reported using EC 0b000000.

                    •      Trapped MCR or MRC access with (coproc==1110).

G7-5208                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  •     Trapped VMRS access, from ID group trap, that is not reported using EC 0b000111.

                  The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                       24 23          20 19    17 16    14 13         10 9 8             5 4         1 0

                                               COND       Opc2      Opc1        CRn              Rt            CRm

                        CV                                                                                                     Direction
                                                                                                                                  RES0

                  CV, bit [24]
                                  Condition code valid. Possible values of this bit are:
                                  0            The COND field is not valid.
                                  1            The COND field is valid.
                                  When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1.
                                  When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether CV is set to 1 or set to
                                  0. See the description of the COND field for more information.

                  COND, bits [23:20]
                                  The condition code for the trapped instruction.
                                  When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1 and:
                                  •      If the instruction is conditional, COND is set to the condition code field value from the
                                         instruction.
                                  •      If the instruction is unconditional, COND is set to 0b1110.
                                  A conditional A32 instruction that is known to pass its condition code check can be presented either:
                                  •      With COND set to 0b1110, the value for unconditional.
                                  •      With the COND value held in the instruction.
                                  When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                  •      CV is set to 0 and COND is set to an UNKNOWN value. Software must examine the SPSR.IT
                                         field to determine the condition, if any, of the T32 instruction.
                                  •      CV is set to 1 and COND is set to the condition code for the condition that applied to the
                                         instruction.
                                  For an implementation that, for both A32 and T32 instructions, takes an exception on a trapped
                                  conditional instruction only if the instruction passes its condition code check, these definitions mean
                                  that when CV is set to 1 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the COND field is set to 0b1110,
                                  or to the value of any condition that applied to the instruction.

                  Opc2, bits [19:17]
                                  The Opc2 value from the issued instruction.
                                  For a trapped VMRS access, holds the value 0b000.

                  Opc1, bits [16:14]
                                  The Opc1 value from the issued instruction.
                                  For a trapped VMRS access, holds the value 0b111.

                  CRn, bits [13:10]
                                  The CRn value from the issued instruction.
                                  For a trapped VMRS access, holds the reg field from the VMRS instruction encoding.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5209
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Bit [9]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                    Rt, bits [8:5]
                                     The Rt value from the issued instruction, the general-purpose register used for the transfer.

                    CRm, bits [4:1]
                                     The CRm value from the issued instruction.
                                     For a trapped VMRS access, holds the value 0b0000.

                    Direction, bit [0]
                                     Indicates the direction of the trapped instruction. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0           Write to System register space. MCR instruction.
                                     1           Read from System register space. MRC or VMRS instruction.

                    The following sections describe configuration settings for traps that are reported using EC value 0b000011:

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to the ID registers on page G1-4718.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to lockdown, DMA, and TCM operations on
                           page G1-4717.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL1 execution of cache maintenance instructions on page G1-4716.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL1 execution of TLB maintenance instructions on page G1-4715.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL1 accesses to the Auxiliary Control Register on page G1-4716.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to Performance Monitors registers on
                           page G1-4728.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL1 accesses to the CPACR on page G1-4723.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL1 accesses to virtual memory control registers on page G1-4714.

                    •      General trapping to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to System registers in the
                           (coproc==0b1111) encoding space on page G1-4724.

                    The following sections describe configuration settings for traps that are reported using EC value 0b000101:

                    •      ID group 0, Primary device identification registers on page G1-4719.

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure System register accesses to trace registers on page G1-4723.

                    •      Trapping Non-secure System register accesses to Debug ROM registers on page G1-4726.

                    •      Trapping Non-secure System register accesses to powerdown debug registers on page G1-4726.

                    •      Trapping general Non-secure System register accesses to debug registers on page G1-4727.

                    The following sections describes configuration settings for traps that are reported using EC value 0b001000:

                    •      ID group 0, Primary device identification registers on page G1-4719.

                    •      ID group 3, Detailed feature identification registers on page G1-4720.

                    ISS encoding for an exception from an MCRR or MRRC access

                    This encoding is used by:

                    •      Trapped MCRR or MRRC access with (coproc==1111) that is not reported using EC 0b000000.

                    •      Trapped MRRC access with (coproc==1110).

G7-5210                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                        24 23          20 19          16 15 14 13         10 9 8          5 4         1 0

                                                COND           Opc1                 Rt2            Rt           CRm

                            CV                                                                                                  Direction
                            RES0                                                                                                   RES0

                  CV, bit [24]
                                   Condition code valid. Possible values of this bit are:
                                   0            The COND field is not valid.
                                   1            The COND field is valid.
                                   When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1.
                                   When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether CV is set to 1 or set to
                                   0. See the description of the COND field for more information.

                  COND, bits [23:20]
                                   The condition code for the trapped instruction.
                                   When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1 and:
                                   •      If the instruction is conditional, COND is set to the condition code field value from the
                                          instruction.
                                   •      If the instruction is unconditional, COND is set to 0b1110.
                                   A conditional A32 instruction that is known to pass its condition code check can be presented either:
                                   •      With COND set to 0b1110, the value for unconditional.
                                   •      With the COND value held in the instruction.
                                   When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                   •      CV is set to 0 and COND is set to an UNKNOWN value. Software must examine the SPSR.IT
                                          field to determine the condition, if any, of the T32 instruction.
                                   •      CV is set to 1 and COND is set to the condition code for the condition that applied to the
                                          instruction.
                                   For an implementation that, for both A32 and T32 instructions, takes an exception on a trapped
                                   conditional instruction only if the instruction passes its condition code check, these definitions mean
                                   that when CV is set to 1 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the COND field is set to 0b1110,
                                   or to the value of any condition that applied to the instruction.

                  Opc1, bits [19:16]
                                   The Opc1 value from the issued instruction.

                  Bits [15:14]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  Rt2, bits [13:10]
                                   The Rt2 value from the issued instruction, the second general-purpose register used for the transfer.

                  Bit [9]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  Rt, bits [8:5]
                                   The Rt value from the issued instruction, the first general-purpose register used for the transfer.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5211
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    CRm, bits [4:1]
                                     The CRm value from the issued instruction.

                    Direction, bit [0]
                                     Indicates the direction of the trapped instruction. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0            Write to System register space. MCRR instruction.
                                     1            Read from System register space. MRRC instruction.

                    The following sections describe configuration settings for traps that are reported using EC value 0b000100:

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL1 accesses to virtual memory control registers on page G1-4714.

                    •      General trapping to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to System registers in the
                           (coproc==0b1111) encoding space on page G1-4724.

                    The following sections describe configuration settings for traps that are reported using EC value 0b001100:

                    •      Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure System register accesses to trace registers on page G1-4723.

                    •      Trapping Non-secure System register accesses to Debug ROM registers on page G1-4726.

                    ISS encoding for an exception from an LDC or STC instruction

                    This encoding is used by:

                    •      Trapped LDC or STC access.
                           The only architected uses of these instructions are:
                           —       An STC to write data to memory from DBGDTRRXint.
                           —       An LDC to read data from memory to DBGDTRTXint.

                    The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                          24 23          20 19                    12 11       9 8           5 4 3        1 0

                                                  COND               imm8              RES0         Rn              AM

                           CV                                                                                                   Direction
                                                                                                                                    Offset

                    CV, bit [24]
                                     Condition code valid. Possible values of this bit are:
                                     0            The COND field is not valid.
                                     1            The COND field is valid.
                                     When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1.
                                     When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether CV is set to 1 or set to
                                     0. See the description of the COND field for more information.

                    COND, bits [23:20]
                                     The condition code for the trapped instruction.
                                     When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1 and:
                                     •      If the instruction is conditional, COND is set to the condition code field value from the
                                            instruction.
                                     •      If the instruction is unconditional, COND is set to 0b1110.

G7-5212                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                                    A conditional A32 instruction that is known to pass its condition code check can be presented either:
                                    •      With COND set to 0b1110, the value for unconditional.
                                    •      With the COND value held in the instruction.
                                    When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                    •      CV is set to 0 and COND is set to an UNKNOWN value. Software must examine the SPSR.IT
                                           field to determine the condition, if any, of the T32 instruction.
                                    •      CV is set to 1 and COND is set to the condition code for the condition that applied to the
                                           instruction.
                                    For an implementation that, for both A32 and T32 instructions, takes an exception on a trapped
                                    conditional instruction only if the instruction passes its condition code check, these definitions mean
                                    that when CV is set to 1 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the COND field is set to 0b1110,
                                    or to the value of any condition that applied to the instruction.

                  imm8, bits [19:12]
                                    The immediate value from the issued instruction.

                  Bits [11:9]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Rn, bits [8:5]
                                    The Rn value from the issued instruction. Valid only when AM[2] is 0, indicating an immediate
                                    form of the LDC or STC instruction.
                                    When AM[2] is 1, indicating a literal form of the LDC or STC instruction, this field is UNKNOWN.

                  Offset, bit [4]
                                    Indicates whether the offset is added or subtracted:
                                    0           Subtract offset.
                                    1           Add offset.
                                    This bit corresponds to the U bit in the instruction encoding.

                  AM, bits [3:1]
                                    Addressing mode. The permitted values of this field are:
                                    000         Immediate unindexed.
                                    001         Immediate post-indexed.
                                    010         Immediate offset.
                                    011         Immediate pre-indexed.
                                    100         Literal unindexed.
                                                LDC instruction in A32 instruction set only.
                                                For a trapped STC instruction or a trapped T32 LDC instruction this encoding is
                                                reserved.
                                    110         Literal offset.
                                                LDC instruction only.
                                                For a trapped STC instruction, this encoding is reserved.
                                    The values 0b101 and 0b111 are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a reserved value is
                                    that behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and
                                    memory-mapped registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.
                                    Bit [2] in this subfield indicates the instruction form, immediate or literal.
                                    Bits [1:0] in this subfield correspond to the bits {P, W} in the instruction encoding.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G7-5213
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Direction, bit [0]
                                     Indicates the direction of the trapped instruction. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0            Write to memory. STC instruction.
                                     1            Read from memory. LDC instruction.

                    Trapping general Non-secure System register accesses to debug registers on page G1-4727 describes the
                    configuration settings for the trap that is reported using EC value 0b000110.

                    ISS encoding for an exception from an access to SIMD or floating-point functionality, resulting
                    from HCPTR

                    This encoding is used by:

                    •      Access to Advanced SIMD or floating-point functionality trapped by a HCPTR.{TASE, TCP10} control.
                           Excludes exceptions generated because Advanced SIMD and floating-point are not implemented. These are
                           reported with EC value 0b000000.
                    The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                          24 23          20 19                                         6 5 4 3              0

                                                  COND                         RES0                         TA     coproc

                           CV                                                                                                      RES0

                    Excludes exceptions that occur because Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality is not implemented, or
                    because the value of HCR.TGE or HCR_EL2.TGE is 1. These are reported with EC value 0b000000.

                    CV, bit [24]
                                     Condition code valid. Possible values of this bit are:
                                     0            The COND field is not valid.
                                     1            The COND field is valid.
                                     When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1.
                                     When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether CV is set to 1 or set to
                                     0. See the description of the COND field for more information.

                    COND, bits [23:20]
                                     The condition code for the trapped instruction.
                                     When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1 and:
                                     •      If the instruction is conditional, COND is set to the condition code field value from the
                                            instruction.
                                     •      If the instruction is unconditional, COND is set to 0b1110.
                                     A conditional A32 instruction that is known to pass its condition code check can be presented either:
                                     •      With COND set to 0b1110, the value for unconditional.
                                     •      With the COND value held in the instruction.
                                     When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                     •      CV is set to 0 and COND is set to an UNKNOWN value. Software must examine the SPSR.IT
                                            field to determine the condition, if any, of the T32 instruction.
                                     •      CV is set to 1 and COND is set to the condition code for the condition that applied to the
                                            instruction.

G7-5214                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                 For an implementation that, for both A32 and T32 instructions, takes an exception on a trapped
                                 conditional instruction only if the instruction passes its condition code check, these definitions mean
                                 that when CV is set to 1 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the COND field is set to 0b1110,
                                 or to the value of any condition that applied to the instruction.

                  Bits [19:6]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  TA, bit [5]
                                 Indicates trapped use of Advanced SIMD functionality. The possible values of this bit are:
                                 0            Exception was not caused by trapped use of Advanced SIMD functionality.
                                 1            Exception was caused by trapped use of Advanced SIMD functionality.
                                 Any use of an Advanced SIMD instruction that is not also a floating-point instruction that is trapped
                                 to Hyp mode because of a trap configured in the HCPTR sets this bit to 1.
                                 For a list of these instructions, see Controls of Advanced SIMD operation that do not apply to
                                 floating-point operation on page E1-2996.

                  Bit [4]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  coproc, bits [3:0]
                                 When the TA field returns the value 1, this field returns the value 1010, otherwise this field is RES0.

                  The following sections describe the configuration settings for the traps that are reported using EC value 0b000111:

                  •     General trapping to Hyp mode of Non-secure accesses to the SIMD and floating-point registers on
                        page G1-4721.

                  •     Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure accesses to Advanced SIMD functionality on page G1-4722.

                  ISS encoding for an exception from HVC or SVC instruction execution

                  This encoding is used by:

                  •     Exception on SVC instruction execution in AArch32 state routed to EL2.

                  •     HVC instruction execution in AArch32 state, when HVC is not disabled.

                  The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                       24                        16 15                                                0

                                                   RES0                                    imm16

                  Bits [24:16]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  imm16, bits [15:0]
                                 The value of the immediate field from the HVC or SVC instruction.
                                 For an HVC instruction, this is the value of the imm16 field of the issued instruction.
                                 For an SVC instruction:
                                 •      If the instruction is unconditional, then:
                                        —      For the T32 instruction, this field is zero-extended from the imm8 field of the
                                               instruction.
                                        —      For the A32 instruction, this field is the bottom 16 bits of the imm24 field of the
                                               instruction.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5215
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    •      If the instruction is conditional, this field is UNKNOWN.

                    The HVC instruction is unconditional, and a conditional SVC instruction generates an exception only if it passes its
                    condition code check. Therefore, the syndrome information for these exceptions does not require conditionality
                    information.

                    Supervisor Call exception, when the value of HCR.TGE is 1 on page G1-4639 describes the configuration settings
                    for the trap reported with EC value 0b010001.

                    ISS encoding for an exception from SMC instruction execution

                    This encoding is used by:

                    •      Trapped execution of SMC instruction in AArch32 state.

                    The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                          24 23          20 19 18                                                        0

                                                  COND                                    RES0

                           CV
                           CCKNOWNPASS

                    CV, bit [24]
                                    Condition code valid. Possible values of this bit are:
                                    0             The COND field is not valid.
                                    1             The COND field is valid.
                                    When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1.
                                    When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether CV is set to 1 or set to
                                    0. See the description of the COND field for more information.
                                    This field is only valid if CCKNOWNPASS is 1, otherwise it is RES0.

                    COND, bits [23:20]
                                    The condition code for the trapped instruction.
                                    When an A32 instruction is trapped, CV is set to 1 and:
                                    •      If the instruction is conditional, COND is set to the condition code field value from the
                                           instruction.
                                    •      If the instruction is unconditional, COND is set to 0b1110.
                                    A conditional A32 instruction that is known to pass its condition code check can be presented either:
                                    •      With COND set to 0b1110, the value for unconditional.
                                    •      With the COND value held in the instruction.
                                    When a T32 instruction is trapped, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                    •      CV is set to 0 and COND is set to an UNKNOWN value. Software must examine the SPSR.IT
                                           field to determine the condition, if any, of the T32 instruction.
                                    •      CV is set to 1 and COND is set to the condition code for the condition that applied to the
                                           instruction.
                                    For an implementation that, for both A32 and T32 instructions, takes an exception on a trapped
                                    conditional instruction only if the instruction passes its condition code check, these definitions mean
                                    that when CV is set to 1 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the COND field is set to 0b1110,
                                    or to the value of any condition that applied to the instruction.
                                    This field is only valid if CCKNOWNPASS is 1, otherwise it is RES0.

G7-5216                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  CCKNOWNPASS, bit [19]
                                  Indicates whether the instruction might have failed its condition code check.
                                  0           The instruction was unconditional, or was conditional and passed its condition code
                                              check.
                                  1           The instruction was conditional, and might have failed its condition code check.

                  Bits [18:0]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Traps to Hyp mode of Non-secure EL1 execution of SMC instructions on page G1-4718 describes the configuration
                  settings for this trap, for instructions executed in Non-secure PL1 modes.

                  ISS encoding for an exception from a Prefetch Abort

                  This encoding is used by:

                  •     Prefetch Abort from a lower Exception level.

                  •     Prefetch Abort taken without a change in Exception level.

                  The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                       24                                          11 10 9 8 7 6 5                        0

                                                            RES0                                               IFSC

                                                                                                                                 RES0
                                                                                                                                S1PTW
                                                                                                                                 RES0
                                                                                                                                    EA
                                                                                                                                   FnV

                  Bits [24:11]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  FnV, bit [10]
                                  FAR not Valid, for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on a
                                  translation table walk.
                                  0           HIFAR is valid.
                                  1           HIFAR is not valid, and holds an UNKNOWN value.
                                  This field is only valid if the IFSC code is 010000. It is RES0 for all other aborts.

                  EA, bit [9]
                                  External abort type. This bit can provide an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of External
                                  aborts.
                                  For any abort other than an External abort this bit returns a value of 0.

                  Bit [8]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  S1PTW, bit [7]
                                  For a stage 2 fault, indicates whether the fault was a stage 2 fault on an access made for a stage 1
                                  translation table walk:
                                  0           Fault not on a stage 2 translation for a stage 1 translation table walk.
                                  1           Fault on the stage 2 translation of an access for a stage 1 translation table walk.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5217
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    For any abort other than a stage 2 fault this bit is RES0.

                    Bit [6]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    IFSC, bits [5:0]
                                    Instruction Fault Status Code. Possible values of this field are:
                                    000000      Address size fault, translation table base register
                                    000001      Address size fault, level 1
                                    000010      Address size fault, level 2
                                    000011      Address size fault, level 3
                                    000101      Translation fault, level 1
                                    000110      Translation fault, level 2
                                    000111      Translation fault, level 3
                                    001001      Access flag fault, level 1
                                    001010      Access flag fault, level 2
                                    001011      Access flag fault, level 3
                                    001101      Permission fault, level 1
                                    001110      Permission fault, level 2
                                    001111      Permission fault, level 3
                                    010000      Synchronous External abort, not on translation table walk
                                    011000      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access, not on translation table walk
                                    010101      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 1
                                    010110      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 2
                                    010111      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 3
                                    011101      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 1
                                    011110      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 2
                                    011111      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 3
                                    100010      Debug exception
                                    110000      TLB conflict abort
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    When the RAS Extension is implemented, 011000, 011101, 011110, and 011111, are reserved.

                                             Note
                                    ARMv8.2 requires the implementation of the RAS Extension.

                                    For more information about the lookup level associated with a fault, see The level associated with
                                    MMU faults on a Long-descriptor translation table lookup on page G4-4952.

                    The following sections describe cases where Prefetch Abort exceptions can be routed to Hyp mode, generating
                    exceptions that are reported in the HSR with EC value 0b100000:

                    •      Abort exceptions, when the value of HCR.TGE is 1 on page G1-4639.

                    •      Routing debug exceptions to EL2 using AArch32 on page G1-4640.

                    ISS encoding for an exception from an Illegal state or PC alignment fault

                    This encoding is used by:

                    •      Illegal exception return to AArch32 state.

G7-5218                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  •     PC alignment fault exception.

                  The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                       24                                                                               0

                                                                             RES0

                  Bits [24:0]
                                  Reserved, RES0.
                  For more information about the Illegal state exception, see:

                  •     Illegal changes to PSTATE.M on page G1-4618.

                  •     Illegal return events from AArch32 state on page G1-4646.

                  •     Legal returns that set PSTATE.IL to 1 on page G1-4648.

                  •     The Illegal Execution state exception on page G1-4648.

                  For more information about the PC alignment fault exception, see Branching to an unaligned PC on page K1-6392.

                  ISS encoding for an exception from a Data Abort

                  This encoding is used by:

                  •     Data Abort from a lower Exception level.

                  •     Data Abort taken without a change in Exception level.

                  The ISS encoding for these exceptions is:

                                       24 23 22 21 20 19          16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5                        0

                                            SAS             SRT                                              DFSC

                        ISV                                                                                                       WnR
                        SSE                                                                                                     S1PTW
                        RES0                                                                                                        CM
                        RES0                                                                                                        EA
                        AR                                                                                                         FnV
                        RES0                                                                                                      AET

                  ISV, bit [24]
                                  Instruction syndrome valid. Indicates whether the syndrome information in ISS[23:14] is valid.
                                  0           No valid instruction syndrome. ISS[23:14] are RES0.
                                  1           ISS[23:14] hold a valid instruction syndrome.
                                  This bit is 0 for all faults except Data Aborts generated by stage 2 address translations for which all
                                  the following apply to the instruction that generated the Data Abort exception:
                                  •      The instruction is an LDR, LDA, LDRT, LDRSH, LDRSHT, LDRH, LDAH, LDRHT,
                                         LDRSB, LDRSBT, LDRB, LDAB, LDRBT, STR, STL, STRT, STRH, STLH, STRHT,
                                         STRB, STLB, or STRBT instruction.
                                  •      The instruction is not performing register writeback.
                                  •      The instruction is not using the PC as a source or destination register.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5219
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    For these cases, ISV is UNKNOWN if the exception was generated in Debug state in memory access
                                    mode, as described in Data Aborts in Memory access mode on page H4-5766, and otherwise
                                    indicates whether ISS[23:14] hold a valid syndrome.

                                             Note
                                    In the A32 instruction set, LDR*T and STR*T instructions always perform register writeback and
                                    therefore never return a valid instruction syndrome.

                                    When the RAS Extension is implemented, ISV is 0 for any synchronous External abort.
                                    ISV is set to 0 on a stage 2 abort on a stage 1 translation table walk.
                                    When the RAS Extension is not implemented, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether ISV is set to
                                    1 or 0 on a synchronous External abort on a stage 2 translation table walk.

                    SAS, bits [23:22]
                                    Syndrome Access Size. When ISV is 1, indicates the size of the access attempted by the faulting
                                    operation.
                                    00          Byte
                                    01          Halfword
                                    10          Word
                                    11          Doubleword
                                    This field is UNKNOWN when the value of ISV is UNKNOWN.
                                    This field is RES0 when the value of ISV is 0.

                    SSE, bit [21]
                                    Syndrome Sign Extend. When ISV is 1, for a byte, halfword, or word load operation, indicates
                                    whether the data item must be sign extended. For these cases, the possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Sign-extension not required.
                                    1           Data item must be sign-extended.
                                    For all other operations this bit is 0.
                                    This field is UNKNOWN when the value of ISV is UNKNOWN.
                                    This field is RES0 when the value of ISV is 0.

                    Bit [20]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    SRT, bits [19:16]
                                    Syndrome Register transfer. When ISV is 1, the register number of the Rt operand of the faulting
                                    instruction.
                                    This field is UNKNOWN when the value of ISV is UNKNOWN.
                                    This field is RES0 when the value of ISV is 0.

                    Bit [15]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    AR, bit [14]
                                    Acquire/Release. When ISV is 1, the possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Instruction did not have acquire/release semantics.
                                    1           Instruction did have acquire/release semantics.
                                    This field is UNKNOWN when the value of ISV is UNKNOWN.
                                    This field is RES0 when the value of ISV is 0.

G7-5220                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Bits [13:12]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  AET, bit [11]
                                  Asynchronous Error Type.
                                  When the RAS Extension is implemented and the value returned in the DFSC field is 010001,
                                  describes the state of the PE after taking the SError interrupt exception. The possible values of this
                                  field are:
                                  00          Uncontainable error (UC) or uncategorized.
                                  01          Unrecoverable error (UEU).
                                  10          Restartable error (UEO) or Corrected error (CE).
                                  11          Recoverable error (UER).
                                  On a synchronous Data Abort, this field is RES0.
                                  If multiple errors are taken as a single SError interrupt exception, the overall state of the PE is
                                  reported. For example, if both a Recoverable and Unrecoverable error occurred, the state is
                                  Unrecoverable.

                                           Note
                                  Software can use this information to determine what recovery might be possible. The recovery
                                  software must also examine any implemented fault records to determine the location and extent of
                                  the error.

                                  When the RAS Extension is not implemented, or when DFSC is not 010001:
                                  •      Bit[11] is RES0.
                                  •      Bit[10] forms the FnV field.

                                           Note
                                  ARMv8.2 requires the implementation of the RAS Extension.

                  FnV, bit [10]
                                  FAR not Valid, for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on a
                                  translation table walk.
                                  0           HDFAR is valid.
                                  1           HDFAR is not valid, and holds an UNKNOWN value.
                                  When the RAS Extension is not implemented, this field is valid only if DFSC is 010000. It is RES0
                                  for all other aborts.
                                  When the RAS Extension is implemented:
                                  •      If DFSC is 010000, this field is valid.
                                  •      If DFSC is 010001, this bit forms part of the AET field, becoming AET[0].
                                  •      This field is RES0 for all other aborts.

                                           Note
                                  ARMv8.2 requires the implementation of the RAS Extension.

                  EA, bit [9]
                                  External abort type. This bit can provide an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of External
                                  aborts.
                                  For any abort other than an External abort this bit returns a value of 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5221
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    CM, bit [8]
                                   Cache maintenance. For a synchronous fault, identifies fault that comes from a cache maintenance
                                   or address translation instruction. For synchronous faults, the possible values of this bit are:
                                   0            Fault not generated by a cache maintenance or address translation instruction.
                                   1            Fault generated by a cache maintenance or address translation instruction.
                                   For an asynchronous Data Abort exception, this bit is 0.

                    S1PTW, bit [7]
                                   For a stage 2 fault, indicates whether the fault was a stage 2 fault on an access made for a stage 1
                                   translation table walk:
                                   0            Fault not on a stage 2 translation for a stage 1 translation table walk.
                                   1            Fault on the stage 2 translation of an access for a stage 1 translation table walk.
                                   For any abort other than a stage 2 fault this bit is RES0.

                    WnR, bit [6]
                                   Write not Read. Indicates whether a synchronous abort was caused by a write instruction or a read
                                   instruction. The possible values of this bit are:
                                   0            Abort caused by a read instruction.
                                   1            Abort caused by a write instruction.
                                   For faults on cache maintenance and address translation instructions, this bit always returns a value
                                   of 1.
                                   On an asynchronous Data Abort:
                                   •        When the RAS Extension is not implemented, this bit is UNKNOWN.
                                   •        When the RAS Extension is implemented, this bit is RES0.

                                             Note
                                   ARMv8.2 requires the implementation of the RAS Extension.

                    DFSC, bits [5:0]
                                   Data Fault Status Code. Possible values of this field are:
                                   000000       Address size fault, translation table base register
                                   000001       Address size fault, level 1
                                   000010       Address size fault, level 2
                                   000011       Address size fault, level 3
                                   000101       Translation fault, level 1
                                   000110       Translation fault, level 2
                                   000111       Translation fault, level 3
                                   001001       Access flag fault, level 1
                                   001010       Access flag fault, level 2
                                   001011       Access flag fault, level 3
                                   001101       Permission fault, level 1
                                   001110       Permission fault, level 2
                                   001111       Permission fault, level 3
                                   010000       Synchronous External abort, not on translation table walk
                                   011000       Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access, not on translation table walk
                                   010001       SError interrupt
                                   011001       SError interrupt from a parity or ECC error on memory access

G7-5222                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                 010101      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 1
                                 010110      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 2
                                 010111      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 3
                                 011101      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 1
                                 011110      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 2
                                 011111      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 3
                                 100001      Alignment fault
                                 100010      Debug exception
                                 110000      TLB conflict abort
                                 110100      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault (Lockdown)

                                 110101      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault (Unsupported Exclusive access)

                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 When the RAS Extension is implemented, 011000, 011001, 011101, 011110, and 011111, are reserved.
                                 For more information about the lookup level associated with a fault, see The level associated with
                                 MMU faults on a Long-descriptor translation table lookup on page G4-4952.

                  The following describe cases where Data Abort exceptions can be routed to Hyp mode, generating exceptions that
                  are reported in the HSR with EC value 0b100100:

                  •     Abort exceptions, when the value of HCR.TGE is 1 on page G1-4639.

                  •     Routing debug exceptions to EL2 using AArch32 on page G1-4640.

                  The following describe cases that can cause a Data Abort exception that is taken to Hyp mode, and reported in the
                  HSR with EC value of 0b100000 or 0b100100:

                  •     Hyp mode control of Non-secure access permissions on page G4-4897.

                  •     Memory fault reporting in Hyp mode on page G4-4956.

                  Accessing the HSR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                            p15, 4, <Rt>, c5, c2, 0    100       000      0101     1111       0010

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5223
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5224                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.71     HSTR, Hyp System Trap Register
                  The HSTR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Controls trapping to Hyp mode of Non-secure accesses, at EL1 or lower, to System registers in the
                                 coproc == 1111 encoding space:
                                 •      By the CRn value used to access the register using MCR or MRC instruction.
                                 •      By the CRm value used to access the register using MCRR or MRRC instruction.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HSTR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register HSTR_EL2.
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                 into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                 this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 HSTR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HSTR bit assignments are:

                  31                                             16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                       RES0                                             T9 T8 T7 T6 T5 T4 T3 T2 T1 T0

                                                                                                                                T10
                                                                                                                                T11
                                                                                                                                T12
                                                                                                                                T13
                                                                                                                                T14
                                                                                                                                T15

                  Bits [31:16]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  T<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 15
                                 Fields T14 and T4 are RES0.
                                 The remaining fields control whether Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses, using MCR, MRC,
                                 MCRR, and MRRC instructions, to the System registers in the coproc == 1111 encoding space are
                                 trapped to Hyp mode:
                                 0            This control has no effect on Non-secure EL0 or EL1 accesses to System registers.
                                 1            Any Non-secure EL1 MCR or MRC access with coproc == 1111 and CRn == <n> is
                                              trapped to Hyp mode. A Non-secure EL0 MCR or MRC access with these values is
                                              trapped to Hyp mode only if the access is not UNDEFINED when the value of this field is
                                              0.
                                              Any Non-secure EL1 MCRR or MRRC access with coproc == 1111 and CRm == <n> is
                                              trapped to Hyp mode. A Non-secure EL0 MCRR or MRRC access with these values is
                                              trapped to Hyp mode only if the access is not UNDEFINED when the value of this field is
                                              0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5225
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     For example, when HSTR.T7 is 1, for instructions executed at Non-secure EL1:
                                     •      An MCR or MRC instruction with coproc set to 1111 and <CRn> set to c7 is trapped to Hyp
                                            mode.
                                     •      An MCRR or MRRC instruction with coproc set to 1111 and <CRm> set to c7 is trapped to Hyp
                                            mode.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Accessing the HSTR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                 <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                 p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c1, 3    100       011        0001         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                   x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                   x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5226                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                             ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.72     HTCR, Hyp Translation Control Register
                  The HTCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  The control register for stage 1 of the EL2 translation regime.

                                           Note
                                  This stage of translation always uses the Long-descriptor translation table format.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register HTCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register TCR_EL2.
                                  If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                  RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  HTCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HTCR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22                         14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7                3 2         0

                                                         RES0               SH0                     RES0        T0SZ

     RES1                                                                                                                     IRGN0
     IMP DEF                                                                                                                 ORGN0
     RES0
     HWU62
     HWU61
     HWU60
     HWU59
     HPD
     RES1

                  Bit [31]
                                  Reserved, RES1.

                  IMP DEF, bit [30]
                                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Bit [29]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  HWU62, bit [28]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                  Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[62] of the stage 1
                                  translation table Block or Page entry.
                                  Defined values are:
                                  0           Bit[62] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                              for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5227
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                   1           Bit[62] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of HTCR.HPD is 1.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                   The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of HTCR.HPD is 0.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    HWU61, bit [27]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[61] of the stage 1
                                   translation table Block or Page entry.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0           Bit[61] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   1           Bit[61] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of HTCR.HPD is 1.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                   The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of HTCR.HPD is 0.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    HWU60, bit [26]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[60] of the stage 1
                                   translation table Block or Page entry.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0           Bit[60] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   1           Bit[60] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of HTCR.HPD is 1.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                   The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of HTCR.HPD is 0.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    HWU59, bit [25]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[59] of the stage 1
                                   translation table Block or Page entry.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0           Bit[59] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   1           Bit[59] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of HTCR.HPD is 1.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                   The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of HTCR.HPD is 0.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

G7-5228                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  HPD, bit [24]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                    Hierarchical Permission Disables. This affects the hierarchical control bits, APTable, XNTable, and
                                    PXNTable, in the PL2 translation regime.
                                    Defined values are:
                                    0           Hierarchical permissions are enabled.
                                    1           Hierarchical permissions are disabled.
                                    When disabled, the permissions are treated as if the bits are zero.
                                    This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-AA32HPD is not implemented.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES1.

                  Bits [22:14]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  SH0, bits [13:12]
                                    Shareability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using HTTBR.
                                    00          Non-shareable
                                    10          Outer Shareable
                                    11          Inner Shareable
                                    Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                    is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                    registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                  ORGN0, bits [11:10]
                                    Outer cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using HTTBR.
                                    00          Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable
                                    01          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    10          Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    11          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable

                  IRGN0, bits [9:8]
                                    Inner cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using HTTBR.
                                    00          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable
                                    01          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    10          Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    11          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable

                  Bits [7:3]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  T0SZ, bits [2:0]
                                    The size offset of the memory region addressed by HTTBR. The region size is 2(32-T0SZ) bytes.

                  Accessing the HTCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5229
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 4, <Rt>, c2, c0, 2    100       010        0010         1111         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5230                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.73     HTPIDR, Hyp Software Thread ID Register
                  The HTPIDR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides a location where software running in Hyp mode can store thread identifying information
                                 that is not visible to Non-secure software executing at EL0 or EL1, for hypervisor management
                                 purposes.
                                 The PE makes no use of this register.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register HTPIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 TPIDR_EL2[31:0].
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 The PE never updates this register. This means the register is always UNKNOWN on reset.

                  Attributes
                                 HTPIDR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HTPIDR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                                Thread ID

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Thread ID. Thread identifying information stored by software running at this Exception level.

                  Accessing the HTPIDR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                           <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                           p15, 4, <Rt>, c13, c0, 2    100       010      1101     1111       0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5231
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5232                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.74     HTTBR, Hyp Translation Table Base Register
                  The HTTBR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Holds the base address of the translation table for the initial lookup for stage 1 of an address
                                  translation in the EL2 translation regime, and other information for this translation regime.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register HTTBR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  TTBR0_EL2.
                                  If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                  RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  HTTBR is a 64-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The HTTBR bit assignments are:

            63                        48 47                                                                            1 0

                      RES0                                                   BADDR

                                                                                                                                        CnP

                  Bits [63:48]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  BADDR, bits [47:1]
                                  Translation table base address, bits[47:x], Bits [x-1:1] are RES0, with the additional requirement that
                                  if bits[x-1:3] are not all zero, this is a misaligned translation table base address, with effects that are
                                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:

                                  •      Register bits [x-1:3] are treated as if all the bits are zero. The value read back from these bits
                                         is either the value written or zero.
                                  •      The result of the calculation of an address for a translation table walk using this register can
                                         be corrupted in those bits that are nonzero.
                                  x is determined from the value of HTCR.T0SZ as follows:
                                  •      If HTCR.T0SZ is 0 or 1, x = 5 - HTCR.T0SZ.
                                  •      If HTCR.T0SZ is greater than 1, x = 14 - HTCR.T0SZ.
                                  If bits[47:40] of the translation table base address are not zero, an Address size fault is generated.

                  CnP, bit [0]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                  Common not Private. In an implementation that includes ARMv8.2-TTCNP, indicates whether each
                                  entry that is pointed to by HTTBR is a member of a common set that can be used by every PE in the
                                  Inner Shareable domain for which the value of HTTBR.CnP is 1.
                                  0           The translation table entries pointed to by HTTBR are permitted to differ from
                                              corresponding entries for HTTBR for other PEs in the Inner Shareable domain. This is
                                              not affected by the value of HTTBR.CnP on those other PEs.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              G7-5233
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    1           The translation table entries pointed to by HTTBR are the same as the translation table
                                                entries pointed to by HTTBR on every other PE in the Inner Shareable domain for which
                                                the value of HTTBR.CnP is 1.

                                             Note
                                    If the value of the HTTBR.CnP bit is 1 on multiple PEs in the same Inner Shareable domain and
                                    those HTTBRs do not point to the same translation table entries when the other conditions specified
                                    for the case when the value of CnP is 1 apply, then the results of translations are CONSTRAINED
                                    UNPREDICTABLE, see CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behaviors due to caching of control or
                                    data values on page K1-6395.

                                    In an implementation that does not include ARMv8.2-TTCNP this field is RES0.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the HTTBR
                    This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                    MRRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                    MCRR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                <syntax>                       opc1         coproc       CRm

                                                                                p15, 4, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c2        0100         1111         0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5234                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5235
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.75       HVBAR, Hyp Vector Base Address Register
                    The HVBAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                      Holds the vector base address for any exception that is taken to Hyp mode.

                    Configurations
                                      AArch32 System register HVBAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                      VBAR_EL2[31:0].
                                      If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                      RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                      HVBAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HVBAR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                       5 4              0

                                                      Vector Base Address                                            RES0

                    Bits [31:5]
                                      Vector Base Address. Bits[31:5] of the base address of the exception vectors for exceptions taken to
                                      this Exception level. Bits[4:0] of an exception vector are the exception offset.

                    Bits [4:0]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the HVBAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1      opc2         CRn      coproc   CRm

                                                                p15, 4, <Rt>, c12, c0, 0    100       000          1100     1111     0000

G7-5236                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    -

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5237
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.76       ICIALLU, Instruction Cache Invalidate All to PoU
                    The ICIALLU characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Invalidate all instruction caches to PoU. If branch predictors are architecturally visible, also flush
                                    branch predictors.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System instruction ICIALLU performs the same function as AArch64 System instruction
                                    IC IALLU.

                    Attributes
                                    ICIALLU is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    ICIALLU ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the ICIALLU instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c5, 0   000       000        0111         1111         0101

                    The PE ignores the value of <Rt>. Software does not have to write a value to this register before issuing this
                    instruction.

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x       x        0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                  x       0        1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                  x       1        1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a ICIALLUIS.

G7-5238                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5239
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.77       ICIALLUIS, Instruction Cache Invalidate All to PoU, Inner Shareable
                    The ICIALLUIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Invalidate all instruction caches Inner Shareable to PoU. If branch predictors are architecturally
                                     visible, also flush branch predictors.

                    Configurations
                                     AArch32 System instruction ICIALLUIS performs the same function as AArch64 System
                                     instruction IC IALLUIS.

                    Attributes
                                     ICIALLUIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    ICIALLUIS ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the ICIALLUIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c1, 0   000       000        0111         1111         0001

                    The PE ignores the value of <Rt>. Software does not have to write a value to this register before issuing this
                    instruction.

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x       x        0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                  x       0        1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                  x       1        1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

G7-5240                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HCR.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5241
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.78       ICIMVAU, Instruction Cache line Invalidate by VA to PoU
                    The ICIMVAU characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Invalidate instruction cache line by virtual address to PoU.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System instruction ICIMVAU performs the same function as AArch64 System instruction
                                    IC IVAU.

                    Attributes
                                    ICIMVAU is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ICIMVAU input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                       0

                                                           Virtual address to use

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Virtual address to use. No alignment restrictions apply to this VA.

                    Executing the ICIMVAU instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c5, 1   000      001        0111         1111         0101

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0        1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1        1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                    Execution of this instruction might require an address translation from VA to PA, and that translation might fault.
                    For more information, see AArch32 instruction cache maintenance instructions (IC*) on page G3-4821.

G7-5242                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TPU==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5243
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.79       ID_AFR0, Auxiliary Feature Register 0
                    The ID_AFR0 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides information about the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED features of the PE in AArch32 state.
                                   Must be interpreted with the Main ID Register, MIDR.
                                   For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                   for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register ID_AFR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   ID_AFR0_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                   ID_AFR0 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_AFR0 bit assignments are:

                    31                                             16 15        12 11         8 7         4 3          0

                                          RES0

                                                                                                                               IMP DEF
                                                                                                                               IMP DEF
                                                                                                                               IMP DEF
                                                                                                                               IMP DEF

                    Bits [31:16]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [15:12]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [11:8]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [7:4]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [3:0]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the ID_AFR0
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

G7-5244                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 3    000       011        0000         1111         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5245
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.80       ID_DFR0, Debug Feature Register 0
                    The ID_DFR0 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                        Provides top level information about the debug system in AArch32 state.
                                        Must be interpreted with the Main ID Register, MIDR.
                                        For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                        for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                        There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                        AArch32 System register ID_DFR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                        ID_DFR0_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                        ID_DFR0 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_DFR0 bit assignments are:

                    31          28 27          24 23         20 19       16 15       12 11        8 7          4 3            0

                         RES0       PerfMon       MProfDbg       MMapTrc      CopTrc     MMapDbg      CopSDbg        CopDbg

                    Bits [31:28]
                                        Reserved, RES0.

                    PerfMon, bits [27:24]
                                        Performance Monitors. Support for System registers-based ARM Performance Monitors Extension,
                                        using registers in the coproc == 1111 encoding space, for A and R profile processors.
                                        This field does not follow the standard ID scheme, but uses the Alternative ID scheme described in
                                        Alternative ID scheme used for the Performance Monitors Extension version on page G7-5024.
                                        Defined values are:
                                        0000           Performance Monitors Extension System registers not implemented.
                                        0001           Support for Performance Monitors Extension version 1 (PMUv1) System registers.
                                        0010           Support for Performance Monitors Extension version 2 (PMUv2) System registers.
                                        0011           Support for Performance Monitors Extension version 3 (PMUv3) System registers.
                                        0100           Support for Performance Monitors Extension version 3 (PMUv3) System registers, with
                                                       a 16-bit evtCount field.
                                        1111           IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED form of Performance Monitors System registers supported.
                                                       PMUv3 not supported. Arm does not recommend this value in new implementations.
                                        All other values are reserved.
                                        ARMv8.1-PMU implements the functionality added by the value 0100.
                                        In any ARMv8 implementation the values 0001 and 0010 are not permitted.
                                        From ARMv8.1 the value 0011 is not permitted.

G7-5246                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                          Note
                                 In ARMv7, the value 0000 can mean that PMUv1 is implemented. PMUv1 is not permitted in an
                                 ARMv8 implementation.

                  MProfDbg, bits [23:20]
                                 M Profile Debug. Support for memory-mapped debug model for M profile processors. Defined
                                 values are:
                                 0000        Not supported.
                                 0001        Support for M profile Debug architecture, with memory-mapped access.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  MMapTrc, bits [19:16]
                                 Memory Mapped Trace. Support for memory-mapped trace model. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Not supported.
                                 0001        Support for ARM trace architecture, with memory-mapped access.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.
                                 In the Trace registers, the ETMIDR gives more information about the implementation.

                  CopTrc, bits [15:12]
                                 Support for System registers-based trace model, using registers in the coproc == 1110 encoding
                                 space. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Not supported.
                                 0001        Support for ARM trace architecture, with System registers access.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.
                                 In the Trace registers, the ETMIDR gives more information about the implementation.

                  MMapDbg, bits [11:8]
                                 Memory Mapped Debug. Support for v7 memory-mapped debug model, for A and R profile
                                 processors.
                                 In ARMv8-A this field is RES0.
                                 The optional memory map defined by ARMv8 is not compatible with ARMv7.

                  CopSDbg, bits [7:4]
                                 Support for a System registers-based Secure debug model, using registers in the coproc = 1110
                                 encoding space, for an A profile processor that includes EL3.
                                 If EL3 is not implemented and the implemented Security state is Non-Secure state, this field is RES0.
                                 Otherwise, this field reads the same as bits [3:0].

                  CopDbg, bits [3:0]
                                 Support for System registers-based debug model, using registers in the coproc == 1110 encoding
                                 space, for A and R profile processors. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Not supported.
                                 0010        Support for ARMv6, v6 Debug architecture, with System registers access.
                                 0011        Support for ARMv6, v6.1 Debug architecture, with System registers access.
                                 0100        Support for ARMv7, v7 Debug architecture, with System registers access.
                                 0101        Support for ARMv7, v7.1 Debug architecture, with System registers access.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5247
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     0110        Support for ARMv8 debug architecture, with System registers access.
                                     0111        Support for ARMv8 debug architecture, with System registers access, and
                                                 Virtualization Host extensions.
                                     1000        Support for ARMv8.2 debug architecture.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     ARMv8.2-Debug adds the functionality indicated by the value 1000.
                                     •      In any ARMv8 implementation, the values 0000, 0010, 0011, 0100, and 0101 are not permitted.
                                     •      If ARMv8.1-VHE is not implemented the only permitted value is 0110.
                                     •      In an ARMv8.0 implementation the value 1000 is not permitted.

                    Accessing the ID_DFR0
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 2   000       010        0000         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5248                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                      G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                          G7.2 General system control registers

                  —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5249
ID121917                                      Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.81       ID_ISAR0, Instruction Set Attribute Register 0
                    The ID_ISAR0 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                        Provides information about the instruction sets implemented by the PE in AArch32 state.
                                        Must be interpreted with ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR3, ID_ISAR4, and ID_ISAR5.
                                        For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                        for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                        There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                        AArch32 System register ID_ISAR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                        ID_ISAR0_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                        ID_ISAR0 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_ISAR0 bit assignments are:

                    31          28 27            24 23           20 19      16 15       12 11            8 7      4 3          0

                         RES0           Divide           Debug       Coproc    CmpBranch      BitField     BitCount     Swap

                    Bits [31:28]
                                        Reserved, RES0.

                    Divide, bits [27:24]
                                        Indicates the implemented Divide instructions. Defined values are:
                                        0000             None implemented.
                                        0001             Adds SDIV and UDIV in the T32 instruction set.
                                        0010             As for 0001, and adds SDIV and UDIV in the A32 instruction set.
                                        All other values are reserved.
                                        In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                    Debug, bits [23:20]
                                        Indicates the implemented Debug instructions. Defined values are:
                                        0000             None implemented.
                                        0001             Adds BKPT.
                                        All other values are reserved.
                                        In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    Coproc, bits [19:16]
                                        Indicates the implemented System register access instructions. Defined values are:
                                        0000             None implemented, except for instructions separately attributed by the architecture to
                                                         provide access to AArch32 System registers and System instructions.
                                        0001             Adds generic CDP, LDC, MCR, MRC, and STC.
                                        0010             As for 0001, and adds generic CDP2, LDC2, MCR2, MRC2, and STC2.
                                        0011             As for 0010, and adds generic MCRR and MRRC.

G7-5250                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                  0100        As for 0011, and adds generic MCRR2 and MRRC2.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  CmpBranch, bits [15:12]
                                  Indicates the implemented combined Compare and Branch instructions in the T32 instruction set.
                                  Defined values are:
                                  0000        None implemented.
                                  0001        Adds CBNZ and CBZ.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  BitField, bits [11:8]
                                  Indicates the implemented BitField instructions. Defined values are:
                                  0000        None implemented.
                                  0001        Adds BFC, BFI, SBFX, and UBFX.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  BitCount, bits [7:4]
                                  Indicates the implemented Bit Counting instructions. Defined values are:
                                  0000        None implemented.
                                  0001        Adds CLZ.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  Swap, bits [3:0]
                                  Indicates the implemented Swap instructions in the A32 instruction set. Defined values are:
                                  0000        None implemented.
                                  0001        Adds SWP and SWPB.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  Accessing the ID_ISAR0
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 0    000       000      0000     1111       0010

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5251
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RO    RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5252                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.82     ID_ISAR1, Instruction Set Attribute Register 1
                  The ID_ISAR1 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                         Provides information about the instruction sets implemented by the PE in AArch32 state.
                                         Must be interpreted with ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR3, ID_ISAR4, and ID_ISAR5.
                                         For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                         for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                         There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                         AArch32 System register ID_ISAR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                         ID_ISAR1_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                         ID_ISAR1 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_ISAR1 bit assignments are:

                  31             28 27          24 23           20 19            16 15            12 11     8 7            4 3            0

                       Jazelle       Interwork     Immediate            IfThen           Extend      Except_AR    Except         Endian

                  Jazelle, bits [31:28]
                                         Indicates the implemented Jazelle extension instructions. Defined values are:
                                         0000           No support for Jazelle.
                                         0001           Adds the BXJ instruction, and the J bit in the PSR. This setting might indicate a trivial
                                                        implementation of the Jazelle extension.
                                         All other values are reserved.
                                         In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  Interwork, bits [27:24]
                                         Indicates the implemented Interworking instructions. Defined values are:
                                         0000           None implemented.
                                         0001           Adds the BX instruction, and the T bit in the PSR.
                                         0010           As for 0001, and adds the BLX instruction. PC loads have BX-like behavior.
                                         0011           As for 0010, and guarantees that data-processing instructions in the A32 instruction set
                                                        with the PC as the destination and the S bit clear have BX-like behavior.
                                         All other values are reserved.
                                         In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0011.

                  Immediate, bits [23:20]
                                         Indicates the implemented data-processing instructions with long immediates. Defined values are:
                                         0000           None implemented.
                                         0001           Adds:
                                                        •       The MOVT instruction.
                                                        •       The MOV instruction encodings with zero-extended 16-bit immediates.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                   G7-5253
ID121917                                                  Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                               •      The T32 ADD and SUB instruction encodings with zero-extended 12-bit
                                                      immediates, and the other ADD, ADR, and SUB encodings cross-referenced by
                                                      the pseudocode for those encodings.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    IfThen, bits [19:16]
                                   Indicates the implemented If-Then instructions in the T32 instruction set. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the IT instructions, and the IT bits in the PSRs.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    Extend, bits [15:12]
                                   Indicates the implemented Extend instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        No scalar sign-extend or zero-extend instructions are implemented, where scalar
                                               instructions means non-Advanced SIMD instructions.
                                   0001        Adds the SXTB, SXTH, UXTB, and UXTH instructions.
                                   0010        As for 0001, and adds the SXTB16, SXTAB, SXTAB16, SXTAH, UXTB16, UXTAB,
                                               UXTAB16, and UXTAH instructions.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                    Except_AR, bits [11:8]
                                   Indicates the implemented A and R profile exception-handling instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the SRS and RFE instructions, and the A and R profile forms of the CPS
                                               instruction.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    Except, bits [7:4]
                                   Indicates the implemented exception-handling instructions in the ARM instruction set. Defined
                                   values are:
                                   0000        Not implemented. This indicates that the User bank and Exception return forms of the
                                               LDM and STM instructions are not implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the LDM (exception return), LDM (user registers), and STM (user registers)
                                               instruction versions.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    Endian, bits [3:0]
                                   Indicates the implemented Endian instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the SETEND instruction, and the E bit in the PSRs.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

G7-5254                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessing the ID_ISAR1
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 1    000       001        0000         1111         0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5255
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.83       ID_ISAR2, Instruction Set Attribute Register 2
                    The ID_ISAR2 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Provides information about the instruction sets implemented by the PE in AArch32 state.
                                     Must be interpreted with ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR3, ID_ISAR4, and ID_ISAR5.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register ID_ISAR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     ID_ISAR2_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                     ID_ISAR2 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_ISAR2 bit assignments are:

                    31       28 27          24 23           20 19           16 15          12 11   8 7       4 3          0

                     Reversal     PSR_AR            MultU           MultS           Mult             MemHint    LoadStore

                                                                                                                          MultiAccessInt

                    Reversal, bits [31:28]
                                     Indicates the implemented Reversal instructions. Defined values are:
                                     0000           None implemented.
                                     0001           Adds the REV, REV16, and REVSH instructions.
                                     0010           As for 0001, and adds the RBIT instruction.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                    PSR_AR, bits [27:24]
                                     Indicates the implemented A and R profile instructions to manipulate the PSR. Defined values are:
                                     0000           None implemented.
                                     0001           Adds the MRS and MSR instructions, and the exception return forms of data-processing
                                                    instructions.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.
                                     The exception return forms of the data-processing instructions are:
                                     •      In the A32 instruction set, data-processing instructions with the PC as the destination and the
                                            S bit set. These instructions might be affected by the WithShifts attribute.
                                     •      In the T32 instruction set, the SUBS PC,LR,#N instruction.

                    MultU, bits [23:20]
                                     Indicates the implemented advanced unsigned Multiply instructions. Defined values are:
                                     0000           None implemented.

G7-5256                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                 0001        Adds the UMULL and UMLAL instructions.
                                 0010        As for 0001, and adds the UMAAL instruction.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                  MultS, bits [19:16]
                                 Indicates the implemented advanced signed Multiply instructions. Defined values are:
                                 0000        None implemented.
                                 0001        Adds the SMULL and SMLAL instructions.
                                 0010        As for 0001, and adds the SMLABB, SMLABT, SMLALBB, SMLALBT, SMLALTB,
                                             SMLALTT, SMLATB, SMLATT, SMLAWB, SMLAWT, SMULBB, SMULBT,
                                             SMULTB, SMULTT, SMULWB, and SMULWT instructions. Also adds the Q bit in the
                                             PSRs.
                                 0011        As for 0010, and adds the SMLAD, SMLADX, SMLALD, SMLALDX, SMLSD,
                                             SMLSDX, SMLSLD, SMLSLDX, SMMLA, SMMLAR, SMMLS, SMMLSR,
                                             SMMUL, SMMULR, SMUAD, SMUADX, SMUSD, and SMUSDX instructions.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0011.

                  Mult, bits [15:12]
                                 Indicates the implemented additional Multiply instructions. Defined values are:
                                 0000        No additional instructions implemented. This means only MUL is implemented.
                                 0001        Adds the MLA instruction.
                                 0010        As for 0001, and adds the MLS instruction.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                  MultiAccessInt, bits [11:8]
                                 Indicates the support for interruptible multi-access instructions. Defined values are:
                                 0000        No support. This means the LDM and STM instructions are not interruptible.
                                 0001        LDM and STM instructions are restartable.
                                 0010        LDM and STM instructions are continuable.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  MemHint, bits [7:4]
                                 Indicates the implemented Memory Hint instructions. Defined values are:
                                 0000        None implemented.
                                 0001        Adds the PLD instruction.
                                 0010        Adds the PLD instruction. (0001 and 0010 have identical effects.)
                                 0011        As for 0001 (or 0010), and adds the PLI instruction.
                                 0100        As for 0011, and adds the PLDW instruction.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0100.

                  LoadStore, bits [3:0]
                                 Indicates the implemented additional load/store instructions. Defined values are:
                                 0000        No additional load/store instructions implemented.
                                 0001        Adds the LDRD and STRD instructions.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5257
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     0010        As for 0001, and adds the Load Acquire (LDAB, LDAH, LDA, LDAEXB, LDAEXH,
                                                 LDAEX, LDAEXD) and Store Release (STLB, STLH, STL, STLEXB, STLEXH,
                                                 STLEX, STLEXD) instructions.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                    Accessing the ID_ISAR2
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 2   000       010        0000         1111         0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5258                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                                    G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.84     ID_ISAR3, Instruction Set Attribute Register 3
                  The ID_ISAR3 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                       Provides information about the instruction sets implemented by the PE in AArch32 state.
                                       Must be interpreted with ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR4, and ID_ISAR5.
                                       For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                       for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register ID_ISAR3 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       ID_ISAR3_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                       ID_ISAR3 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_ISAR3 bit assignments are:

                  31           28 27          24 23         20 19        16 15        12 11         8 7          4 3         0

                       T32EE      TrueNOP         T32Copy       TabBranch SynchPrim           SVC         SIMD      Saturate

                  T32EE, bits [31:28]
                                       Indicates the implemented T32EE instructions. Defined values are:
                                       0000           None implemented.
                                       0001           Adds the ENTERX and LEAVEX instructions, and modifies the load behavior to
                                                      include null checking.
                                       All other values are reserved.
                                       In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  TrueNOP, bits [27:24]
                                       Indicates the implemented true NOP instructions. Defined values are:
                                       0000           None implemented. This means there are no NOP instructions that do not have any
                                                      register dependencies.
                                       0001           Adds true NOP instructions in both the T32 and A32 instruction sets. This also permits
                                                      additional NOP-compatible hints.
                                       All other values are reserved.
                                       In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  T32Copy, bits [23:20]
                                       Indicates the support for T32 non flag-setting MOV instructions. Defined values are:
                                       0000           Not supported. This means that in the T32 instruction set, encoding T1 of the MOV
                                                      (register) instruction does not support a copy from a low register to a low register.
                                       0001           Adds support for T32 instruction set encoding T1 of the MOV (register) instruction,
                                                      copying from a low register to a low register.
                                       All other values are reserved.
                                       In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G7-5259
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    TabBranch, bits [19:16]
                                   Indicates the implemented Table Branch instructions in the T32 instruction set. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the TBB and TBH instructions.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    SynchPrim, bits [15:12]
                                   Used in conjunction with ID_ISAR4.SynchPrim_frac to indicate the implemented Synchronization
                                   Primitive instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        If SynchPrim_frac == 0000, no Synchronization Primitives implemented.
                                   0001        If SynchPrim_frac == 0000, adds the LDREX and STREX instructions.
                                               If SynchPrim_frac == 0011, also adds the CLREX, LDREXB, STREXB, and STREXH
                                               instructions.
                                   0010        If SynchPrim_frac == 0000, as for [0001, 0011] and also adds the LDREXD and
                                               STREXD instructions.
                                   All other combinations of SynchPrim and SynchPrim_frac are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                    SVC, bits [11:8]
                                   Indicates the implemented SVC instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Not implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the SVC instruction.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    SIMD, bits [7:4]
                                   Indicates the implemented SIMD instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the SSAT and USAT instructions, and the Q bit in the PSRs.
                                   0011        As for 0001, and adds the PKHBT, PKHTB, QADD16, QADD8, QASX, QSUB16,
                                               QSUB8, QSAX, SADD16, SADD8, SASX, SEL, SHADD16, SHADD8, SHASX,
                                               SHSUB16, SHSUB8, SHSAX, SSAT16, SSUB16, SSUB8, SSAX, SXTAB16,
                                               SXTB16, UADD16, UADD8, UASX, UHADD16, UHADD8, UHASX, UHSUB16,
                                               UHSUB8, UHSAX, UQADD16, UQADD8, UQASX, UQSUB16, UQSUB8, UQSAX,
                                               USAD8, USADA8, USAT16, USUB16, USUB8, USAX, UXTAB16, and UXTB16
                                               instructions. Also adds support for the GE[3:0] bits in the PSRs.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0011.
                                   The SIMD field relates only to implemented instructions that perform SIMD operations on the
                                   general-purpose registers. In an implementation that supports floating-point and Advanced SIMD
                                   instructions, MVFR0, MVFR1, and MVFR2 give information about the implemented Advanced
                                   SIMD instructions.

                    Saturate, bits [3:0]
                                   Indicates the implemented Saturate instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None implemented. This means no non-Advanced SIMD saturate instructions are
                                               implemented.
                                   0001        Adds the QADD, QDADD, QDSUB, and QSUB instructions, and the Q bit in the PSRs.
                                   All other values are reserved.

G7-5260                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  Accessing the ID_ISAR3
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 3    000       011        0000         1111         0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5261
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.85       ID_ISAR4, Instruction Set Attribute Register 4
                    The ID_ISAR4 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Provides information about the instruction sets implemented by the PE in AArch32 state.
                                     Must be interpreted with ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR3, and ID_ISAR5.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register ID_ISAR4 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     ID_ISAR4_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                     ID_ISAR4 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_ISAR4 bit assignments are:

                    31       28 27          24 23        20 19             16 15         12 11      8 7          4 3            0

                     SWP_frac      PSR_M                         Barrier           SMC      Writeback   WithShifts     Unpriv

      SynchPrim_frac

                    SWP_frac, bits [31:28]
                                     Indicates support for the memory system locking the bus for SWP or SWPB instructions. Defined
                                     values are:
                                     0000           SWP or SWPB instructions not implemented.
                                     0001           SWP or SWPB implemented but only in a uniprocessor context. SWP and SWPB do not
                                                    guarantee whether memory accesses from other masters can come between the load
                                                    memory access and the store memory access of the SWP or SWPB.
                                     All other values are reserved. This field is valid only if the ID_ISAR0.Swap_instrs field is 0000.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                    PSR_M, bits [27:24]
                                     Indicates the implemented M profile instructions to modify the PSRs. Defined values are:
                                     0000           None implemented.
                                     0001           Adds the M profile forms of the CPS, MRS, and MSR instructions.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                    SynchPrim_frac, bits [23:20]
                                     Used in conjunction with ID_ISAR3.SynchPrim to indicate the implemented Synchronization
                                     Primitive instructions. Possible values are:
                                     0000           If SynchPrim == 0000, no Synchronization Primitives implemented. If SynchPrim ==
                                                    0001, adds the LDREX and STREX instructions. If SynchPrim == 0010, also adds the
                                                    CLREX, LDREXB, LDREXH, STREXB, STREXH, LDREXD, and STREXD
                                                    instructions.

G7-5262                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                 0011        If SynchPrim == 0001, adds the LDREX, STREX, CLREX, LDREXB, LDREXH,
                                             STREXB, and STREXH instructions.
                                 All other combinations of SynchPrim and SynchPrim_frac are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  Barrier, bits [19:16]
                                 Indicates the implemented Barrier instructions in the A32 and T32 instruction sets. Defined values
                                 are:
                                 0000        None implemented. Barrier operations are provided only as System instructions in the
                                             (coproc==1111) encoding space.
                                 0001        Adds the DMB, DSB, and ISB barrier instructions.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  SMC, bits [15:12]
                                 Indicates the implemented SMC instructions. Defined values are:
                                 0000        None implemented.
                                 0001        Adds the SMC instruction.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  Writeback, bits [11:8]
                                 Indicates the support for Writeback addressing modes. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Basic support. Only the LDM, STM, PUSH, POP, SRS, and RFE instructions support
                                             writeback addressing modes. These instructions support all of their writeback
                                             addressing modes.
                                 0001        Adds support for all of the writeback addressing modes.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  WithShifts, bits [7:4]
                                 Indicates the support for instructions with shifts. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Nonzero shifts supported only in MOV and shift instructions.
                                 0001        Adds support for shifts of loads and stores over the range LSL 0-3.
                                 0011        As for 0001, and adds support for other constant shift options, both on load/store and
                                             other instructions.
                                 0100        As for 0011, and adds support for register-controlled shift options.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0100.

                  Unpriv, bits [3:0]
                                 Indicates the implemented unprivileged instructions. Defined values are:
                                 0000        None implemented. No T variant instructions are implemented.
                                 0001        Adds the LDRBT, LDRT, STRBT, and STRT instructions.
                                 0010        As for 0001, and adds the LDRHT, LDRSBT, LDRSHT, and STRHT instructions.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5263
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessing the ID_ISAR4
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 4    000       100        0000         1111         0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5264                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                                     G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.86     ID_ISAR5, Instruction Set Attribute Register 5
                  The ID_ISAR5 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                      Provides information about the instruction sets implemented by the PE in AArch32 state.
                                      Must be interpreted with ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR3, and ID_ISAR4.
                                      For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                      for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                      There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                      AArch32 System register ID_ISAR5 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                      ID_ISAR5_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                      ID_ISAR5 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_ISAR5 bit assignments are:

                  31          28 27          24 23          20 19      16 15          12 11          8 7         4 3          0

                       VCMA           RDM            RES0       CRC32          SHA2           SHA1         AES         SEVL

                  VCMA, bits [31:28]
                                In ARMv8.3
                                      Indicates AArch32 support for complex number addition and multiplication where numbers are
                                      stored in vectors. Defined values are:
                                      0000           The VCMLA and VCADD instructions are not implemented in AArch32.
                                      0001           The VCMLA and VCADD instructions are implemented in AArch32.
                                      All other values are reserved.
                                      In ARMv8.0, ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.2 the only permitted value is 0000.
                                      From ARMv8.3 the only permitted value is 0001. This feature is identified as ARMv8.3-CompNum.
                                In ARMv8.2, ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                  RDM, bits [27:24]
                                In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                      Indicates whether the VQRDMLAH and VQRDMLSH instructions are implemented in AArch32
                                      state. Defined values are:
                                      0000           No VQRDMLAH and VQRDMLSH instructions implemented.
                                      0001           VQRDMLAH and VQRDMLSH instructions implemented.
                                      All other values are reserved.
                                      ARMv8.1-SIMD implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.
                                      From ARMv8.1 the only permitted value is 0001.
                                In ARMv8.0.
                                      Reserved, RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G7-5265
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Bits [23:20]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    CRC32, bits [19:16]
                                      Indicates whether the CRC32 instructions are implemented in AArch32 state.
                                      0000        No CRC32 instructions implemented.
                                      0001        CRC32B, CRC32H, CRC32W, CRC32CB, CRC32CH, and CRC32CW instructions
                                                  implemented.
                                      All other values are reserved.
                                      In ARMv8.0 the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.
                                      From ARMv8.1 the only permitted value is 0001.

                    SHA2, bits [15:12]
                                      Indicates whether the SHA2 instructions are implemented in AArch32 state.
                                      0000        No SHA2 instructions implemented.
                                      0001        SHA256H, SHA256H2, SHA256SU0, and SHA256SU1 implemented.
                                      All other values are reserved.
                                      In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                    SHA1, bits [11:8]
                                      Indicates whether the SHA1 instructions are implemented in AArch32 state.
                                      0000        No SHA1 instructions implemented.
                                      0001        SHA1C, SHA1P, SHA1M, SHA1H, SHA1SU0, and SHA1SU1 implemented.
                                      All other values are reserved.
                                      In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                    AES, bits [7:4]
                                      Indicates whether the AES instructions are implemented in AArch32 state.
                                      0000        No AES instructions implemented.
                                      0001        AESE, AESD, AESMC, and AESIMC implemented.
                                      0010        As for 0001, plus VMULL (polynomial) instructions operating on 64-bit data quantities.
                                      All other values are reserved.
                                      In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0010.

                    SEVL, bits [3:0]
                                      Indicates whether the SEVL instruction is implemented in AArch32 state.
                                      0000        SEVL is implemented as a NOP.
                                      0001        SEVL is implemented as Send Event Local.
                                      All other values are reserved.
                                      In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    Accessing the ID_ISAR5
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

G7-5266                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 5    000       101        0000         1111         0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5267
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.87       ID_ISAR6, Instruction Set Attribute Register 6
                    The ID_ISAR6 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Provides information about the instruction sets implemented by the PE in AArch32 state.
                                     Must be interpreted with ID_ISAR0, ID_ISAR1, ID_ISAR2, ID_ISAR3, ID_ISAR4 and
                                     ID_ISAR5.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register ID_ISAR6 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     ID_ISAR6_EL1.

                                     This register is introduced in ARMv8.2.

                    Attributes
                                     ID_ISAR6 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_ISAR6 bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11         8 7          4 3           0

                                                 RES0                                    FHM          DP          JSCVT

                    Bits [31:12]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                    FHM, bits [11:8]
                                     Indicates whether VFMAL and VFMSL instructions are implemented.
                                     0000        VFMAL and VMFSL instructions not implemented.
                                     0001        VFMAL and VMFSL instructions implemented.
                                     ARMv8.2-FHM implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.

                    DP, bits [7:4]
                                     Indicates the support for dot product instructions in AArch32 state.
                                     0000        No dot product instructions implemented.
                                     0001        VUDOT and VSDOT instructions implemented.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     ARMv8.2-DotProd implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.

                    JSCVT, bits [3:0]
                                 In ARMv8.3
                                     Indicates whether the Javascript conversion instruction is implemented in AArch32 state. Defined
                                     values are:
                                     0000        The VJCVT instruction is not implemented.
                                     0001        The VJCVT instruction is implemented.

G7-5268                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8.0, ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.2 the only permitted value is 0000.
                                   From ARMv8.3 the only permitted value is 0001. This feature is identified as ARMv8.3-JSConv.
                             In ARMv8.2.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  Accessing the ID_ISAR6
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 7   000       111        0000         1111         0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5269
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.88       ID_MMFR0, Memory Model Feature Register 0
                    The ID_MMFR0 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Provides information about the implemented memory model and memory management support in
                                     AArch32 state.
                                     Must be interpreted with ID_MMFR1, ID_MMFR2, ID_MMFR3, and ID_MMFR4.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register ID_MMFR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     ID_MMFR0_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                     ID_MMFR0 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_MMFR0 bit assignments are:

                    31       28 27          24 23         20 19         16 15      12 11           8 7          4 3          0

                     InnerShr        FCSE       AuxReg            TCM       ShareLvl   OuterShr          PMSA         VMSA

                    InnerShr, bits [31:28]
                                     Innermost Shareability. Indicates the innermost shareability domain implemented. Defined values
                                     are:
                                     0000           Implemented as Non-cacheable.
                                     0001           Implemented with hardware coherency support.
                                     1111           Shareability ignored.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8 the permitted values are 0000, 0001, and 1111.
                                     This field is valid only if the implementation supports two levels of shareability, as indicated by
                                     ID_MMFR0.ShareLvl having the value 0001.
                                     When ID_MMFR0.ShareLvl is zero, this field is UNK.

                    FCSE, bits [27:24]
                                     Indicates whether the implementation includes the FCSE. Defined values are:
                                     0000           Not supported.
                                     0001           Support for FCSE.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0000.

                    AuxReg, bits [23:20]
                                     Auxiliary Registers. Indicates support for Auxiliary registers. Defined values are:
                                     0000           None supported.
                                     0001           Support for Auxiliary Control Register only.

G7-5270                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                 0010        Support for Auxiliary Fault Status Registers (AIFSR and ADFSR) and Auxiliary
                                             Control Register.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0010.

                                           Note
                                 Accesses to unimplemented Auxiliary registers are UNDEFINED.

                  TCM, bits [19:16]
                                 Indicates support for TCMs and associated DMAs. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Not supported.
                                 0001        Support is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. ARMv7 requires this setting.
                                 0010        Support for TCM only, ARMv6 implementation.
                                 0011        Support for TCM and DMA, ARMv6 implementation.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  ShareLvl, bits [15:12]
                                 Shareability Levels. Indicates the number of shareability levels implemented. Defined values are:
                                 0000        One level of shareability implemented.
                                 0001        Two levels of shareability implemented.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0001.

                  OuterShr, bits [11:8]
                                 Outermost Shareability. Indicates the outermost shareability domain implemented. Defined values
                                 are:
                                 0000        Implemented as Non-cacheable.
                                 0001        Implemented with hardware coherency support.
                                 1111        Shareability ignored.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8 the permitted values are 0000, 0001, and 1111.

                  PMSA, bits [7:4]
                                 Indicates support for a PMSA. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Not supported.
                                 0001        Support for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED PMSA.
                                 0010        Support for PMSAv6, with a Cache Type Register implemented.
                                 0011        Support for PMSAv7, with support for memory subsections. ARMv7-R profile.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  VMSA, bits [3:0]
                                 Indicates support for a VMSA. Defined values are:
                                 0000        Not supported.
                                 0001        Support for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED VMSA.
                                 0010        Support for VMSAv6, with Cache and TLB Type Registers implemented.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5271
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     0011        Support for VMSAv7, with support for remapping and the Access flag. ARMv7-A
                                                 profile.
                                     0100        As for 0011, and adds support for the PXN bit in the Short-descriptor translation table
                                                 format descriptors.
                                     0101        As for 0100, and adds support for the Long-descriptor translation table format.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0101.

                    Accessing the ID_MMFR0
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 4   000       100        0000         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5272                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                                     G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.89     ID_MMFR1, Memory Model Feature Register 1
                  The ID_MMFR1 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                       Provides information about the implemented memory model and memory management support in
                                       AArch32 state.
                                       Must be interpreted with ID_MMFR0, ID_MMFR2, ID_MMFR3, and ID_MMFR4.
                                       For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                       for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register ID_MMFR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       ID_MMFR1_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                       ID_MMFR1 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_MMFR1 bit assignments are:

                  31           28 27          24 23           20 19           16 15    12 11         8 7          4 3        0

                       BPred       L1TstCln           L1Uni           L1Hvd      L1UniSW   L1HvdSW         L1UniVA    L1HvdVA

                  BPred, bits [31:28]
                                       Branch Predictor. Indicates branch predictor management requirements. Defined values are:
                                       0000           No branch predictor, or no MMU present. Implies a fixed MPU configuration.
                                       0001           Branch predictor requires flushing on:
                                                      •       Enabling or disabling a stage of address translation.
                                                      •       Writing new data to instruction locations.
                                                      •       Writing new mappings to the translation tables.
                                                      •       Changes to the TTBR0, TTBR1, or TTBCR registers.
                                                      •       Changes to the ContextID or ASID, or to the FCSE ProcessID if this is supported.
                                       0010           Branch predictor requires flushing on:
                                                      •       Enabling or disabling a stage of address translation.
                                                      •       Writing new data to instruction locations.
                                                      •       Writing new mappings to the translation tables.
                                                      •       Any change to the TTBR0, TTBR1, or TTBCR registers without a change to the
                                                              corresponding ContextID or ASID, or FCSE ProcessID if this is supported.
                                       0011           Branch predictor requires flushing only on writing new data to instruction locations.
                                       0100           For execution correctness, branch predictor requires no flushing at any time.
                                       All other values are reserved.
                                       In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0010, 0011, or 0100. For values other than 0000 and 0100 the
                                       ARM Architecture Reference Manual, or the product documentation, might give more information
                                       about the required maintenance.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G7-5273
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    L1TstCln, bits [27:24]
                                   Level 1 cache Test and Clean. Indicates the supported Level 1 data cache test and clean operations,
                                   for Harvard or unified cache implementations. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None supported.
                                   0001        Supported Level 1 data cache test and clean operations are:
                                               •      Test and clean data cache.
                                   0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                               •      Test, clean, and invalidate data cache.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                    L1Uni, bits [23:20]
                                   Level 1 Unified cache. Indicates the supported entire Level 1 cache maintenance operations for a
                                   unified cache implementation. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None supported.
                                   0001        Supported entire Level 1 cache operations are:
                                               •      Invalidate cache, including branch predictor if appropriate.
                                               •      Invalidate branch predictor, if appropriate.
                                   0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                               •      Clean cache, using a recursive model that uses the cache dirty status bit.
                                               •      Clean and invalidate cache, using a recursive model that uses the cache dirty
                                                      status bit.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                    L1Hvd, bits [19:16]
                                   Level 1 Harvard cache. Indicates the supported entire Level 1 cache maintenance operations for a
                                   Harvard cache implementation. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None supported.
                                   0001        Supported entire Level 1 cache operations are:
                                               •      Invalidate instruction cache, including branch predictor if appropriate.
                                               •      Invalidate branch predictor, if appropriate.
                                   0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                               •      Invalidate data cache.
                                               •      Invalidate data cache and instruction cache, including branch predictor if
                                                      appropriate.
                                   0011        As for 0010, and adds:
                                               •      Clean data cache, using a recursive model that uses the cache dirty status bit.
                                               •      Clean and invalidate data cache, using a recursive model that uses the cache dirty
                                                      status bit.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                    L1UniSW, bits [15:12]
                                   Level 1 Unified cache by Set/Way. Indicates the supported Level 1 cache line maintenance
                                   operations by set/way, for a unified cache implementation. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None supported.

G7-5274                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                0001        Supported Level 1 unified cache line maintenance operations by set/way are:
                                            •      Clean cache line by set/way.
                                0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                            •      Clean and invalidate cache line by set/way.
                                0011        As for 0010, and adds:
                                            •      Invalidate cache line by set/way.
                                All other values are reserved.
                                In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  L1HvdSW, bits [11:8]
                                Level 1 Harvard cache by Set/Way. Indicates the supported Level 1 cache line maintenance
                                operations by set/way, for a Harvard cache implementation. Defined values are:
                                0000        None supported.
                                0001        Supported Level 1 Harvard cache line maintenance operations by set/way are:
                                            •      Clean data cache line by set/way.
                                            •      Clean and invalidate data cache line by set/way.
                                0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                            •      Invalidate data cache line by set/way.
                                0011        As for 0010, and adds:
                                            •      Invalidate instruction cache line by set/way.
                                All other values are reserved.
                                In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  L1UniVA, bits [7:4]
                                Level 1 Unified cache by Virtual Address. Indicates the supported Level 1 cache line maintenance
                                operations by VA, for a unified cache implementation. Defined values are:
                                0000        None supported.
                                0001        Supported Level 1 unified cache line maintenance operations by VA are:
                                            •      Clean cache line by VA.
                                            •      Invalidate cache line by VA.
                                            •      Clean and invalidate cache line by VA.
                                0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                            •      Invalidate branch predictor by VA, if branch predictor is implemented.
                                All other values are reserved.
                                In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  L1HvdVA, bits [3:0]
                                Level 1 Harvard cache by Virtual Address. Indicates the supported Level 1 cache line maintenance
                                operations by VA, for a Harvard cache implementation. Defined values are:
                                0000        None supported.
                                0001        Supported Level 1 Harvard cache line maintenance operations by VA are:
                                            •      Clean data cache line by VA.
                                            •      Invalidate data cache line by VA.
                                            •      Clean and invalidate data cache line by VA.
                                            •      Clean instruction cache line by VA.
                                0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                            •      Invalidate branch predictor by VA, if branch predictor is implemented.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5275
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                    Accessing the ID_MMFR1
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 5   000       101        0000         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5276                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.90     ID_MMFR2, Memory Model Feature Register 2
                  The ID_MMFR2 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Provides information about the implemented memory model and memory management support in
                                  AArch32 state.
                                  Must be interpreted with ID_MMFR0, ID_MMFR1, ID_MMFR3, and ID_MMFR4.
                                  For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                  for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register ID_MMFR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  ID_MMFR2_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                  ID_MMFR2 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_MMFR2 bit assignments are:

                  31      28 27          24 23         20 19       16 15       12 11         8 7         4 3          0

                  HWAccFlg     WFIStall      MemBarr        UniTLB        HvdTLB   L1HvdRng     L1HvdBG      L1HvdFG

                  HWAccFlg, bits [31:28]
                                  Hardware Access Flag. In earlier versions of the ARM Architecture, this field indicates support for
                                  a Hardware Access flag, as part of the VMSAv7 implementation. Defined values are:
                                  0000           Not supported.
                                  0001           Support for VMSAv7 Access flag, updated in hardware.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0000.

                  WFIStall, bits [27:24]
                                  Wait For Interrupt Stall. Indicates the support for Wait For Interrupt (WFI) stalling. Defined values
                                  are:
                                  0000           Not supported.
                                  0001           Support for WFI stalling.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8 the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                  MemBarr, bits [23:20]
                                  Memory Barrier. Indicates the supported memory barrier System instructions in the (coproc==1111)
                                  encoding space:
                                  0000           None supported.
                                  0001           Supported memory barrier System instructions are:
                                                 •     Data Synchronization Barrier (DSB).
                                  0010           As for 0001, and adds:
                                                 •     Instruction Synchronization Barrier (ISB).

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5277
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                               •      Data Memory Barrier (DMB).
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0010.
                                   ARM deprecates the use of these operations. ID_ISAR4.Barrier_instrs indicates the level of support
                                   for the preferred barrier instructions.

                    UniTLB, bits [19:16]
                                   Unified TLB. Indicates the supported TLB maintenance operations, for a unified TLB
                                   implementation. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Not supported.
                                   0001        Supported unified TLB maintenance operations are:
                                               •      Invalidate all entries in the TLB.
                                               •      Invalidate TLB entry by VA.
                                   0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                               •      Invalidate TLB entries by ASID match.
                                   0011        As for 0010, and adds:
                                               •      Invalidate instruction TLB and data TLB entries by VA All ASID. This is a
                                                      shared unified TLB operation.
                                   0100        As for 0011, and adds:
                                               •      Invalidate Hyp mode unified TLB entry by VA.
                                               •      Invalidate entire Non-secure PL1&0 unified TLB.
                                               •      Invalidate entire Hyp mode unified TLB.
                                   0101        As for 0100, and adds the following operations: TLBIMVALIS, TLBIMVAALIS,
                                               TLBIMVALHIS, TLBIMVAL, TLBIMVAAL, TLBIMVALH.
                                   0110        As for 0101, and adds the following operations: TLBIIPAS2IS, TLBIIPAS2LIS,
                                               TLBIIPAS2, TLBIIPAS2L.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0110.

                    HvdTLB, bits [15:12]
                                   If the Unified TLB field (UniTLB, bits [19:16]) is not 0000, then the meaning of this field is
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. ARM deprecates the use of this field by software.

                    L1HvdRng, bits [11:8]
                                   Level 1 Harvard cache Range. Indicates the supported Level 1 cache maintenance range operations,
                                   for a Harvard cache implementation. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Not supported.
                                   0001        Supported Level 1 Harvard cache maintenance range operations are:
                                               •      Invalidate data cache range by VA.
                                               •      Invalidate instruction cache range by VA.
                                               •      Clean data cache range by VA.
                                               •      Clean and invalidate data cache range by VA.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0000.

G7-5278                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  L1HvdBG, bits [7:4]
                                  Level 1 Harvard cache Background fetch. Indicates the supported Level 1 cache background fetch
                                  operations, for a Harvard cache implementation. When supported, background fetch operations are
                                  non-blocking operations. Defined values are:
                                  0000        Not supported.
                                  0001        Supported Level 1 Harvard cache background fetch operations are:
                                              •      Fetch instruction cache range by VA.
                                              •      Fetch data cache range by VA.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0000.

                  L1HvdFG, bits [3:0]
                                  Level 1 Harvard cache Foreground fetch. Indicates the supported Level 1 cache foreground fetch
                                  operations, for a Harvard cache implementation. When supported, foreground fetch operations are
                                  blocking operations. Defined values are:
                                  0000        Not supported.
                                  0001        Supported Level 1 Harvard cache foreground fetch operations are:
                                              •      Fetch instruction cache range by VA.
                                              •      Fetch data cache range by VA.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8 the only permitted value is 0000.

                  Accessing the ID_MMFR2
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 6    000       110        0000         1111         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5279
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5280                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.91     ID_MMFR3, Memory Model Feature Register 3
                  The ID_MMFR3 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                   Provides information about the implemented memory model and memory management support in
                                   AArch32 state.
                                   Must be interpreted with ID_MMFR0, ID_MMFR1, ID_MMFR2, and ID_MMFR4.
                                   For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                   for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register ID_MMFR3 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   ID_MMFR3_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                   ID_MMFR3 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_MMFR3 bit assignments are:

                  31      28 27           24 23         20 19         16 15        12 11        8 7           4 3          0

                   Supersec     CMemSz        CohWalk           PAN       MaintBcst     BPMaint     CMaintSW     CMaintVA

                  Supersec, bits [31:28]
                                   Supersections. On a VMSA implementation, indicates whether Supersections are supported.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0000           Supersections supported.
                                   1111           Supersections not supported.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 1111.

                  CMemSz, bits [27:24]
                                   Cached Memory Size. Indicates the physical memory size supported by the caches. Defined values
                                   are:
                                   0000           4GB, corresponding to a 32-bit physical address range.
                                   0001           64GB, corresponding to a 36-bit physical address range.
                                   0010           1TB or more, corresponding to a 40-bit or larger physical address range.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000, 0001, and 0010.

                  CohWalk, bits [23:20]
                                   Coherent Walk. Indicates whether Translation table updates require a clean to the point of
                                   unification. Defined values are:
                                   0000           Updates to the translation tables require a clean to the point of unification to ensure
                                                  visibility by subsequent translation table walks.
                                   0001           Updates to the translation tables do not require a clean to the point of unification to
                                                  ensure visibility by subsequent translation table walks.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G7-5281
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    PAN, bits [19:16]
                               In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                   Privileged Access Never. Indicates support for the PAN bit in CPSR, SPSR, and DSPSR in AArch32
                                   state. Defined values are:
                                   0000        PAN not supported.
                                   0001        PAN supported.
                                   0010        PAN supported and ATS1CPRP and ATS1CPWP instructions supported.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   ARMv8.1-PAN implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.
                                   ARMv8.2-ATS1E1 implements the functionality added by the value 0010.
                                   In ARMv8.1 the value 0000 is not permitted.
                                   From ARMv8.2, the only permitted value is 0010.
                               In ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    MaintBcst, bits [15:12]
                                   Maintenance Broadcast. Indicates whether Cache, TLB, and branch predictor operations are
                                   broadcast. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Cache, TLB, and branch predictor operations only affect local structures.
                                   0001        Cache and branch predictor operations affect structures according to shareability and
                                               defined behavior of instructions. TLB operations only affect local structures.
                                   0010        Cache, TLB, and branch predictor operations affect structures according to shareability
                                               and defined behavior of instructions.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                    BPMaint, bits [11:8]
                                   Branch Predictor Maintenance. Indicates the supported branch predictor maintenance operations in
                                   an implementation with hierarchical cache maintenance operations. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None supported.
                                   0001        Supported branch predictor maintenance operations are:
                                               •      Invalidate all branch predictors.
                                   0010        As for 0001, and adds:
                                               •      Invalidate branch predictors by VA.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0010.

                    CMaintSW, bits [7:4]
                                   Cache Maintenance by Set/Way. Indicates the supported cache maintenance operations by set/way,
                                   in an implementation with hierarchical caches. Defined values are:
                                   0000        None supported.
                                   0001        Supported hierarchical cache maintenance instructions by set/way are:
                                               •      Invalidate data cache by set/way.
                                               •      Clean data cache by set/way.
                                               •      Clean and invalidate data cache by set/way.

G7-5282                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.
                                  In a unified cache implementation, the data cache maintenance operations apply to the unified
                                  caches.

                  CMaintVA, bits [3:0]
                                  Cache Maintenance by Virtual Address. Indicates the supported cache maintenance operations by
                                  VA, in an implementation with hierarchical caches. Defined values are:
                                  0000        None supported.
                                  0001        Supported hierarchical cache maintenance operations by VA are:
                                              •      Invalidate data cache by VA.
                                              •      Clean data cache by VA.
                                              •      Clean and invalidate data cache by VA.
                                              •      Invalidate instruction cache by VA.
                                              •      Invalidate all instruction cache entries.
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.
                                  In a unified cache implementation, data cache maintenance operations apply to the unified caches,
                                  and the instruction cache maintenance instructions are not implemented.

                  Accessing the ID_MMFR3
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 7    000       111        0000         1111         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                x       x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                x       0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                x       1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5283
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5284                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                      G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                          G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.92     ID_MMFR4, Memory Model Feature Register 4
                  The ID_MMFR4 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Provides information about the implemented memory model and memory management support in
                                     AArch32 state.
                                     Must be interpreted with ID_MMFR0, ID_MMFR1, ID_MMFR2, and ID_MMFR3.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register ID_MMFR4 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     ID_MMFR4_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                     ID_MMFR4 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_MMFR4 bit assignments are:

                  31         28 27           24 23         20 19          16 15         12 11         8 7         4 3         0

                       RAZ           CCIDX           LSM           HPDS           CnP           XNX         AC2       SpecSEI

                  Bits [31:28]
                                     Reserved, RAZ.

                  CCIDX, bits [27:24]
                               In ARMv8.3
                                     Support for use of the revised CCSIDR format and the presence of the CCSIDR2 is indicated.
                                     Defined values are:
                                     0000            32-bit format implemented for all levels of the CCSIDR, and the CCSIDR2 register is
                                                     not implemented.
                                     0001            64-bit format implemented for all levels of the CCSIDR, and the CCSIDR2 register is
                                                     implemented.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     From ARMv8.3, the permitted values are 0000 and 0001. This feature is identified as
                                     ARMv8.3-CCIDX.
                               In ARMv8.2, ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                     Reserved, RAZ.

                  LSM, bits [23:20]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                     Indicates support for LSMAOE and nTLSMD bits in HSCTLR and SCTLR. Defined values are:
                                     0000            LSMAOE and nTLSMD bits not supported.
                                     0001            LSMAOE and nTLSMD bits supported.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     ARMv8.2-LSMAOC implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G7-5285
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RAZ.

                    HPDS, bits [19:16]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Hierarchical permission disables bits in translation tables. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Disabling of hierarchical controls not supported.
                                   0001        Supports disabling of hierarchical controls using the TTBCR2.HPD0, TTBCR2.HPD1,
                                               and HTCR.HPD bits.
                                   0010        As for value 0001, and adds possible hardware allocation of bits[62:59] of the translation
                                               table descriptors from the final lookup level for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED use.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   ARMv8.2-AA32HPD implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.
                                   ARMv8.2-TTPBHA implements the functionality added by the value 0010.

                                            Note
                                   The value 0000 implies that the encoding for TTBCR2 is unallocated.

                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RAZ.

                    CnP, bits [15:12]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Common not Private translations. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Common not Private translations not supported.
                                   0001        Common not Private translations supported.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   ARMv8.2-TTCNP implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.
                                   From ARMv8.2 the only permitted value is 0001.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RAZ.

                    XNX, bits [11:8]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Support for execute-never control distinction by Exception level at stage 2. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Distinction between EL0 and EL1 execute-never control at stage 2 not supported.
                                   0001        Distinction between EL0 and EL1 execute-never control at stage 2 supported.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   ARMv8.2-TTS2UXN implements the functionality identified by the value 0001.
                                   When ARMv8.2-TTS2UXN is implemented:
                                   •      If all of the following conditions are true it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the value
                                          of ID_MMFR4.XNX is 0000 or 0001:
                                          —      ID_AA64MMFR1_EL1.XNX ==1.
                                          —      EL2 cannot use AArch32.
                                          —      EL1 can use AArch32.
                                   •      If EL2 can use AArch32 then the only permitted value is 0001.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RAZ.

G7-5286                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  AC2, bits [7:4]
                                    Indicates the extension of the ACTLR and HACTLR registers using ACTLR2 and HACTLR2.
                                    Defined values are:
                                    0000        ACTLR2 and HACTLR2 are not implemented.
                                    0001        ACTLR2 and HACTLR2 are implemented.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    In ARMv8.0 and ARMv8.1 the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.
                                    From ARMv8.2, the only permitted value is 0001.

                  SpecSEI, bits [3:0]
                                    Describes whether the PE can generate SError interrupt exceptions from speculative reads of
                                    memory, including speculative instruction fetches. The defined values of this field are:
                                    0000        The PE never generates an SError interrupt due to an External abort on a speculative
                                                read.
                                    0001        The PE might generate an SError interrupt due to an External abort on a speculative
                                                read.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    When the RAS Extension is not implemented, this field is RAZ.

                  Accessing the ID_MMFR4
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 6   000       110        0000         1111         0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5287
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1 and the register is not RAZ/WI, Non-secure read accesses to this register from
                                 EL1 are trapped to EL2 using AArch64.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1 and the register is RAZ/WI, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                                 Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2 using AArch64.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1 and the register is not RAZ/WI, Non-secure read accesses to this register from
                                 EL1 are trapped to EL2 using AArch64.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID3==1 and the register is RAZ/WI, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                                 Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2 using AArch64.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID3==1 and the register is not RAZ/WI, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1
                                 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TID3==1 and the register is RAZ/WI, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether Non-secure
                                 read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5288                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                        G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                            G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.93     ID_PFR0, Processor Feature Register 0
                  The ID_PFR0 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Gives top-level information about the instruction sets and other features supported by the PE in
                                     AArch32 state.
                                     Must be interpreted with ID_PFR1.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                  Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register ID_PFR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     ID_PFR0_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                     ID_PFR0 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ID_PFR0 bit assignments are:

                  31         28 27                                    16 15            12 11            8 7            4 3            0

                       RAS                       RES0                         State3           State2         State1         State0

                  RAS, bits [31:28]
                                     RAS Extension version. The defined values of this field are:
                                     0000        No RAS Extension.
                                     0001        Version 1 of the RAS Extension present.
                                     All other values are reserved.

                  Bits [27:16]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  State3, bits [15:12]
                                     T32EE instruction set support. Defined values are:
                                     0000        Not implemented.
                                     0001        T32EE instruction set implemented.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                  State2, bits [11:8]
                                     Jazelle extension support. Defined values are:
                                     0000        Not implemented.
                                     0001        Jazelle extension implemented, without clearing of JOSCR.CV on exception entry.
                                     0010        Jazelle extension implemented, with clearing of JOSCR.CV on exception entry.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                   G7-5289
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    State1, bits [7:4]
                                    T32 instruction set support. Defined values are:
                                    0000        T32 instruction set not implemented.
                                    0001        T32 encodings before the introduction of Thumb-2 technology implemented:
                                                •      All instructions are 16-bit.
                                                •      A BL or BLX is a pair of 16-bit instructions.
                                                •      32-bit instructions other than BL and BLX cannot be encoded.
                                    0011        T32 encodings after the introduction of Thumb-2 technology implemented, for all
                                                16-bit and 32-bit T32 basic instructions.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0011.

                    State0, bits [3:0]
                                    A32 instruction set support. Defined values are:
                                    0000        A32 instruction set not implemented.
                                    0001        A32 instruction set implemented.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    Accessing the ID_PFR0
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 0    000       000        0000         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x       x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                  x       0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                  x       1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

G7-5290                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5291
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.94       ID_PFR1, Processor Feature Register 1
                    The ID_PFR1 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Gives information about the AArch32 programmers' model.
                                       Must be interpreted with ID_PFR0.
                                       For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                       for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register ID_PFR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       ID_PFR1_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                       ID_PFR1 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The ID_PFR1 bit assignments are:

                    31         28 27           24 23         20 19        16 15        12 11        8 7              4 3      0

                         GIC       Virt_frac       Sec_frac      GenTimer                 MProgMod        Security     ProgMod

                                                                                                                                  Virtualization

                    GIC, bits [31:28]
                                       System register GIC CPU interface. Defined values are:
                                       0000            No System register interface to the GIC CPU interface is supported.
                                       0001            System register interface to versions 3.0 and 4.0 of the GIC CPU interface is supported.
                                       All other values are reserved.

                    Virt_frac, bits [27:24]
                                       Virtualization fractional field. When the Virtualization field is 0000, determines the support for
                                       features from the ARMv7 Virtualization Extensions. Defined values are:
                                       0000            No features from the ARMv7 Virtualization Extensions are implemented.
                                       0001            The following features of the ARMv7 Virtualization Extensions are implemented:
                                                       •     The SCR.SIF bit, if EL3 is implemented.
                                                       •     The modifications to the SCR.AW and SCR.FW bits described in the
                                                             Virtualization Extensions, if EL3 is implemented.
                                                       •     The MSR (banked register) and MRS (banked register) instructions.
                                                       •     The ERET instruction.
                                       All other values are reserved.
                                       In ARMv8-A the permitted values are:
                                       •       0000 when EL2 is implemented.
                                       •       0001 when EL2 is not implemented.
                                       This field is only valid when the value of ID_PFR1.Virtualization is 0, otherwise it holds the value
                                       0000.

G7-5292                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                            Note
                                 The ID_ISAR registers do not identify whether the instructions added by the ARMv7 Virtualization
                                 Extensions are implemented.

                  Sec_frac, bits [23:20]
                                 Security fractional field. When the Security field is 0000, determines the support for features from
                                 the ARMv7 Security Extensions. Defined values are:
                                 0000          No features from the ARMv7 Security Extensions are implemented.
                                 0001          The following features from the ARMv7 Security Extensions are implemented:
                                               •      The VBAR register.
                                               •      The TTBCR.PD0 and TTBCR.PD1 bits.
                                 0010          As for 0001, plus the ability to access Secure or Non-secure physical memory is
                                               supported.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the permitted values are:
                                 •         0000 when EL3 is implemented.
                                 •         0001 or 0010 when EL3 is not implemented.
                                 This field is only valid when the value of ID_PFR1.Security is 0, otherwise it holds the value 0000.

                  GenTimer, bits [19:16]
                                 Generic Timer support. Defined values are:
                                 0000          Not implemented.
                                 0001          Generic Timer implemented.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                  Virtualization, bits [15:12]
                                 Virtualization support. Defined values are:
                                 0000          EL2, Hyp mode, and the HVC instruction not implemented.
                                 0001          EL2, Hyp mode, the HVC instruction, and all the features described by Virt_frac ==
                                               0001 implemented.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the permitted values are:
                                 •         0000 when EL2 is not implemented.
                                 •         0001 when EL2 is implemented.
                                 In an implementation that includes EL2, if EL2 cannot use AArch32 but EL1 can use AArch32 then
                                 this field has the value 0001.

                                            Note
                                 The ID_ISARs do not identify whether the HVC instruction is implemented.

                  MProgMod, bits [11:8]
                                 M profile programmers' model support. Defined values are:
                                 0000          Not supported.
                                 0010          Support for two-stack programmers' model.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5293
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Security, bits [7:4]
                                    Security support. Defined values are:
                                    0000        EL3, Monitor mode, and the SMC instruction not implemented.
                                    0001        EL3, Monitor mode, the SMC instruction, and all the features described by Sec_frac ==
                                                0001 implemented.
                                    0010        As for 0001, and adds the ability to set the NSACR.RFR bit. Not permitted in ARMv8
                                                as the NSACR.RFR bit is RES0.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    In ARMv8-A the permitted values are:
                                    •      0000 when EL3 is not implemented.
                                    •      0001 when EL3 is implemented.
                                    In an implementation that includes EL3, if EL3 cannot use AArch32 but EL1 can use AArch32 then
                                    this field has the value 0001.

                    ProgMod, bits [3:0]
                                    Support for the standard programmers' model for ARMv4 and later. Model must support User, FIQ,
                                    IRQ, Supervisor, Abort, Undefined, and System modes. Defined values are:
                                    0000        Not supported.
                                    0001        Supported.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0001.

                    Accessing the ID_PFR1
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 1    000       001        0000         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

G7-5294                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5295
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.95       IFAR, Instruction Fault Address Register
                    The IFAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Holds the virtual address of the faulting address that caused a synchronous Prefetch Abort
                                   exception.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register IFAR(NS) is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   FAR_EL1[63:32].
                                   AArch32 System register IFAR(S) is architecturally mapped to AArch32 System register HIFAR
                                   when EL2 is implemented.
                                   AArch32 System register IFAR(S) is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   FAR_EL2[63:32] when EL2 is implemented.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   IFAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The IFAR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              0

                                      VA of faulting address of synchronous Prefetch Abort exception

                    Bits [31:0]
                                   VA of faulting address of synchronous Prefetch Abort exception.

                    Accessing the IFAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1     opc2   CRn     coproc        CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c6, c0, 2   000      010    0110    1111          0000

G7-5296                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                 Control                  Accessibility
                                    Configuration                                                                          Instance
                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1     EL2     EL3

                                    EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -        n/a     n/a     RW      IFAR_s

                                    EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -        RW      n/a     n/a     IFAR

                                    EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -        RW      RW      n/a     IFAR

                                    EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a     IFAR

                                    EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -        RW      n/a     n/a     IFAR

                                    EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -        RW      RW      n/a     IFAR

                                    EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a     IFAR

                                    EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -        RW      RW      RW      IFAR_ns

                                    EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      RW      IFAR_ns

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T6==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5297
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.96       IFSR, Instruction Fault Status Register
                    The IFSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Holds status information about the last instruction fault.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register IFSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    IFSR32_EL2.
                                    The current translation table format determines which format of the register is used.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    IFSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The IFSR bit assignments are:

                    When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                    31                                            17 16 15   13 12 11 10 9 8               4 3             0

                                          RES0                           RES0                      RES0          FS[3:0]

      FnV                                                                                                                         LPAE
                                                                                                                                  FS[4]
                                                                                                                                  RES0
                                                                                                                                    ExT

                    Bits [31:17]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    FnV, bit [16]
                                    FAR not Valid, for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on a
                                    translation table walk.
                                    0            IFAR is valid.
                                    1            IFAR is not valid, and holds an UNKNOWN value.
                                    This field is only valid for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on
                                    a translation table walk. It is RES0 for all other Prefetch Abort exceptions.

                    Bits [15:13]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    ExT, bit [12]
                                    External abort type. This bit can be used to provide an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of
                                    External aborts.
                                    In an implementation that does not provide any classification of External aborts, this bit is RES0.
                                    For aborts other than External aborts this bit always returns 0.

                    Bit [11]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

G7-5298                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  FS[4], bit [10]
                                    See FS[3:0], bits [3:0] for description of the FS field.

                  LPAE, bit [9]
                                    On taking a Data Abort exception, this bit is set as follows:
                                    0           Using the Short-descriptor translation table formats.
                                    1           Using the Long-descriptor translation table formats.
                                    Hardware does not interpret this bit to determine the behavior of the memory system, and therefore
                                    software can set this bit to 0 or 1 without affecting operation.

                  Bits [8:4]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  FS[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                    Fault status bits. Interpreted with bit [10]. Possible values of FS[4:0] are:
                                    00001       PC alignment fault
                                    00010       Debug exception
                                    00011       Access flag fault, level 1
                                    00101       Translation fault, level 1
                                    00110       Access flag fault, level 2
                                    00111       Translation fault, level 2
                                    01000       Synchronous External abort, not on translation table walk
                                    01001       Domain fault, level 1
                                    01011       Domain fault, level 2
                                    01100       Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 1
                                    01101       Permission fault, level 1
                                    01110       Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 2
                                    01111       Permission fault, level 2
                                    10000       TLB conflict abort
                                    10100       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED fault (Lockdown fault)

                                    11001       Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access, not on translation table walk
                                    11100       Synchronous parity or ECC error on translation table walk, level 1
                                    11110       Synchronous parity or ECC error on translation table walk, level 2
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    When the RAS Extension is implemented, 11001, 11100, and 11110, are reserved.
                                    For more information about the lookup level associated with a fault, see The level associated with
                                    MMU faults on a Short-descriptor translation table lookup on page G4-4950.

                  When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                  31                                             17 16 15     13 12 11 10 9 8         6 5              0

                                        RES0                             RES0                   RES0          STATUS

     FnV                                                                                                                         LPAE
                                                                                                                                 RES0
                                                                                                                                  ExT

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5299
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Bits [31:17]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    FnV, bit [16]
                                      FAR not Valid, for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on a
                                      translation table walk.
                                      0           IFAR is valid.
                                      1           IFAR is not valid, and holds an UNKNOWN value.
                                      This field is only valid for a synchronous External abort other than a synchronous External abort on
                                      a translation table walk. It is RES0 for all other Prefetch Abort exceptions.

                    Bits [15:13]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    ExT, bit [12]
                                      External abort type. This bit can be used to provide an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED classification of
                                      External aborts.
                                      In an implementation that does not provide any classification of External aborts, this bit is RES0.
                                      For aborts other than External aborts this bit always returns 0.

                    Bits [11:10]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    LPAE, bit [9]
                                      On taking a Data Abort exception, this bit is set as follows:
                                      0           Using the Short-descriptor translation table formats.
                                      1           Using the Long-descriptor translation table formats.
                                      Hardware does not interpret this bit to determine the behavior of the memory system, and therefore
                                      software can set this bit to 0 or 1 without affecting operation.

                    Bits [8:6]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    STATUS, bits [5:0]
                                      Fault status bits. Possible values of this field are:
                                      000000      Address size fault in TTBR0 or TTBR1
                                      000001      Address size fault, level 1
                                      000010      Address size fault, level 2
                                      000011      Address size fault, level 3
                                      000101      Translation fault, level 1
                                      000110      Translation fault, level 2
                                      000111      Translation fault, level 3
                                      001001      Access flag fault, level 1
                                      001010      Access flag fault, level 2
                                      001011      Access flag fault, level 3
                                      001101      Permission fault, level 1
                                      001110      Permission fault, level 2
                                      001111      Permission fault, level 3
                                      010000      Synchronous External abort, not on translation table walk
                                      010101      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 1

G7-5300                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                  010110      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 2
                                  010111      Synchronous External abort, on translation table walk, level 3
                                  011000      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access, not on translation table walk
                                  011101      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 1
                                  011110      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 2
                                  011111      Synchronous parity or ECC error on memory access on translation table walk, level 3
                                  100001      PC alignment fault
                                  100010      Debug exception
                                  110000      TLB conflict abort
                                  All other values are reserved.
                                  When the RAS Extension is implemented, 011000, 011101, 011110, and 011111, are reserved.
                                  For more information about the lookup level associated with a fault, see The level associated with
                                  MMU faults on a Long-descriptor translation table lookup on page G4-4952.

                  Accessing the IFSR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c5, c0, 1    000       001      0101     1111       0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                Accessibility
                                    Configuration                                                                          Instance
                                                                   E2H    TGE      NS     EL0      EL1     EL2     EL3

                                    EL3 is not implemented.        x      x        0      -        RW      n/a     n/a     IFSR

                                    EL3 is not implemented.        x      0        1      -        RW      RW      n/a     IFSR

                                    EL3 is not implemented.        x      1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a     IFSR

                                    EL3 is using AArch64.          x      x        0      -        RW      n/a     n/a     IFSR

                                    EL3 is using AArch64.          x      0        1      -        RW      RW      n/a     IFSR

                                    EL3 is using AArch64.          x      1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a     IFSR

                                    EL3 is using AArch32.          x      x        0      -        n/a     n/a     RW      IFSR_s

                                    EL3 is using AArch32.          x      0        1      -        RW      RW      RW      IFSR_ns

                                    EL3 is using AArch32.          x      1        1      -        n/a     RW      RW      IFSR_ns

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5301
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T5==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5302                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.97     ISR, Interrupt Status Register
                  The ISR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                    Shows the pending status of the IRQ, FIQ, or External abort. When executing at EL2, EL3 or secure
                                    EL1, this shows the pending status of the physical interrupts. When executing at Non-secure EL1:
                                    •      If the HCR.{IMO,FMO,AMO} bit has a value of 1, the corresponding ISR.{I,F,A} bit shows
                                           the pending status of the virtual IRQ, FIQ, or SError.
                                    •      If the HCR.{IMO,FMO,AMO} bit has a value of 0, the corresponding ISR.{I,F,A} bit shows
                                           the pending status of the physical IRQ, FIQ, or SError.

                  Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register ISR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register ISR_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                    ISR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ISR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                       9 8 7 6 5                     0

                                                      RES0                                    A I F           RES0

                  Bits [31:9]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt pending bit:
                                    0           No pending SError interrupt.
                                    1           An SError interrupt is pending.
                                    If the SError interrupt is edge-triggered, this field is cleared to zero when the physical SError
                                    interrupt is taken.

                  I, bit [7]
                                    IRQ pending bit. Indicates whether an IRQ interrupt is pending:
                                    0           No pending IRQ.
                                    1           An IRQ interrupt is pending.

                  F, bit [6]
                                    FIQ pending bit. Indicates whether an FIQ interrupt is pending.
                                    0           No pending FIQ.
                                    1           An FIQ interrupt is pending.

                  Bits [5:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Accessing the ISR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5303
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c12, c1, 0    000       000        1100         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HSTR.T12==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5304                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.98     ITLBIALL, Instruction TLB Invalidate All
                  The ITLBIALL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from instruction TLBs that are from any level
                                  of the translation table walk. The entries that are invalidated are as follows:
                                  •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, all entries that would be required for
                                         the Secure EL1&0 translation regime.
                                  •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, all entries that would be required for
                                         the Secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                  •      If executed at Non-secure EL1, all stage 1 translation table entries that would be required for
                                         the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and, if EL2 is implemented, they must match the
                                         current VMID.
                                  •      If executed at EL2, the stage 1 or stage 2 translation table entries that would be required for
                                         the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and matches the current VMID.
                                  The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.
                                  ARM deprecates the use of this instruction. It is only provided for backwards compatibility with
                                  earlier versions of the ARM architecture.

                  Configurations
                                  There are no configuration notes.

                  Attributes
                                  ITLBIALL is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  ITLBIALL ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                  the register before issuing this instruction.

                  Executing the ITLBIALL instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c5, 0   000       000        1000         1111         0101

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                E2H     TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                x       x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                x       0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                x       1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5305
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIALLIS operating on instruction TLBs
                    only.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5306                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.99     ITLBIASID, Instruction TLB Invalidate by ASID match
                  The ITLBIASID characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from instruction TLBs that meet the
                                 following requirements:
                                 •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                 •      The entry would be used for the specified ASID, and either:
                                        —      Is from a level of lookup above the final level.
                                        —      Is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                 •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                 From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                 following translation regime:
                                 •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                        regime.
                                 •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                        regime.
                                 •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                 The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.
                                 ARM deprecates the use of this instruction. It is only provided for backwards compatibility with
                                 earlier versions of the ARM architecture.

                  Configurations
                                 There are no configuration notes.

                  Attributes
                                 ITLBIASID is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ITLBIASID input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                        8 7                      0

                                                    RES0                                                   ASID

                  Bits [31:8]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  ASID, bits [7:0]
                                 ASID value to match. Any TLB entries for non-global pages that match the ASID values will be
                                 affected by this operation.

                  Executing the ITLBIASID instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5307
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c5, 2   000       010        1000         1111         0101

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIASIDIS operating on instruction TLBs
                    only.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5308                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.100    ITLBIMVA, Instruction TLB Invalidate by VA
                  The ITLBIMVA characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from instruction TLBs that meet the
                                 following requirements:
                                 •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                 •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address, and one of the following applies:
                                        —      The entry is from a level of lookup above the final level and matches the specified
                                               ASID.
                                        —      The entry is a global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                        —      The entry is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup that matches the
                                               specified ASID.
                                 •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                 From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                 following translation regime:
                                 •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                        regime.
                                 •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                        regime.
                                 •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                 The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.
                                 ARM deprecates the use of this instruction. It is only provided for backwards compatibility with
                                 earlier versions of the ARM architecture.

                  Configurations
                                 There are no configuration notes.

                  Attributes
                                 ITLBIMVA is a 32-bit System instruction.

                  Field descriptions
                  The ITLBIMVA input value bit assignments are:

                  31                                                           12 11          8 7                     0

                                               VA                                      RES0                ASID

                  VA, bits [31:12]
                                 Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                 by this operation.

                  Bits [11:8]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  ASID, bits [7:0]
                                 ASID value to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected by
                                 this operation.
                                 Global TLB entries that match the VA value will be affected by this operation, regardless of the
                                 value of the ASID field.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5309
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Executing the ITLBIMVA instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c5, 1   000       001        1000         1111         0101

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIMVAIS operating on instruction TLBs
                    only.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5310                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.101    JIDR, Jazelle ID Register
                  The JIDR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  A Jazelle register, which identified the Jazelle architecture version.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                  Attributes
                                  JIDR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The JIDR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                       0

                                                     RO, RAZ at EL1, EL2, and EL3

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  RO, RAZ at EL1, EL2, and EL3. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this field is RAZ or
                                  UNDEFINED at EL0.

                  Accessing the JIDR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                  opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p14, 7, <Rt>, c0, c0, 0   111       000      0000         1110         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                        Control                   Accessibility

                                                        E2H       TGE      NS     EL0                              EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                        x         x        0      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED           RO           n/a    RO

                                                        x         0        1      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED           RO           RO     RO

                                                        x         1        1      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED           n/a          RO     RO

                  For accesses from EL0 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the register is RO or UNDEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                G7-5311
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TID0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TID0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.

G7-5312                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.102    JMCR, Jazelle Main Configuration Register
                  The JMCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  A Jazelle register, which provides control of the Jazelle extension.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                  Attributes
                                  JMCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The JMCR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                       0

                                                     RAZ/WI at EL1, EL2, and EL3

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  RAZ/WI at EL1, EL2, and EL3. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this field is RAZ/WI or
                                  UNDEFINED at EL0.

                  Accessing the JMCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                  opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p14, 7, <Rt>, c2, c0, 0   111       000      0010         1110         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                        Control                   Accessibility

                                                        E2H       TGE      NS     EL0                              EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                        x         x        0      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED           RW           n/a    RW

                                                        x         0        1      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED           RW           RW     RW

                                                        x         1        1      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED           n/a          RW     RW

                  For accesses from EL0 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the register is RW or UNDEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                G7-5313
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.103      JOSCR, Jazelle OS Control Register
                    The JOSCR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    A Jazelle register, which provides operating system control of the Jazelle Extension.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                    Attributes
                                    JOSCR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The JOSCR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                     0

                                                       RAZ/WI at EL1, EL2, and EL3

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    RAZ/WI at EL1, EL2, and EL3. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this field is RAZ/WI or
                                    UNDEFINED at EL0.

                    Accessing the JOSCR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2    CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p14, 7, <Rt>, c1, c0, 0   111       000     0001         1110         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                          Control                  Accessibility

                                                          E2H      TGE      NS     EL0                             EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                          x        x        0      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED          RW           n/a    RW

                                                          x        0        1      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED          RW           RW     RW

                                                          x        1        1      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED          n/a          RW     RW

                    For accesses from EL0 it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the register is RW or UNDEFINED.

G7-5314                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.104    MAIR0, Memory Attribute Indirection Register 0
                  The MAIR0 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Along with MAIR1, provides the memory attribute encodings corresponding to the possible
                                     AttrIndx values in a Long-descriptor format translation table entry for stage 1 translations.
                                     AttrIndx[2] indicates the MAIR register to be used:
                                     •     When AttrIndx[2] is 0, MAIR0 is used.
                                     •     When AttrIndx[2] is 1, MAIR1 is used.

                  Configurations
                                     AArch32 System register MAIR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     MAIR_EL1[31:0].
                                     MAIR0 and PRRR are the same register, with a different view depending on the value of
                                     TTBCR.EAE:
                                     •     When it is set to 0, the register is as described in PRRR.
                                     •     When it is set to 1, the register is as described in MAIR0.
                                     When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to MAIR0(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                     signal is asserted HIGH.
                                     RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                     MAIR0 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The MAIR0 bit assignments are:

                  When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                  31                       24 23                    16 15                     8 7                      0

                            Attr3                      Attr2                     Attr1                     Attr0

                  Attr<n>, bits [8n+7:8n], for n = 0 to 3
                                     The memory attribute encoding for an AttrIndx[2:0] entry in a Long descriptor format translation
                                     table entry, where:
                                     •     AttrIndx[2:0] gives the value of <n> in Attr<n>.
                                     •     AttrIndx[2] defines which MAIR to access. Attr7 to Attr4 are in MAIR1, and Attr3 to Attr0
                                           are in MAIR0.
                                     Bits [7:4] are encoded as follows:

                                    Attr<n>[7:4]       Meaning

                                    0000               Device memory. See encoding of Attr<n>[3:0] for the type of Device memory.

                                    00RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Transient

                                    0100               Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5315
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     Attr<n>[7:4]       Meaning

                                     01RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Transient

                                     10RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Non-transient

                                     11RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Non-transient

                                      R = Outer Read-Allocate policy, W = Outer Write-Allocate policy.
                                      The meaning of bits [3:0] depends on the value of bits [7:4]:

       Attr<n>[3:0]       Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is 0000            Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is not 0000

       0000               Device-nGnRnE memory                         UNPREDICTABLE

       00RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Transient

       0100               Device-nGnRE memory                          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable

       01RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Transient

       1000               Device-nGRE memory                           Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient (RW=00)

       10RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient

       1100               Device-GRE memory                            Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient (RW=00)

       11RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient

                                      R = Inner Read-Allocate policy, W = Inner Write-Allocate policy.
                                      The R and W bits in some Attr<n> fields have the following meanings:

                                                                                                               R or W      Meaning

                                                                                                               0           No Allocate

                                                                                                               1           Allocate

                      Accessing the MAIR0
                      This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                      MRC <syntax>

                      This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                      MCR <syntax>

                      This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                    opc1       opc2   CRn    coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c10, c2, 0    000        000    1010   1111         0010

G7-5316                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                Control                  Accessibility
                                   Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                                E2H      TGE      NS     EL0     EL1     EL2     EL3

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a     RW      MAIR0_s

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -       RW      n/a     n/a     MAIR0

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -       RW      RW      n/a     MAIR0

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -       n/a     RW      n/a     MAIR0

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -       RW      n/a     n/a     MAIR0

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW      n/a     MAIR0

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW      n/a     MAIR0

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW      RW      MAIR0_ns

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW      RW      MAIR0_ns

                  When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to MAIR0_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                  HIGH.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5317
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.105      MAIR1, Memory Attribute Indirection Register 1
                    The MAIR1 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Along with MAIR0, provides the memory attribute encodings corresponding to the possible
                                       AttrIndx values in a Long-descriptor format translation table entry for stage 1 translations.
                                       AttrIndx[2] indicates the MAIR register to be used:
                                       •     When AttrIndx[2] is 0, MAIR0 is used.
                                       •     When AttrIndx[2] is 1, MAIR1 is used.

                    Configurations
                                       AArch32 System register MAIR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       MAIR_EL1[63:32].
                                       MAIR1 and NMRR are the same register, with a different view depending on the value of
                                       TTBCR.EAE:
                                       •     When it is set to 0, the register is as described in NMRR.
                                       •     When it is set to 1, the register is as described in MAIR1.
                                       When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to MAIR1(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                       signal is asserted HIGH.
                                       RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                       MAIR1 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The MAIR1 bit assignments are:

                    When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                    31                       24 23                    16 15                     8 7                      0

                              Attr7                      Attr6                     Attr5                     Attr4

                    Attr<n>, bits [8(n-4)+7:8(n-4)], for n = 4 to 7
                                       The memory attribute encoding for an AttrIndx[2:0] entry in a Long descriptor format translation
                                       table entry, where:
                                       •     AttrIndx[2:0] gives the value of <n> in Attr<n>.
                                       •     AttrIndx[2] defines which MAIR to access. Attr7 to Attr4 are in MAIR1, and Attr3 to Attr0
                                             are in MAIR0.
                                       Bits [7:4] are encoded as follows:

                                      Attr<n>[7:4]       Meaning

                                      0000               Device memory. See encoding of Attr<n>[3:0] for the type of Device memory.

                                      00RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Transient

                                      0100               Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable

G7-5318                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    Attr<n>[7:4]       Meaning

                                    01RW, RW not 00    Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Transient

                                    10RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Non-transient

                                    11RW               Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Non-transient

                                     R = Outer Read-Allocate policy, W = Outer Write-Allocate policy.
                                     The meaning of bits [3:0] depends on the value of bits [7:4]:

      Attr<n>[3:0]       Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is 0000            Meaning when Attr<n>[7:4] is not 0000

      0000               Device-nGnRnE memory                         UNPREDICTABLE

      00RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Transient

      0100               Device-nGnRE memory                          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable

      01RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Transient

      1000               Device-nGRE memory                           Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient (RW=00)

      10RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Non-transient

      1100               Device-GRE memory                            Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient (RW=00)

      11RW, RW not 00    UNPREDICTABLE                                Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Non-transient

                                     R = Inner Read-Allocate policy, W = Inner Write-Allocate policy.
                                     The R and W bits in some Attr<n> fields have the following meanings:

                                                                                                                R or W       Meaning

                                                                                                                0            No Allocate

                                                                                                                1            Allocate

                     Accessing the MAIR1
                     This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                     MRC <syntax>

                     This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                     MCR <syntax>

                     This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1       opc2    CRn      coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c10, c2, 1    000        001     1010     1111         0010

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5319
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                  Control                  Accessibility
                                     Configuration                                                                      Instance
                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0     EL1     EL2   EL3

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a   RW     MAIR1_s

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    RW     MAIR1_ns

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    RW     MAIR1_ns

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    MAIR1

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    MAIR1

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    MAIR1

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    MAIR1

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    MAIR1

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    MAIR1

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to MAIR1_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5320                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.106     MIDR, Main ID Register
                    The MIDR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides identification information for the PE, including an implementer code for the device and a
                                   device ID number.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register MIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   MIDR_EL1.
                                   AArch32 System register MIDR is architecturally mapped to External register MIDR_EL1.
                                   Some fields of the MIDR are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. For details of the values of these fields for
                                   a particular ARMv8 implementation, and any implementation-specific significance of these values,
                                   see the product documentation.

                    Attributes
                                   MIDR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The MIDR bit assignments are:

                    31                    24 23             20 19       16 15                             4 3           0

                         Implementer              Variant                            PartNum                   Revision

     Architecture

                    Implementer, bits [31:24]
                                   The Implementer code. This field must hold an implementer code that has been assigned by ARM.
                                   Assigned codes include the following:

                                   Hex representation               ASCII representation   Implementer

                                   0x41                             A                      ARM Limited

                                   0x42                             B                      Broadcom Corporation

                                   0x43                             C                      Cavium Inc.

                                   0x44                             D                      Digital Equipment Corporation

                                   0x49                             I                      Infineon Technologies AG

                                   0x4D                             M                      Motorola or Freescale Semiconductor Inc.

                                   0x4E                             N                      NVIDIA Corporation

                                   0x50                             P                      Applied Micro Circuits Corporation

                                   0x51                             Q                      Qualcomm Inc.

                                   0x56                             V                      Marvell International Ltd.

                                   0x69                             i                      Intel Corporation

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5321
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    ARM can assign codes that are not published in this manual. All values not assigned by ARM are
                                    reserved and must not be used.

                    Variant, bits [23:20]
                                    An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED variant number. Typically, this field is used to distinguish between
                                    different product variants, or major revisions of a product.

                    Architecture, bits [19:16]
                                    The permitted values of this field are:
                                    0001         ARMv4
                                    0010         ARMv4T
                                    0011         ARMv5 (obsolete)
                                    0100         ARMv5T
                                    0101         ARMv5TE
                                    0110         ARMv5TEJ
                                    0111         ARMv6
                                    1111         Architectural features are individually identified in the ID_* registers, see ID registers
                                                 on page K13-6627.
                                    All other values are reserved.

                    PartNum, bits [15:4]
                                    An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED primary part number for the device.
                                    On processors implemented by ARM, if the top four bits of the primary part number are 0x0 or 0x7,
                                    the variant and architecture are encoded differently.

                    Revision, bits [3:0]
                                    An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED revision number for the device.

                    Accessing the MIDR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 0    000      000        0000         1111         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                  x        0        1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                  x        1        1      -          n/a          RO     RO

G7-5322                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5323
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.107      MPIDR, Multiprocessor Affinity Register
                    The MPIDR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       In a multiprocessor system, provides an additional PE identification mechanism for scheduling
                                       purposes.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register MPIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       MPIDR_EL1.
                                       The assigned value of the MPIDR.{Aff2, Aff1, Aff0} or MPIDR_EL1.{Aff3, Aff2, Aff1, Aff0} set
                                       of fields of each PE must be unique within the system as a whole.
                                       In a uniprocessor system ARM recommends that each Aff<n> field of this register returns a value
                                       of 0.

                    Attributes
                                       MPIDR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The MPIDR bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29               25 24 23                      16 15                        8 7                       0

                    M U        RES0                          Aff2                     Aff1                      Aff0

      MT

                    M, bit [31]
                                       Indicates whether this implementation includes the functionality introduced by the ARMv7
                                       Multiprocessing Extensions. The possible values of this bit are:
                                       0              This implementation does not include the ARMv7 Multiprocessing Extensions
                                                      functionality.
                                       1              This implementation includes the ARMv7 Multiprocessing Extensions functionality.
                                       In ARMv8 this bit is RES1.

                    U, bit [30]
                                       Indicates a Uniprocessor system, as distinct from PE 0 in a multiprocessor system. The possible
                                       values of this bit are:
                                       0              Processor is part of a multiprocessor system.
                                       1              Processor is part of a uniprocessor system.

                    Bits [29:25]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    MT, bit [24]
                                       Indicates whether the lowest level of affinity consists of logical PEs that are implemented using a
                                       multithreading type approach. The possible values of this bit are:
                                       0              Performance of PEs at the lowest affinity level is largely independent.
                                       1              Performance of PEs at the lowest affinity level is very interdependent.

G7-5324                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                   G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                       G7.2 General system control registers

                  Aff2, bits [23:16]
                                     Affinity level 2. The least significant affinity level field, for this PE in the system.

                  Aff1, bits [15:8]
                                     Affinity level 1. The intermediate affinity level field, for this PE in the system.

                  Aff0, bits [7:0]
                                     Affinity level 0. The most significant affinity level field, for this PE in the system.

                  Accessing the MPIDR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                 <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                 p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 5     000       101        0000         1111         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                    Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                    E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                    x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                    x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                    x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                      G7-5325
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.108      MVBAR, Monitor Vector Base Address Register
                    The MVBAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   When EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32, holds the vector base address for any exception
                                   that is taken to Monitor mode.
                                   Secure software must program the MVBAR with the required initial value as part of the PE boot
                                   sequence.

                    Configurations
                                   This register is only accessible in Secure state.
                                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether MVBAR[0] has a fixed value and ignored writes, or takes
                                   the last value written to it.
                                   Write access to MVBAR is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted HIGH.
                                   On a reset into EL3 using AArch32, the reset value of MVBAR is an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                   choice between:
                                   •       MVBAR[31:5] = an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED value, which might be UNKNOWN.
                                   •       MVBAR[4:1] = RES0.
                                   •       MVBAR[0] = 0.
                                   And:
                                   •       MVBAR[31:1] = an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED value that is bits[31:1] of the AArch32 reset
                                           address.
                                   •       MVBAR[0] = 1.

                    Attributes
                                   MVBAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The MVBAR bit assignments are:

                    When programmed with a vector base address:

                    31                                                                                    5 4              0

                                                   Vector Base Address                                          Reserved

                    Bits [31:5]
                                   Vector Base Address. Bits[31:5] of the base address of the exception vectors for exceptions taken to
                                   this Exception level. Bits[4:0] of an exception vector are the exception offset.

                    Reserved, bits [4:0]
                                   Reserved, see Configurations.

                    Accessing the MVBAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5326                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c12, c0, 1    000       001        1100         1111         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          -            n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          -            -      RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          -      RW

                  When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to MVBAR is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                  HIGH.

                  If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, any read or write to MVBAR from Secure EL1 using AArch32 is
                  trapped as an exception to EL3.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5327
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.109      MVFR0, Media and VFP Feature Register 0
                    The MVFR0 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Describes the features provided by the AArch32 Advanced SIMD and Floating-point
                                     implementation.
                                     Must be interpreted with MVFR1 and MVFR2.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register MVFR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     MVFR0_EL1.
                                     Implemented only if the implementation includes Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions.

                    Attributes
                                     MVFR0 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The MVFR0 bit assignments are:

                    31       28 27          24 23            20 19      16 15       12 11          8 7          4 3      0

                     FPRound     FPShVec            FPSqrt       FPDivide   FPTrap          FPDP         FPSP     SIMDReg

                    FPRound, bits [31:28]
                                     Floating-Point Rounding modes. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides
                                     support for rounding modes. Defined values are:
                                     0000           Not implemented, or only Round to Nearest mode supported, except that Round towards
                                                    Zero mode is supported for VCVT instructions that always use that rounding mode
                                                    regardless of the FPSCR setting.
                                     0001           All rounding modes supported.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                    FPShVec, bits [27:24]
                                     Short Vectors. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support for the use of
                                     short vectors. Defined values are:
                                     0000           Short vectors not supported.
                                     0001           Short vector operation supported.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the only permitted value is 0000.

                    FPSqrt, bits [23:20]
                                     Square Root. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support for the ARMv6
                                     VFP square root operations. Defined values are:
                                     0000           Not supported in hardware.
                                     0001           Supported.

G7-5328                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.
                                 The VSQRT.F32 instruction also requires the single-precision floating-point attribute, bits [7:4],
                                 and the VSQRT.F64 instruction also requires the double-precision floating-point attribute, bits
                                 [11:8].

                  FPDivide, bits [19:16]
                                 Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support for VFP divide operations.
                                 Defined values are:
                                 0000         Not supported in hardware.
                                 0001         Supported.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.
                                 The VDIV.F32 instruction also requires the single-precision floating-point attribute, bits [7:4], and
                                 the VDIV.F64 instruction also requires the double-precision floating-point attribute, bits [11:8].

                  FPTrap, bits [15:12]
                                 Floating Point Exception Trapping. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides
                                 support for exception trapping. Defined values are:
                                 0000         Not supported.
                                 0001         Supported.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 A value of 0001 indicates that, when the corresponding trap is enabled, a floating-point exception
                                 generates an exception.

                  FPDP, bits [11:8]
                                 Double Precision. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support for
                                 double-precision operations. Defined values are:
                                 0000         Not supported in hardware.
                                 0001         Supported, VFPv2.
                                 0010         Supported, VFPv3, VFPv4, or ARMv8. VFPv3 and ARMv8 add an instruction to load
                                              a double-precision floating-point constant, and conversions between double-precision
                                              and fixed-point values.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0010.
                                 A value of 0b0001 or 0b0010 indicates support for all VFP double-precision instructions in the
                                 supported version of VFP, except that, in addition to this field being nonzero:
                                 •       VSQRT.F64 is only available if the Square root field is 0001.
                                 •       VDIV.F64 is only available if the Divide field is 0001.
                                 •       Conversion between double-precision and single-precision is only available if the
                                         single-precision field is nonzero.

                  FPSP, bits [7:4]
                                 Single Precision. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support for
                                 single-precision operations. Defined values are:
                                 0000         Not supported in hardware.
                                 0001         Supported, VFPv2.
                                 0010         Supported, VFPv3 or VFPv4. VFPv3 adds an instruction to load a single-precision
                                              floating-point constant, and conversions between single-precision and fixed-point
                                              values.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5329
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0010.
                                    A value of 0b0001 or 0b0010 indicates support for all VFP single-precision instructions in the
                                    supported version of VFP, except that, in addition to this field being nonzero:
                                    •      VSQRT.F32 is only available if the Square root field is 0001.
                                    •      VDIV.F32 is only available if the Divide field is 0001.
                                    •      Conversion between double-precision and single-precision is only available if the
                                           double-precision field is nonzero.

                    SIMDReg, bits [3:0]
                                    Advanced SIMD registers. Indicates whether the Advanced SIMD and floating-point
                                    implementation provides support for the Advanced SIMD and floating-point register bank. Defined
                                    values are:
                                    0000        The implementation has no Advanced SIMD and floating-point support.
                                    0001        The implementation includes floating-point support with 16 x 64-bit registers.
                                    0010        The implementation includes Advanced SIMD and floating-point support with 32 x
                                                64-bit registers.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0010.

                    Accessing the MVFR0
                    This register can be read using VMRS with the following syntax:

                    VMRS <Rt>, <spec_reg>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                                 <spec_reg>          reg

                                                                                                                 MVFR0               0111

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE        NS    EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x          0     -     RO        n/a       RO

                                                                                 x        0          1     -     RO        RO        RO

                                                                                 x        1          1     -     n/a       RO        RO

G7-5330                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                        —      If CPACR.cp10==00, read accesses to this register from PL1 are UNDEFINED.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.TFP==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==00, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==10, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL2 are UNDEFINED.
                        —      If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If NSACR.cp10==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are UNDEFINED.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If CPTR_EL3.TFP==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5331
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.110      MVFR1, Media and VFP Feature Register 1
                    The MVFR1 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Describes the features provided by the AArch32 Advanced SIMD and Floating-point
                                     implementation.
                                     Must be interpreted with MVFR0 and MVFR2.
                                     For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                     for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register MVFR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     MVFR1_EL1.
                                     Implemented only if the implementation includes Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions.

                    Attributes
                                     MVFR1 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The MVFR1 bit assignments are:

                    31       28 27          24 23         20 19        16 15        12 11        8 7          4 3           0

                                     FPHP       SIMDHP         SIMDSP       SIMDInt      SIMDLS       FPDNaN        FPFtZ

      SIMDFMAC

                    SIMDFMAC, bits [31:28]
                                     Advanced SIMD Fused Multiply-Accumulate. Indicates whether the Advanced SIMD
                                     implementation provides fused multiply accumulate instructions. Defined values are:
                                     0000           Not implemented.
                                     0001           Implemented.
                                     All other values are reserved.
                                     In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.
                                     The Advanced SIMD and floating-point implementations must provide the same level of support
                                     for these instructions.

                    FPHP, bits [27:24]
                                     Floating Point Half Precision. Indicates the level of half-precision floating-point support. Defined
                                     values are:
                                     0000           Not supported.
                                     0001           Floating-point half-precision conversion instructions are supported for conversion
                                                    between single-precision and half-precision.
                                     0010           As for 0001, and adds instructions for conversion between double-precision and
                                                    half-precision.
                                     0011           As for 0010, and adds support for half-precision floating-point arithmetic.
                                     All other values are reserved.

G7-5332                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                           G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                               G7.2 General system control registers

                                In ARMv8-A the permitted values are:
                                •      0000 in an implementation without floating-point support.
                                •      0010 in an implementation with floating-point support that does not include the
                                       ARMv8.2-FP16 extension.
                                •      0011 in an implementation with floating-point support that includes the ARMv8.2-FP16
                                       extension.
                                The level of support indicated by this field must be equivalent to the level of support indicated by
                                the SIMDHP field, meaning the permitted values are:

                                                              Half Precision instructions supported            FPHP       SIMDHP

                                                              No support                                       0000       0000

                                                              Conversions only                                 0010       0001

                                                              Conversions and arithmetic                       0011       0010

                  SIMDHP, bits [23:20]
                                Advanced SIMD Half Precision. Indicates the level of half-precision floating-point support.
                                Defined values are:
                                0000        Not supported.
                                0001        SIMD half-precision conversion instructions are supported for conversion between
                                            single-precision and half-precision.
                                0010        As for 0001, and adds support for half-precision floating-point arithmetic.
                                All other values are reserved.
                                In ARMv8-A the permitted values are:
                                •      0000 in an implementation without SIMD floating-point support.
                                •      0001 in an implementation with SIMD floating-point support that does not include the
                                       ARMv8.2-FP16 extension.
                                •      0010 in an implementation with SIMD floating-point support that includes the
                                       ARMv8.2-FP16 extension.
                                The level of support indicated by this field must be equivalent to the level of support indicated by
                                the FPHP field, meaning the permitted values are:

                                                              Half Precision instructions supported            FPHP       SIMDHP

                                                              No support                                       0000       0000

                                                              Conversions only                                 0010       0001

                                                              Conversions and arithmetic                       0011       0010

                  SIMDSP, bits [19:16]
                                Advanced SIMD Single Precision. Indicates whether the Advanced SIMD and floating-point
                                implementation provides single-precision floating-point instructions. Defined values are:
                                0000        Not implemented.
                                0001        Implemented. This value is permitted only if the SIMDInt field is 0001.
                                All other values are reserved.
                                In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5333
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    SIMDInt, bits [15:12]
                                   Advanced SIMD Integer. Indicates whether the Advanced SIMD and floating-point implementation
                                   provides integer instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Not implemented.
                                   0001        Implemented.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                    SIMDLS, bits [11:8]
                                   Advanced SIMD Load/Store. Indicates whether the Advanced SIMD and floating-point
                                   implementation provides load/store instructions. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Not implemented.
                                   0001        Implemented.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                    FPDNaN, bits [7:4]
                                   Default NaN mode. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support only for
                                   the Default NaN mode. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Not implemented, or hardware supports only the Default NaN mode.
                                   0001        Hardware supports propagation of NaN values.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                    FPFtZ, bits [3:0]
                                   Flush to Zero mode. Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support only for
                                   the Flush-to-Zero mode of operation. Defined values are:
                                   0000        Not implemented, or hardware supports only the Flush-to-Zero mode of operation.
                                   0001        Hardware supports full denormalized number arithmetic.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0001.

                    Accessing the MVFR1
                    This register can be read using VMRS with the following syntax:

                    VMRS <Rt>, <spec_reg>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                             <spec_reg>       reg

                                                                                                             MVFR1            0110

G7-5334                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RO        n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RO        RO     RO

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                        —      If CPACR.cp10==00, read accesses to this register from PL1 are UNDEFINED.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.TFP==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==00, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==10, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL2 are UNDEFINED.
                        —      If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If NSACR.cp10==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are UNDEFINED.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If CPTR_EL3.TFP==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5335
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.111      MVFR2, Media and VFP Feature Register 2
                    The MVFR2 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Describes the features provided by the AArch32 Advanced SIMD and Floating-point
                                   implementation.
                                   Must be interpreted with MVFR0 and MVFR1.
                                   For general information about the interpretation of the ID registers see Principles of the ID scheme
                                   for fields in ID registers on page G7-5022.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register MVFR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   MVFR2_EL1.
                                   Implemented only if the implementation includes Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions.

                    Attributes
                                   MVFR2 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The MVFR2 bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                        8 7            4 3       0

                                                     RES0                                           FPMisc     SIMDMisc

                    Bits [31:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    FPMisc, bits [7:4]
                                   Indicates whether the floating-point implementation provides support for miscellaneous VFP
                                   features.
                                   0000        Not implemented, or no support for miscellaneous features.
                                   0001        Support for Floating-point selection.
                                   0010        As 0001, and Floating-point Conversion to Integer with Directed Rounding modes.
                                   0011        As 0010, and Floating-point Round to Integer Floating-point.
                                   0100        As 0011, and Floating-point MaxNum and MinNum.
                                   All other values are reserved.
                                   In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0100.

                    SIMDMisc, bits [3:0]
                                   Indicates whether the Advanced SIMD implementation provides support for miscellaneous
                                   Advanced SIMD features.
                                   0000        Not implemented, or no support for miscellaneous features.
                                   0001        Floating-point Conversion to Integer with Directed Rounding modes.
                                   0010        As 0001, and Floating-point Round to Integer Floating-point.
                                   0011        As 0010, and Floating-point MaxNum and MinNum.
                                   All other values are reserved.

G7-5336                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                  In ARMv8-A the permitted values are 0000 and 0011.

                  Accessing the MVFR2
                  This register can be read using VMRS with the following syntax:

                  VMRS <Rt>, <spec_reg>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                               <spec_reg>        reg

                                                                                                               MVFR2             0101

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RO        n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RO        RO     RO

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                        —      If CPACR.cp10==00, read accesses to this register from PL1 are UNDEFINED.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.TFP==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==00, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If CPTR_EL2.FPEN==10, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCPTR.TCP10==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL2 are UNDEFINED.
                        —      If HCR.TID3==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If NSACR.cp10==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are UNDEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5337
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If CPTR_EL3.TFP==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5338                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                             ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.112    NMRR, Normal Memory Remap Register
                  The NMRR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides additional mapping controls for memory regions that are mapped as Normal memory by
                                 their entry in the PRRR.
                                 Used in conjunction with the PRRR.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register NMRR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 MAIR_EL1[63:32].
                                 MAIR1 and NMRR are the same register, with a different view depending on the value of
                                 TTBCR.EAE:
                                 •      When it is set to 0, the register is as described in NMRR.
                                 •      When it is set to 1, the register is as described in MAIR1.
                                 When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to NMRR(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                 signal is asserted HIGH.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 NMRR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The NMRR bit assignments are:

                  When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                  OR7 OR6 OR5 OR4 OR3 OR2 OR1 OR0                    IR7    IR6   IR5    IR4   IR3      IR2   IR1   IR0

                  OR<n>, bits [2n+17:2n+16], for n = 0 to 7
                                 Outer Cacheable property mapping for memory attributes n, if the region is mapped as Normal
                                 memory by the PRRR.TR<n> entry. n is the value of the TEX[0], C, and B bits concatenated. The
                                 possible values of this field are:
                                 00          Region is Non-cacheable.
                                 01          Region is Write-Back, Write-Allocate.
                                 10          Region is Write-Through, no Write-Allocate.
                                 11          Region is Write-Back, no Write-Allocate.
                                 The meaning of the field with n = 6 is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED and might differ from the meaning
                                 given here. This is because the meaning of the attribute combination {TEX[0] = 1, C = 1, B = 0} is
                                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  IR<n>, bits [2n+1:2n], for n = 0 to 7
                                 Inner Cacheable property mapping for memory attributes n, if the region is mapped as Normal
                                 memory by the PRRR.TR<n> entry. n is the value of the TEX[0], C, and B bits concatenated. The
                                 possible values of this field are:
                                 00          Region is Non-cacheable.
                                 01          Region is Write-Back, Write-Allocate.
                                 10          Region is Write-Through, no Write-Allocate.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5339
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     11         Region is Write-Back, no Write-Allocate.
                                     The meaning of the field with n = 6 is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED and might differ from the meaning
                                     given here. This is because the meaning of the attribute combination {TEX[0] = 1, C = 1, B = 0} is
                                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the NMRR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c10, c2, 1    000       001     1010    1111       0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                  Accessibility
                                      Configuration                                                                        Instance
                                                                   E2H     TGE      NS      EL0     EL1     EL2    EL3

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x       x        0       -       n/a     n/a    RW      NMRR_s

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x       x        0       -       RW      n/a    n/a     NMRR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x       0        1       -       RW      RW     n/a     NMRR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x       1        1       -       n/a     RW     n/a     NMRR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x       x        0       -       RW      n/a    n/a     NMRR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW     n/a     NMRR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW     n/a     NMRR

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x       0        1       -       RW      RW     RW      NMRR_ns

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x       1        1       -       n/a     RW     RW      NMRR_ns

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to NMRR_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5340                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                      —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5341
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.113      NSACR, Non-Secure Access Control Register
                    The NSACR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    When EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32, defines the Non-secure access permissions to
                                    Trace, Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality. Also includes IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                    bits that can define Non-secure access permissions for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED functionality.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                                            Note
                                    In AArch64 state, the NSACR controls are replaced by controls in CPTR_EL3.

                                    Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply whenever the register
                                    is accessible. This means they apply when the PE resets into EL3 using AArch32.

                    Attributes
                                    NSACR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The NSACR bit assignments are:

                    31                              21 20 19 18    16 15 14      12 11 10 9                             0

                                   RES0                                    RES0                           RES0

      NSTRCDIS                                                                                                                      cp10
      RES0                                                                                                                          cp11
      IMP DEF                                                                                                                   NSASEDIS

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64 then:

                    •      Any read of the NSACR from Non-secure EL2 or Non-secure EL1 returns a value of 0x00000C00.

                    •      Any read or write to NSACR from Secure EL1 is trapped as an exception to EL3.

                    If EL3 is not implemented, then any read of the NSACR from EL2 or EL1 returns a value of 0x00000C00.

                    Bits [31:21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    NSTRCDIS, bit [20]
                                    Disables Non-secure System register accesses to all implemented trace registers.
                                    0           This control has no effect on:
                                                •      System register access to implemented trace registers.
                                                •      The behavior of CPACR.TRCDIS and HCPTR.TTA.
                                    1           Non-secure System register accesses to all implemented trace registers are disabled,
                                                meaning:
                                                •      CPACR.TRCDIS behaves as RAO/WI in Non-secure state, regardless of its
                                                       actual value.
                                                •      HCPTR.TTA behaves as RAO/WI, regardless of its actual value.

G7-5342                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                                   The implementation of this field must correspond to the implementation of the CPACR.TRCDIS
                                   field:
                                   •      If CPACR.TRCDIS is RAZ/WI, this field is RAZ/WI.
                                   •      If CPACR.TRCDIS is RW, this field is RW.

                                            Note
                                   •      The ETMv4 architecture does not permit EL0 to access the trace registers. If the
                                          implementation includes an ETMv4 implementation, EL0 accesses to the trace registers are
                                          UNDEFINED.

                                   •      The architecture does not provide Non-secure access controls on trace register accesses
                                          through the optional memory-mapped external debug interface.

                                   System register accesses to the trace registers can have side-effects. When a System register access
                                   is trapped, any side-effects that are normally associated with the access do not occur before the
                                   exception is taken.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                   field, it resets to 0.

                  Bit [19]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [18:16]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  NSASEDIS, bit [15]
                                   Disables Non-secure access to the Advanced SIMD functionality.
                                   0           This control has no effect on:
                                               •      Non-secure access to Advanced SIMD functionality.
                                               •      The behavior of CPACR.ASEDIS and HCPTR.TASE.
                                   1           Non-secure access to the Advanced SIMD functionality is disabled, meaning:
                                               •      CPACR.ASEDIS behaves as RAO/WI in Non-secure state, regardless of its
                                                      actual value.
                                               •      HCPTR.TASE behaves as RAO/WI, regardless of its actual value.
                                   The implementation of this field must correspond to the implementation of the CPACR.ASEDIS
                                   field:
                                   •      If CPACR.ASEDIS is RES0, this field is RES0. If the implementation does not include
                                          Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field is RES0.
                                   •      If CPACR.ASEDIS is RAZ/WI, this field is RAZ/WI.
                                   •      If CPACR.ASEDIS is RW, this field is RW.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                   field, it resets to 0.

                  Bits [14:12]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  cp11, bit [11]
                                   The value of this field is ignored. If this field is programmed with a different value to the cp10 field
                                   then this field is UNKNOWN on a direct read of the NSACR.
                                   If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                   is RES0.
                                   If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G7-5343
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    cp10, bit [10]
                                      Enable Non-secure access to the Advanced SIMD and floating-point features. Possible values of the
                                      fields are:
                                      0           Advanced SIMD and floating-point features can be accessed only from Secure state.
                                                  Any attempt to access this functionality from Non-secure state is UNDEFINED.
                                                  When the PE is in Non-secure state:
                                                  •      The CPACR.{cp11, cp10} fields ignore writes and read as 0b00, access denied.
                                                  •      The HCPTR.{TCP11, TCP10} fields behave as RAO/WI, regardless of their
                                                         actual values.
                                      1           Advanced SIMD and floating-point features can be accessed from both Security states.
                                      If Non-secure access to the Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality is enabled, the CPACR
                                      must be checked to determine the level of access that is permitted.
                                      The Advanced SIMD and floating-point features controlled by these fields are:
                                      •      Execution of any floating-point or Advanced SIMD instruction.
                                      •      Any access to the Advanced SIMD and floating-point registers D0-D31 and their views as
                                             S0-S31 and Q0-Q15.
                                      •      Any access to the FPSCR, FPSID, MVFR0, MVFR1, MVFR2, or FPEXC System registers.
                                      If the implementation does not include Advanced SIMD and floating-point functionality, this field
                                      is RES0.
                                      If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [9:0]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the NSACR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                 <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                 p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c1, 2    000       010        0001         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0       -          -            n/a    RW

                                                                                   x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RW

                                                                                   x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RW

G7-5344                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, any read from or write to NSACR from Secure EL1 is trapped as an
                  exception to EL3.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5345
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.114      PAR, Physical Address Register
                    The PAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                      Returns the output address (OA) from an Address translation instruction that executed successfully,
                                      or fault information if the instruction did not execute successfully.

                    Configurations
                                      AArch32 System register PAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register PAR_EL1.
                                      The PAR returns a 32-bit value:
                                      •      When the PE is not in Hyp mode and is using the Short-descriptor translation table format.
                                      •      When the PE is in Hyp mode and executes an ATS12NSOPR, ATS12NSOPW,
                                             ATS12NSOUR, or ATS12NSOUW instruction when the value of HCR.VM is 0 and the value
                                             of TTBCR.EAE is 0.
                                      In these cases, PAR[63:32] is RES0.
                                      Otherwise, the PAR returns a 64-bit value. This means it returns a 64-bit value in the following
                                      cases:
                                      •      When using the Long-descriptor translation table format.
                                      •      If the stage 1 address translation is disabled and TTBCR.EAE is set to 1.
                                      •      In an implementation that includes EL2, for the result of an ATS1Cxx instruction performed
                                             from Hyp mode.
                                      For PL1&0 stage 1 translations, TTBCR.EAE selects the translation table format.
                                      RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                      PAR is a 64-bit register that can also be accessed as a 32-bit value. If it is accessed as a 32-bit
                                      register, accesses read and write bits[31:0] and do not modify bits[63:32].
                                      The Configurations section specifies the cases where each PAR format is used.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PAR bit assignments are:

                    For all register layouts:

                    F, bit [0]
                                      Indicates whether the instruction performed a successful address translation.
                                      0           Address translation completed successfully.
                                      1           Address translation aborted.

G7-5346                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                  When the instruction returned a 32-bit value to the PAR, PAR.F==0:

                  31                                                             12 11 10 9 8 7 6            4 3 2 1 0

                                                 PA                                        NS                         SS F

                                                                                                                               Outer[1:0]
                                                                                                                               Inner[2:0]
                                                                                                                                       SH
                                                                                                                                 IMP DEF
                                                                                                                                     NOS
                                                                                                                                    LPAE

                  This section describes the register value returned by the successful execution of an Address translation instruction.
                  Software might subsequently write a different value to the register, and that write does not affect the operation of
                  the PE.

                  On a successful conversion, the PAR can return a value that indicates the resulting attributes, rather than the values
                  that appear in the translation table descriptors. More precisely:

                  •     Memory attribute fields are permitted to report the resulting attributes, as determined by any permitted
                        implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of reporting the values that appear in
                        the translation table descriptors. This applies to the NOS, SH, Inner, and Outer fields.

                  •     See the NS bit description for constraints on the value it returns.

                  PA, bits [31:12]
                                   Output address. The output address (OA) corresponding to the supplied input address. This field
                                   returns address bits[31:12].

                  LPAE, bit [11]
                                   When updating the PAR with the result of the translation operation, this bit is set as follows:
                                   0           Short-descriptor translation table format used. This means the PAR returned a 32-bit
                                               value.

                  NOS, bit [10]
                                   Not Outer Shareable. When the returned value of PAR.SH is 1, indicates the Shareability attribute
                                   for the physical memory region:
                                   0           Memory region is Outer Shareable.
                                   1           Memory region is Inner Shareable.
                                   When the returned value of PAR.SH is 0 the value returned to this field is UNKNOWN.
                                   The value returned in this field can be the resulting attribute, as determined by any permitted
                                   implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of the value that appears in
                                   the translation table descriptor.

                  NS, bit [9]
                                   Non-secure. The NS attribute for a translation table entry from a Secure translation regime.
                                   For a result from a Secure translation regime, this bit reflects the Security state of the physical
                                   address space of the translation. This means it reflects the effect of the NSTable bits of earlier levels
                                   of the translation table walk if those NSTable bits have an effect on the translation.
                                   For a result from a Non-secure translation regime, this bit is UNKNOWN.

                  IMP DEF, bit [8]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G7-5347
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    SH, bit [7]
                                       Shareability. Indicates whether the physical memory region is Non-shareable:
                                       0           Memory is Non-shareable.
                                       1           Memory is shareable, and PAR.NOS indicates whether the region is Outer Shareable or
                                                   Inner Shareable.
                                       The value returned in this field can be the resulting attribute, as determined by any permitted
                                       implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of the value that appears in
                                       the translation table descriptor.

                    Inner[2:0], bits [6:4]
                                       Inner cacheability attribute for the region. Permitted values are:
                                       000         Non-cacheable.
                                       001         Device-nGnRnE.
                                       011         Device-nGnRE.
                                       101         Write-Back, Write-Allocate.
                                       110         Write-Through.
                                       111         Write-Back, no Write-Allocate.
                                       The values 010 and 100 are reserved.
                                       The value returned in this field can be the resulting attribute, as determined by any permitted
                                       implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of the value that appears in
                                       the translation table descriptor.

                    Outer[1:0], bits [3:2]
                                       Outer cacheability attribute for the region. Permitted values are:
                                       00          Non-cacheable.
                                       01          Write-Back, Write-Allocate.
                                       10          Write-Through, no Write-Allocate.
                                       11          Write-Back, no Write-Allocate.
                                       The value returned in this field can be the resulting attribute, as determined by any permitted
                                       implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of the value that appears in
                                       the translation table descriptor.

                    SS, bit [1]
                                       Supersection. Used to indicate if the result is a Supersection:
                                       0           Result is not a Supersection. PAR[31:12] contains OA[31:12].
                                       1           Result is a Supersection, and:
                                                   •      PAR[31:24] contains OA[31:24].
                                                   •      PAR[23:16] contains OA[39:32].
                                                   •       PAR[15:12] contains 0b0000.
                                                   If an implementation supports less than 40 bits of physical address, the bits in the PAR
                                                   field that correspond to physical address bits that are not implemented are UNKNOWN.

                    F, bit [0]
                                       Indicates whether the instruction performed a successful address translation.
                                       0           Address translation completed successfully.

G7-5348                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                  G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                      G7.2 General system control registers

                   When the instruction returned a 32-bit value to the PAR, PAR.F==1:

                   31                                                 16 15          12 11 10          7 6             1 0

                                          IMP DEF                             RES0              RES0           FS         F

                                                                                                                                        LPAE

                   This section describes the register value returned by a fault on the execution of an Address translation instruction.
                   Software might subsequently write a different value to the register, and that write does not affect the operation of
                   the PE.

                   IMP DEF, bits [31:16]
                                      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                   Bits [15:12]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                   LPAE, bit [11]
                                      When updating the PAR with the result of the translation operation, this bit is set as follows:
                                      0           Short-descriptor translation table format used. This means the PAR returned a 32-bit
                                                  value.

                   Bits [10:7]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                   FS, bits [6:1]
                                      Fault status bits. Bits [12,10,3:0] from the DFSR, indicating the source of the abort.

                   F, bit [0]
                                      Indicates whether the instruction performed a successful address translation.
                                      1           Address translation aborted.

                   When the instruction returned a 64-bit value to the PAR, PAR.F==0:

            63           56 55                     40 39                                  12 11 10 9 8 7 6             1 0

                  ATTR                RES0                             PA                              NS SH    RES0      F

                                                                                                                                 IMP DEF
                                                                                                                                    LPAE

                   This section describes the register value returned by the successful execution of an Address translation instruction.
                   Software might subsequently write a different value to the register, and that write does not affect the operation of
                   the PE.

                   On a successful conversion, the PAR can return a value that indicates the resulting attributes, rather than the values
                   that appear in the translation table descriptors. More precisely:

                   •      Memory attribute fields are permitted to report the resulting attributes, as determined by any permitted
                          implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of reporting the values that appear in
                          the translation table descriptors. This applies to the ATTR and SH fields.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5349
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    •      See the NS bit description for constraints on the value it returns.

                    ATTR, bits [63:56]
                                      Memory attributes for the returned output address. This field uses the same encoding as the Attr<n>
                                      fields in MAIR0 and MAIR1.
                                      The value returned in this field can be the resulting attribute, as determined by any permitted
                                      implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of the value that appears in
                                      the translation table descriptor.

                    Bits [55:40]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    PA, bits [39:12]
                                      Output address. The output address (OA) corresponding to the supplied input address. This field
                                      returns address bits[39:12].

                    LPAE, bit [11]
                                      When updating the PAR with the result of the translation operation, this bit is set as follows:
                                      1           Long-descriptor translation table format used. This means the PAR returned a 64-bit
                                                  value.

                    IMP DEF, bit [10]
                                      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    NS, bit [9]
                                      Non-secure. The NS attribute for a translation table entry from a Secure translation regime.
                                      For a result from a Secure translation regime, this bit reflects the Security state of the physical
                                      address space of the translation. This means it reflects the effect of the NSTable bits of earlier levels
                                      of the translation table walk if those NSTable bits have an effect on the translation.
                                      For a result from a Non-secure translation regime, this bit is UNKNOWN.

                    SH, bits [8:7]
                                      Shareability attribute, for the returned output address. Permitted values are:
                                      00          Non-shareable.
                                      10          Outer Shareable.
                                      11          Inner Shareable.
                                      The value 01 is reserved.

                                               Note
                                      This field returns the value 10 for:
                                      •      Any type of Device memory.
                                      •      Normal memory with both Inner Non-cacheable and Outer Non-cacheable attributes.

                                      The value returned in this field can be the resulting attribute, as determined by any permitted
                                      implementation choices and any applicable configuration bits, instead of the value that appears in
                                      the translation table descriptor.

                    Bits [6:1]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    F, bit [0]
                                      Indicates whether the instruction performed a successful address translation.
                                      0           Address translation completed successfully.

G7-5350                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                                    G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.2 General system control registers

                     When the instruction returned a 64-bit value to the PAR, PAR.F==1:

            63              56 55          52 51       48 47                                  12 11 10 9 8 7 6              1 0

                  IMP DEF         IMP DEF      IMP DEF                    RES0                                        FST      F

                                                                                                                                         RES0
                                                                                                                                        S2WLK
                                                                                                                                       FSTAGE
                                                                                                                                         RES0
                                                                                                                                          LPAE

                     This section describes the register value returned by a fault on the execution of an Address translation instruction.
                     Software might subsequently write a different value to the register, and that write does not affect the operation of
                     the PE.

                     IMP DEF, bits [63:56]
                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                     IMP DEF, bits [55:52]
                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                     IMP DEF, bits [51:48]
                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                     Bits [47:12]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                     LPAE, bit [11]
                                       When updating the PAR with the result of the translation operation, this bit is set as follows:
                                       1           Long-descriptor translation table format used. This means the PAR returned a 64-bit
                                                   value.

                     Bit [10]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                     FSTAGE, bit [9]
                                       Indicates the translation stage at which the translation aborted:
                                       0           Translation aborted because of a fault in the stage 1 translation.
                                       1           Translation aborted because of a fault in the stage 2 translation.

                     S2WLK, bit [8]
                                       If this bit is set to 1, it indicates the translation aborted because of a stage 2 fault during a stage 1
                                       translation table walk.

                     Bit [7]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                     FST, bits [6:1]
                                       Fault status field. Values are as in the DFSR.STATUS and IFSR.STATUS fields when using the
                                       Long-descriptor translation table format.

                     F, bit [0]
                                       Indicates whether the instruction performed a successful address translation.
                                       1           Address translation aborted.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G7-5351
ID121917                                                  Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessing the PAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn    coproc    CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c7, c4, 0    000       000     0111   1111      0100

                    This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                    MRRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                    MCRR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                <syntax>                    opc1   coproc    CRm

                                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c7     0000   1111      0111

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                  Accessibility
                                      Configuration                                                                       Instance
                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1    EL2    EL3

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -       RW      n/a    n/a    PAR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -       RW      RW     n/a    PAR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     n/a    PAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -       RW      n/a    n/a    PAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW     n/a    PAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     n/a    PAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW     RW     PAR_ns

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     RW     PAR_ns

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a    RW     PAR_s

G7-5352                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T7==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T7==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5353
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.115      PRRR, Primary Region Remap Register
                    The PRRR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Controls the top level mapping of the TEX[0], C, and B memory region attributes.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register PRRR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   MAIR_EL1[31:0].
                                   MAIR0 and PRRR are the same register, with a different view depending on the value of
                                   TTBCR.EAE:
                                   •      When it is set to 0, the register is as described in PRRR.
                                   •      When it is set to 1, the register is as described in MAIR0.
                                   When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to PRRR(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                   signal is asserted HIGH.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   PRRR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PRRR bit assignments are:

                    When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23          20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                 RES0                  TR7 TR6 TR5 TR4 TR3 TR2 TR1 TR0

      NOS7
      NOS6
      NOS5
      NOS4
      NOS3
      NOS2
      NOS1
      NOS0
      NS1
      NS0
      DS1
      DS0

                    NOS<n>, bit [n+24], for n = 0 to 7
                                   Not Outer Shareable. NOS<n> is the Outer Shareable property for memory attributes n, if the region
                                   is mapped as Normal memory that is not Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable, and the
                                   appropriate PRRR.{NS0, NS1} field identifies the region as shareable. n is the value of the
                                   concatenation of the {TEX[0], C, B} bits from the translation table descriptor. The possible values
                                   of each NOS<n> field other than NOS6 are:
                                   0             Memory region is Outer Shareable.
                                   1             Memory region is Inner Shareable.

G7-5354                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                  The value of this bit is ignored if the region is:
                                  •      Device memory
                                  •      Normal memory that is at least one of:
                                         —      Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                         —      Identified by the appropriate PRRR.{NS0, NS1} field as Non-shareable.
                                  The meaning of the NOS6 field is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                  Bits [23:20]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  NS1, bit [19]
                                  Mapping of S = 1 attribute for Normal memory regions. This field is used in determining the
                                  Shareability of a memory region that is mapped to Normal memory and both:
                                  •      Is not Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                  •      Has the S bit in the translation table descriptor set to 1.
                                  The possible values of this bit are:
                                  0           Region is Non-shareable.
                                  1           Region is shareable. The value of the appropriate PRRR.NOS<n> field determines
                                              whether the region is Inner Shareable or Outer Shareable.

                  NS0, bit [18]
                                  Mapping of S = 0 attribute for Normal memory regions. This field is used in determining the
                                  Shareability of a memory region that is mapped to Normal memory and both:
                                  •      Is not Inner Non-cacheable, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                  •      Has the S bit in the translation table descriptor set to 0.
                                  The possible values of this bit are:
                                  0           Region is Non-shareable.
                                  1           Region is shareable. The value of the appropriate PRRR.NOS<n> field determines
                                              whether the region is Inner Shareable or Outer Shareable.

                  DS1, bit [17]
                                  Mapping of S = 1 attribute for Device memory. In ARMv8, all types of Device memory are Outer
                                  Shareable, and therefore this bit is RES1.

                  DS0, bit [16]
                                  Mapping of S = 0 attribute for Device memory. In ARMv8, all types of Device memory are Outer
                                  Shareable, and therefore this bit is RES1.

                  TR<n>, bits [2n+1:2n], for n = 0 to 7
                                  TR<n> is the primary TEX mapping for memory attributes n, and defines the mapped memory type
                                  for a region with attributes n. n is the value of the concatenation of the {TEX[0], C, B} bits from the
                                  translation table descriptor. The possible values for each field other than TR6 are:
                                  00          Device-nGnRnE memory
                                  01          Device-nGnRE memory
                                  10          Normal memory
                                  The value 11 is reserved. The effect of programming a field to 11 is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE,
                                  see Reserved values in System and memory-mapped registers and translation table entries on
                                  page K1-6411.
                                  The meaning of the TR6 field is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5355
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessing the PRRR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2    CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c10, c2, 0    000       000     1010   1111       0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                  Accessibility
                                       Configuration                                                                      Instance
                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1    EL2    EL3

                                       EL3 is not implemented.     x        x        0      -       RW      n/a    n/a    PRRR

                                       EL3 is not implemented.     x        0        1      -       RW      RW     n/a    PRRR

                                       EL3 is not implemented.     x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     n/a    PRRR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.       x        x        0      -       RW      n/a    n/a    PRRR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.       x        0        1      -       RW      RW     n/a    PRRR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.       x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     n/a    PRRR

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.       x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a    RW     PRRR_s

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.       x        0        1      -       RW      RW     RW     PRRR_ns

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.       x        1        1      -       n/a     RW     RW     PRRR_ns

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to PRRR_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5356                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                      —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HSTR.T10==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5357
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.116      REVIDR, Revision ID Register
                    The REVIDR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Provides implementation-specific minor revision information.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register REVIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    REVIDR_EL1.
                                    If REVIDR has the same value as MIDR, then its contents have no significance.

                    Attributes
                                    REVIDR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The REVIDR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the REVIDR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 6    000       110        0000         1111         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

G7-5358                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5359
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.117      RMR, Reset Management Register
                    The RMR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    If EL1 or EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level and this register is implemented:
                                    •     A write to the register at the highest implemented Exception level can request a Warm reset.
                                    •     If the highest implemented Exception level can use AArch32 and AArch64, this register
                                          specifies the Execution state that the PE boots into on a Warm reset.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register RMR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register RMR_EL1
                                    when EL1 is highest implemented Exception level.
                                    AArch32 System register RMR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register RMR_EL3
                                    when EL3 is implemented.
                                    Only implemented if EL1 or EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level. In this case:
                                    •     If the highest implemented Exception level can use AArch32 and AArch64 then this register
                                          must be implemented.
                                    •     If the highest implemented Exception level cannot use AArch64 then it is IMPLEMENTATION
                                          DEFINED whether the register is implemented.

                                    See the field descriptions for the reset values. These apply whenever the register is implemented.

                    Attributes
                                    RMR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The RMR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                           2 1 0

                                                                RES0                                                RR

                                                                                                                                 AA64

                    Bits [31:2]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    RR, bit [1]
                                    Reset Request. Setting this bit to 1 requests a Warm reset.
                                    This field resets to 0 on a Warm or Cold reset.

                    AA64, bit [0]
                                    When the highest implemented Exception level can use AArch64, determines which Execution state
                                    the PE boots into after a Warm reset:
                                    0           AArch32.
                                    1           AArch64.
                                    On coming out of the Warm reset, execution starts at the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED reset vector
                                    address of the specified Execution state.
                                    If the highest implemented Exception level cannot use AArch64 this bit is RAZ/WI.

G7-5360                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                  When implemented as a RW field, this field resets to 0 on a Cold reset.

                  Accessing the RMR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c12, c0, 2    000       010        1100         1111         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility
                          Configuration
                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                          EL1 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        x         x      -          RW           n/a    n/a

                          EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        0         1      -          -            -      n/a

                          EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        1         1      -          n/a          -      n/a

                          EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        x         0      -          -            n/a    RW

                          EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        0         1      -          -            -      RW

                          EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        1         1      -          n/a          -      RW

                  The encoding for this register is UNDEFINED:

                  •     If the RMR is not implemented.

                  •     At all Exception levels other than the highest implemented Exception level.

                  When EL3 is implemented, ARM deprecates accessing this register from any PE mode other than Monitor mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5361
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.118      RVBAR, Reset Vector Base Address Register
                    The RVBAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   If EL3 is not implemented, contains the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED address that execution starts
                                   from after reset when executing in AArch32 state.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   This register is only implemented if the highest Exception level implemented is capable of using
                                   AArch32, and is not EL3.

                    Attributes
                                   RVBAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The RVBAR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              1 0

                                                          Reset Address[31:1]

                                                                                                                               RES1

                    Bits [31:1]
                                   Reset Address[31:1]. Bits [31:1] of the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED address that execution starts
                                   from after reset when executing in 32-bit state.

                    Bit [0]
                                   Reserved, RES1.

                    Accessing the RVBAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                    opc1      opc2    CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c12, c0, 1    000       001     1100     1111       0000

G7-5362                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility
                          Configuration
                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                          EL1 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        x        x       -     RO        n/a    n/a

                          EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        0        1       -     -         RO     n/a

                          EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        1        1       -     n/a       RO     n/a

                          EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        x        0       -     -         n/a    -

                          EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        0        1       -     -         -      -

                          EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        1        1       -     n/a       -      -

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5363
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.119      SCR, Secure Configuration Register
                    The SCR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   When EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32, defines the configuration of the current Security
                                   state. It specifies:
                                   •      The Security state, either Secure or Non-secure.
                                   •      What mode the PE branches to if an IRQ, FIQ, or External abort occurs.
                                   •      Whether the CPSR.F or CPSR.A bits can be modified when SCR.NS==1.

                    Configurations
                                   This register is only accessible in Secure state.
                                   AArch32 System register SCR can be mapped to AArch64 System register SCR_EL3, but this is
                                   not architecturally mandated.
                                   Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply whenever the register
                                   is accessible. This means they apply when the PE resets into EL3 using AArch32.

                    Attributes
                                   SCR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SCR bit assignments are:

                    31                                             16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                          RES0                                                                       NS

                                                                                                                                   IRQ
                                                                                                                                   FIQ
                                                                                                                                    EA
                                                                                                                                   FW
                                                                                                                                   AW
                                                                                                                                   nET
                                                                                                                                  SCD
                                                                                                                                  HCE
                                                                                                                                   SIF
                                                                                                                                 RES0
                                                                                                                                   TWI
                                                                                                                                  TWE
                                                                                                                                 RES0
                                                                                                                                 TERR

                    Bits [31:16]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    TERR, bit [15]
                                   Trap Error record accesses. If the RAS Extension is implemented, the possible values of this bit are:
                                   0             Accesses to the ER* registers from modes other than Monitor mode do not generate a
                                                 Monitor Trap exception.
                                   1             Accesses to the ER* registers from modes other than Monitor mode generate a Monitor
                                                 Trap exception.

G7-5364                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                  This bit resets to 0 on Warm reset.
                                  When the RAS Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.

                  Bit [14]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  TWE, bit [13]
                                  Traps WFE instructions to Monitor mode.
                                  0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                  1           Any attempt to execute a WFE instruction in any mode other than Monitor mode is
                                              trapped to Monitor mode, if the instruction would otherwise have caused the PE to enter
                                              a low-power state and the attempted execution does not generate an exception that is
                                              taken to EL1 or EL2 by SCTLR.nTWE or HCR.TWE.
                                              Any exception that is taken to EL1 or to EL2 has priority over this trap.
                                  The attempted execution of a conditional WFE instruction is only trapped if the instruction passes
                                  its condition code check.

                                           Note
                                  Since a WFE or WFI can complete at any time, even without a Wakeup event, the traps on WFE of
                                  WFI are not guaranteed to be taken, even if the WFE or WFI is executed when there is no Wakeup
                                  event. The only guarantee is that if the instruction does not complete in finite time in the absence of
                                  a Wakeup event, the trap will be taken.

                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TWI, bit [12]
                                  Traps WFI instructions to Monitor mode.
                                  0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                  1           Any attempt to execute a WFI instruction in any mode other than Monitor mode is
                                              trapped to Monitor mode, if the instruction would otherwise have caused the PE to enter
                                              a low-power state and the attempted execution does not generate an exception that is
                                              taken to EL1 or EL2 by SCTLR.nTWI or HCR.TWI.
                                              Any exception that is taken to EL1 or to EL2 has priority over this trap.
                                  The attempted execution of a conditional WFI instruction is only trapped if the instruction passes
                                  its condition code check.

                                           Note
                                  Since a WFE or WFI can complete at any time, even without a Wakeup event, the traps on WFE of
                                  WFI are not guaranteed to be taken, even if the WFE or WFI is executed when there is no Wakeup
                                  event. The only guarantee is that if the instruction does not complete in finite time in the absence of
                                  a Wakeup event, the trap will be taken.

                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Bits [11:10]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  SIF, bit [9]
                                  Secure instruction fetch. When the PE is in Secure state, this bit disables instruction fetch from
                                  Non-secure memory. The possible values for this bit are:
                                  0           Secure state instruction fetches from Non-secure memory are permitted.
                                  1           Secure state instruction fetches from Non-secure memory are not permitted.
                                  This bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5365
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    HCE, bit [8]
                                   Hypervisor Call instruction enable. Enables EL2 and Non-secure EL1 execution of HVC
                                   instructions.
                                   0           HVC instructions are:
                                               •      UNDEFINED at Non-secure EL1. The Undefined Instruction exception is taken
                                                      from PL1 to PL1.
                                               •      UNPREDICTABLE at EL2. Behavior is one of the following:

                                                      —      The instruction is UNDEFINED.
                                                      —      The instruction executes as a NOP.
                                   1           HVC instructions are enabled at EL2 and Non-secure EL1.

                                            Note
                                   HVC instructions are always UNDEFINED at EL0 and in Secure state.

                                   If EL2 is not implemented, this bit is RES0 and HVC is UNDEFINED.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                   field, it resets to 0.

                    SCD, bit [7]
                                   Secure Monitor Call disable. Disables SMC instructions.
                                   0           SMC instructions are enabled.
                                   1           In Non-secure state, SMC instructions are UNDEFINED. The Undefined Instruction
                                               exception is taken from the current Exception level to the current Exception level.
                                               In Secure state, behavior is one of the following:
                                               •      The instruction is UNDEFINED.
                                               •      The instruction executes as a NOP.

                                            Note
                                   SMC instructions are always UNDEFINED at PL0.

                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    nET, bit [6]
                                   Not Early Termination. This bit disables early termination. The possible values of this bit are:
                                   0           Early termination permitted. Execution time of data operations can depend on the data
                                               values.
                                   1           Disable early termination. The number of cycles required for data operations is forced
                                               to be independent of the data values.
                                   This IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED mechanism can disable data dependent timing optimizations from
                                   multiplies and data operations. It can provide system support against information leakage that might
                                   be exploited by timing correlation types of attack.
                                   On implementations that do not support early termination or do not support disabling early
                                   termination, this bit is RES0.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                   field, it resets to 0.

                    AW, bit [5]
                                   When the value of SCR.EA is 1 and the value of HCR.AMO is 0, this bit controls whether CPSR.A
                                   masks an External abort taken from Non-secure state, and the possible values of this bit are:
                                   0           External aborts taken from Non-secure state are not masked by CPSR.A, and are taken
                                               to EL3.
                                               External aborts taken from Secure state are masked by CPSR.A.

G7-5366                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                                 1           External aborts taken from either Security state are masked by CPSR.A. When CPSR.A
                                             is 0, the abort is taken to EL3.
                                 When SCR.EA is 0 or HCR.AMO is 1, this bit has no effect.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  FW, bit [4]
                                 When the value of SCR.FIQ is 1 and the value of HCR.FMO is 0, this bit controls whether CPSR.F
                                 masks an FIQ interrupt taken from Non-secure state, and the possible values of this bit are:
                                 0           An FIQ taken from Non-secure state is not masked by CPSR.F, and is taken to EL3.
                                             An FIQ taken from Secure state is masked by CPSR.F.
                                 1           An FIQ taken from either Security state is masked by CPSR.F. When CPSR.F is 0, the
                                             FIQ is taken to EL3.
                                 When SCR.FIQ is 0 or HCR.FMO is 1, this bit has no effect.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  EA, bit [3]
                                 External Abort handler. This bit controls which mode takes External aborts. The possible values of
                                 this bit are:
                                 0           External aborts taken to Abort mode.
                                 1           External aborts taken to Monitor mode.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  FIQ, bit [2]
                                 FIQ handler. This bit controls which mode takes FIQ exceptions. The possible values of this bit are:
                                 0           FIQs taken to FIQ mode.
                                 1           FIQs taken to Monitor mode.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  IRQ, bit [1]
                                 IRQ handler. This bit controls which mode takes IRQ exceptions. The possible values of this bit are:
                                 0           IRQs taken to IRQ mode.
                                 1           IRQs taken to Monitor mode.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  NS, bit [0]
                                 Non-secure bit. Except when the PE is in Monitor mode, this bit determines the Security state of the
                                 PE:
                                 0           PE is in Secure state.
                                 1           PE is in Non-secure state.
                                 If the HCR.TGE bit is set, an attempt to change from a Secure PL1 mode to a Non-secure EL1 mode
                                 by changing the SCR.NS bit from 0 to 1 results in the SCR.NS bit remaining as 0.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Accessing the SCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5367
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c1, 0    000       000        0001         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          -            n/a    RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          -            -      RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          -      RW

                    If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, any read or write to SCR from Secure EL1 using AArch32 is trapped
                    as an exception to EL3.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5368                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.120    SCTLR, System Control Register
                  The SCTLR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Provides the top level control of the system, including its memory system.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register SCTLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  SCTLR_EL1.
                                  When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to SCTLR(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                  signal is asserted HIGH.
                                  Some bits in the register are read-only. These bits relate to non-configurable features of an
                                  implementation, and are provided for compatibility with previous versions of the architecture.
                                  Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                  into an Exception level that is using AArch32. If the PE resets into EL3 using AArch32 they apply
                                  only to the Secure instance of the register. Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to
                                  architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  SCTLR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The SCTLR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                    TE                                                      V I                                C A M

     RES0                                                                                                                    nTLSMD
     AFE                                                                                                                    LSMAOE
     TRE                                                                                                                   CP15BEN
     RES0                                                                                                                       UNK
     EE                                                                                                                          ITD
     RES0                                                                                                                       SED
     SPAN                                                                                                                      RES0
     RES1                                                                                                                      RES1
     RES0                                                                                                                      RES0
     UWXN
     WXN
     nTWE
     RES0
     nTWI

                  Bit [31]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  TE, bit [30]
                                  T32 Exception Enable. This bit controls whether exceptions to an Exception Level that is executing
                                  at PL1 are taken to A32 or T32 state:
                                  0           Exceptions, including reset, taken to A32 state.
                                  1           Exceptions, including reset, taken to T32 state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5369
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to an IMPLEMENTATION
                                    DEFINED choice between:

                                    •      0.
                                    •      A value determined by an input configuration signal.

                    AFE, bit [29]
                                    Access Flag Enable. When using the Short-descriptor translation table format for the PL1&0
                                    translation regime, this bit enables use of the AP[0] bit in the translation descriptors as the Access
                                    flag, and restricts access permissions in the translation descriptors to the simplified model. The
                                    possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           In the translation table descriptors, AP[0] is an access permissions bit. The full range of
                                                access permissions is supported. No Access flag is implemented.
                                    1           In the translation table descriptors, AP[0] is the Access flag. Only the simplified model
                                                for access permissions is supported.
                                    When using the Long-descriptor translation table format, the VMSA behaves as if this bit is set to
                                    1, regardless of the value of this bit.
                                    The AFE bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TRE, bit [28]
                                    TEX remap enable. This bit enables remapping of the TEX[2:1] bits in the PL1&0 translation
                                    regime for use as two translation table bits that can be managed by the operating system. Enabling
                                    this remapping also changes the scheme used to describe the memory region attributes in the
                                    VMSA. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           TEX remap disabled. TEX[2:0] are used, with the C and B bits, to describe the memory
                                                region attributes.
                                    1           TEX remap enabled. TEX[2:1] are reassigned for use as bits managed by the operating
                                                system. The TEX[0], C, and B bits are used to describe the memory region attributes,
                                                with the MMU remap registers.
                                    When the value of TTBCR.EAE is 1, this bit is RES1.
                                    The TRE bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bits [27:26]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    EE, bit [25]
                                    The value of the PSTATE.E bit on branch to an exception vector or coming out of reset, and the
                                    endianness of stage 1 translation table walks in the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                    The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Little-endian. PSTATE.E is cleared to 0 on taking an exception or coming out of reset.
                                                Stage 1 translation table walks in the PL1&0 translation regime are little-endian.
                                    1           Big-endian. PSTATE.E is set to 1 on taking an exception or coming out of reset. Stage
                                                1 translation table walks in the PL1&0 translation regime are big-endian.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support for data accesses at Exception Levels
                                    higher than EL0, this bit is RES0.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Little-endian support for data accesses at Exception Levels
                                    higher than EL0, this bit is RES1.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED choice between:
                                    •      0.
                                    •      A value determined by an input configuration signal.

G7-5370                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Bit [24]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  SPAN, bit [23]
                             In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                   Set Privileged Access Never, on taking an exception to EL1 from either Secure or Non-secure state,
                                   or to EL3 from Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32.
                                   0           CPSR.PAN is set to 1 in the following situations:
                                               •      In Non-secure state, on taking an exception to EL1.
                                               •      In Secure state, when EL3 is using AArch64, on taking an exception to EL1.
                                               •      In Secure state, when EL3 is using AArch32, on taking an exception to EL3.
                                   1           The value of CPSR.PAN is left unchanged on taking an exception.
                             In ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES1.

                  Bit [22]
                                   Reserved, RES1.

                  Bit [21]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  UWXN, bit [20]
                                   Unprivileged write permission implies PL1 XN (Execute-never). This bit can force all memory
                                   regions that are writable at PL0 to be treated as XN for accesses from software executing at PL1.
                                   The possible values of this bit are:
                                   0           This control has no effect on memory access permissions.
                                   1           Any region that is writable at PL0 forced to XN for accesses from software executing
                                               at PL1.
                                   The UWXN bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  WXN, bit [19]
                                   Write permission implies XN (Execute-never). For the PL1&0 translation regime, this bit can force
                                   all memory regions that are writable to be treated as XN. The possible values of this bit are:
                                   0           This control has no effect on memory access permissions.
                                   1           Any region that is writable in the PL1&0 translation regime is forced to XN for accesses
                                               from software executing at PL1 or PL0.
                                   The WXN bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  nTWE, bit [18]
                                   Traps EL0 execution of WFE instructions to Undefined mode.
                                   0           Any attempt to execute a WFE instruction at EL0 is trapped to Undefined mode, if the
                                               instruction would otherwise have caused the PE to enter a low-power state.
                                   1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                   The attempted execution of a conditional WFE instruction is only trapped if the instruction passes
                                   its condition code check.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5371
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                                   Note
                                       Since a WFE or WFI can complete at any time, even without a Wakeup event, the traps on WFE of
                                       WFI are not guaranteed to be taken, even if the WFE or WFI is executed when there is no Wakeup
                                       event. The only guarantee is that if the instruction does not complete in finite time in the absence of
                                       a Wakeup event, the trap will be taken.

                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 1.

                    Bit [17]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    nTWI, bit [16]
                                       Traps EL0 execution of WFI instructions to Undefined mode.
                                       0             Any attempt to execute a WFI instruction at EL0 is trapped to Undefined mode, if the
                                                     instruction would otherwise have caused the PE to enter a low-power state.
                                       1             This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                       The attempted execution of a conditional WFI instruction is only trapped if the instruction passes
                                       its condition code check.

                                                   Note
                                       Since a WFE or WFI can complete at any time, even without a Wakeup event, the traps on WFE of
                                       WFI are not guaranteed to be taken, even if the WFE or WFI is executed when there is no Wakeup
                                       event. The only guarantee is that if the instruction does not complete in finite time in the absence of
                                       a Wakeup event, the trap will be taken.

                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 1.

                    Bits [15:14]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    V, bit [13]
                                       Vectors bit. This bit selects the base address of the exception vectors for exceptions taken to a PE
                                       mode other than Monitor mode or Hyp mode:
                                       0             Normal exception vectors. Base address is held in VBAR.
                                       1             High exception vectors (Hivecs), base address 0xFFFF0000. This base address cannot be
                                                     remapped.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to an IMPLEMENTATION
                                       DEFINED choice between:

                                       •      0.
                                       •      A value determined by an input configuration signal.

                    I, bit [12]
                                       Instruction access Cacheability control, for accesses at EL1 and EL0:
                                       0             All instruction access to Normal memory from PL1 and PL0 are Non-cacheable for all
                                                     levels of instruction and unified cache.
                                                     If the value of SCTLR.M is 0, instruction accesses from stage 1 of the PL1&0
                                                     translation regime are to Normal, Outer Shareable, Inner Non-cacheable, Outer
                                                     Non-cacheable memory.
                                       1             All instruction access to Normal memory from PL1 and PL0 can be cached at all levels
                                                     of instruction and unified cache.
                                                     If the value of SCTLR.M is 0, instruction accesses from stage 1 of the PL1&0
                                                     translation regime are to Normal, Outer Shareable, Inner Write-Through, Outer
                                                     Write-Through memory.

G7-5372                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                                  Instruction accesses to Normal memory from Non-secure EL1 and Non-secure EL0 are Cacheable
                                  regardless of the value of the SCTLR.I bit if either:
                                  •       EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.DC is 1.
                                  •       EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.DC is 1.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Bit [11]
                                  Reserved, RES1.

                  Bits [10:9]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  SED, bit [8]
                                  SETEND instruction disable. Disables SETEND instructions at PL0 and PL1.
                                  0           SETEND instruction execution is enabled at PL0 and PL1.
                                  1           SETEND instructions are UNDEFINED at PL0 and PL1.
                                  If the implementation does not support mixed-endian operation at any Exception level, this bit is
                                  RES1.

                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                  field, it resets to 0.

                  ITD, bit [7]
                                  IT Disable. Disables some uses of IT instructions at PL1 and PL0.
                                  0           All IT instruction functionality is enabled at PL1 and PL0.
                                  1           Any attempt at PL1 or PL0 to execute any of the following is UNDEFINED:
                                              •      All encodings of the IT instruction with hw1[3:0]!=1000.
                                              •      All encodings of the subsequent instruction with the following values for hw1:
                                                     11xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                  All 32-bit instructions, and the 16-bit instructions B, UDF, SVC,
                                                                  LDM, and STM.
                                                     1011xxxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                  All instructions in Miscellaneous 16-bit instructions on
                                                                  page F3-3137.
                                                     10100xxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                  ADD Rd, PC, #imm
                                                     01001xxxxxxxxxxx
                                                                  LDR Rd, [PC, #imm]
                                                     0100x1xxx1111xxx
                                                                  ADD Rdn, PC; CMP Rn, PC; MOV Rd, PC; BX PC; BLX PC.
                                                     010001xx1xxxx111
                                                                 ADD PC, Rm; CMP PC, Rm; MOV PC, Rm. This pattern also covers
                                                                 UNPREDICTABLE cases with BLX Rn.
                                              These instructions are always UNDEFINED, regardless of whether they would pass or fail
                                              the condition code check that applies to them as a result of being in an IT block.
                                              It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the IT instruction is treated as:
                                              •      A 16-bit instruction, that can only be followed by another 16-bit instruction.
                                              •      The first half of a 32-bit instruction.
                                              This means that, for the situations that are UNDEFINED, either the second 16-bit
                                              instruction or the 32-bit instruction is UNDEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5373
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                               An implementation might vary dynamically as to whether IT is treated as a 16-bit
                                               instruction or the first half of a 32-bit instruction.
                                   If an instruction in an active IT block that would be disabled by this field sets this field to 1 then
                                   behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. For more information see Changes to an ITD control by
                                   an instruction in an IT block on page E1-2988.
                                   ITD is optional, but if it is implemented in the SCTLR then it must also be implemented in the
                                   SCTLR_EL1. If it is not implemented then this bit is RAZ/WI.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                   field, it resets to 0.

                    UNK, bit [6]
                                   Writes to this bit are IGNORED. Reads of this bit return an UNKNOWN value.

                    CP15BEN, bit [5]
                                   System instruction memory barrier enable. Enables accesses to the DMB, DSB, and ISB System
                                   instructions in the (coproc==1111) encoding space from PL1 and PL0:
                                   0           PL0 and PL1 execution of the CP15DMB, CP15DSB, and CP15ISB instructions is
                                               UNDEFINED.

                                   1           PL0 and PL1 execution of the CP15DMB, CP15DSB, and CP15ISB instructions is
                                               enabled.
                                   CP15BEN is optional, but if it is implemented in the SCTLR then it must also be implemented in
                                   the SCTLR_EL1. If it is not implemented then this bit is RAO/WI.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                   field, it resets to 1.

                    LSMAOE, bit [4]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Load Multiple and Store Multiple Atomicity and Ordering Enable. When the OPTIONAL feature
                                   ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented, defined values are:
                                   0           For all memory accesses at EL1 or EL0, A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple
                                               can have an interrupt taken during the sequence memory accesses, and the memory
                                               accesses are not required to be ordered.
                                   1           The ordering and interrupt behavior of A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple
                                               at EL1 or EL0 is as defined for ARMv8.0.
                                   This bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                   If this bit is not implemented, it is RES1.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 1.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES1.

                    nTLSMD, bit [3]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   No Trap Load Multiple and Store Multiple to Device-nGRE/Device-nGnRE/Device-nGnRnE
                                   memory. When the OPTIONAL feature ARMv8.2-LSMAOC is implemented, defined values are:
                                   0           All memory accesses by A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple at EL1 or EL0
                                               that are marked at stage 1 as Device-nGRE/Device-nGnRE/Device-nGnRnE memory
                                               are trapped and generate a stage 1 Alignment fault.
                                   1           All memory accesses by A32 and T32 Load Multiple and Store Multiple at EL1 or EL0
                                               that are marked at stage 1 as Device-nGRE/Device-nGnRE/Device-nGnRnE memory
                                               are not trapped.
                                   This bit is permitted to be cached in a TLB.
                                   If this bit is not implemented, it is RES1.

G7-5374                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 1.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES1.

                  C, bit [2]
                                    Cacheability control, for data accesses at EL1 and EL0:
                                    0           All data access to Normal memory from PL1 and PL0, and all accesses to the PL1&0
                                                stage 1 translation tables, are Non-cacheable for all levels of data and unified cache.
                                    1           All data access to Normal memory from PL1 and PL0, and all accesses to the PL1&0
                                                stage 1 translation tables, can be cached at all levels of data and unified cache.
                                    The PE ignores SCLTR.C for Non-secure state and data accesses to Normal memory from EL1 and
                                    EL0 are Cacheable if either:
                                    •      EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.DC is 1.
                                    •      EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.DC is 1.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  A, bit [1]
                                    Alignment check enable. This is the enable bit for Alignment fault checking at PL1 and PL0:
                                    0           Alignment fault checking disabled when executing at PL1 or PL0.
                                                Instructions that load or store one or more registers, other than load/store exclusive and
                                                load-acquire/store-release, do not check that the address being accessed is aligned to the
                                                size of the data element(s) being accessed.
                                    1           Alignment fault checking enabled when executing at PL1 or PL0.
                                                All instructions that load or store one or more registers have an alignment check that the
                                                address being accessed is aligned to the size of the data element(s) being accessed. If
                                                this check fails it causes an Alignment fault, which is taken as a Data Abort exception.
                                    Load/store exclusive and load-acquire/store-release instructions have an alignment check regardless
                                    of the value of the A bit.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  M, bit [0]
                                    MMU enable for EL1 and EL0 stage 1 address translation. Possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           EL1 and EL0 stage 1 address translation disabled.
                                                See the SCTLR.I field for the behavior of instruction accesses to Normal memory.
                                    1           EL1 and EL0 stage 1 address translation enabled.
                                    In the Non-secure state the PE behaves as if the value of the SCTLR.M field is 0 for all purposes
                                    other than returning the value of a direct read of the field if either:
                                    •      EL2 is using AArch32 and the value of HCR.{DC, TGE} is not {0, 0}.
                                    •      EL2 is using AArch64 and the value of HCR_EL2.{DC, TGE} is not {0, 0}.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Accessing the SCTLR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5375
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c0, 0    000       000     0001    1111       0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                  Control                  Accessibility
                                     Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0     EL1     EL2     EL3

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -       RW      n/a     n/a     SCTLR

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -       RW      RW      n/a     SCTLR

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -       n/a     RW      n/a     SCTLR

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -       RW      n/a     n/a     SCTLR

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW      n/a     SCTLR

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW      n/a     SCTLR

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a     RW      SCTLR_s

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW      RW      SCTLR_ns

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW      RW      SCTLR_ns

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to SCTLR_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5376                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                 G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                     G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.121       SPSR, Saved Program Status Register
                   The SPSR characteristics are:

                   Purpose
                                      Holds the saved process state for the current mode.

                   Configurations
                                      There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                   Attributes
                                      SPSR is a 32-bit register.

                   Field descriptions
                   The SPSR bit assignments are:

                   31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19               16 15             10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                   N Z C V Q                  J          IL        GE           IT[7:2]       E A I F T             M[3:0]

     IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
     RES0
     PAN
     RES0

                   N, bit [31]
                                      Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to the current mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                      executing an exception return operation in the current mode.

                   Z, bit [30]
                                      Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to the current mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on
                                      executing an exception return operation in the current mode.

                   C, bit [29]
                                      Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to the current mode, and copied to CPSR.C on
                                      executing an exception return operation in the current mode.

                   V, bit [28]
                                      Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to the current mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                      executing an exception return operation in the current mode.

                   Q, bit [27]
                                      Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to the current mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                      executing an exception return operation in the current mode.

                   IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                      IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                   J, bit [24]
                                      RES0.

                                      In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                      ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                      set state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5377
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Bit [23]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    PAN, bit [22]
                                   In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                      When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to the
                                      current mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in the current
                                      mode.
                                      When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                   In ARMv8.0.
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Bit [21]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    IL, bit [20]
                                      Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                      taken.

                    GE, bits [19:16]
                                      Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                    IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                      IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                      •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                             condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                      •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                             conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                             the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                      The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                    E, bit [9]
                                      Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                      0           Little-endian operation
                                      1           Big-endian operation.
                                      Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                      When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                      applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                      If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                      Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                      If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                      return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                      Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                      any Exception level other than EL0.

                    A, bit [8]
                                      SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           Exception not masked.
                                      1           Exception masked.

G7-5378                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                  I, bit [7]
                                    IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0            Exception not masked.
                                    1            Exception masked.

                  F, bit [6]
                                    FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0            Exception not masked.
                                    1            Exception masked.

                  T, bit [5]
                                    T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                    taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                    0            Taken from A32 state.
                                    1            Taken from T32 state.

                  M[4], bit [4]
                                    Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                    1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                  M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                    AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                        M[3:0]      Mode

                                        0b0000      User

                                        0b0001      FIQ

                                        0b0010      IRQ

                                        0b0011      Supervisor

                                        0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                        0b0111      Abort

                                        0b1010      Hyp

                                        0b1011      Undefined

                                        0b1111      System

                                    Other values are reserved.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5379
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.122        SPSR_abt, Saved Program Status Register (Abort mode)
                    The SPSR_abt characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state when an exception is taken to Abort mode.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register SPSR_abt is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       SPSR_abt.

                    Attributes
                                       SPSR_abt is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SPSR_abt bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19              16 15              10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J          IL     GE             IT[7:2]       E A I F T              M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to Abort mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Abort mode.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to Abort mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Abort mode.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to Abort mode, and copied to CPSR.C on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Abort mode.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to Abort mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Abort mode.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to Abort mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Abort mode.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

G7-5380                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                    ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                    set state.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to
                                    Abort mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in Abort mode.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                    taken.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5381
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    I, bit [7]
                                      IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                      taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Taken from A32 state.
                                      1            Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                          M[3:0]      Mode

                                          0b0000      User

                                          0b0001      FIQ

                                          0b0010      IRQ

                                          0b0011      Supervisor

                                          0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                          0b0111      Abort

                                          0b1011      Undefined

                                          0b1111      System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the SPSR_abt
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

G7-5382                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                 <banked_reg>        R     M     M1

                                                                                                 SPSR_abt            1     1     0100

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Using MRS (banked register) and MSR (banked register) instructions, at PL1 this register is only accessible from
                  PE modes other than Abort mode. In Abort mode, it is accessible as the current SPSR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5383
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.123        SPSR_fiq, Saved Program Status Register (FIQ mode)
                    The SPSR_fiq characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state when an exception is taken to FIQ mode.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register SPSR_fiq is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       SPSR_fiq.

                    Attributes
                                       SPSR_fiq is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SPSR_fiq bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19              16 15              10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J          IL     GE             IT[7:2]       E A I F T              M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to FIQ mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                       executing an exception return operation in FIQ mode.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to FIQ mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on executing
                                       an exception return operation in FIQ mode.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to FIQ mode, and copied to CPSR.C on executing
                                       an exception return operation in FIQ mode.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to FIQ mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                       executing an exception return operation in FIQ mode.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to FIQ mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                       executing an exception return operation in FIQ mode.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

G7-5384                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                    ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                    set state.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to FIQ
                                    mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in FIQ mode.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                    taken.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5385
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    I, bit [7]
                                      IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                      taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Taken from A32 state.
                                      1            Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                          M[3:0]      Mode

                                          0b0000      User

                                          0b0001      FIQ

                                          0b0010      IRQ

                                          0b0011      Supervisor

                                          0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                          0b0111      Abort

                                          0b1011      Undefined

                                          0b1111      System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the SPSR_fiq
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

G7-5386                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                 <banked_reg>        R     M     M1

                                                                                                 SPSR_fiq            1     0     1110

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Using MRS (banked register) and MSR (banked register) instructions, at PL1 this register is only accessible from
                  PE modes other than FIQ mode. In FIQ mode, it is accessible as the current SPSR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5387
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.124        SPSR_hyp, Saved Program Status Register (Hyp mode)
                    The SPSR_hyp characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state when an exception is taken to Hyp mode.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register SPSR_hyp is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       SPSR_EL2.

                    Attributes
                                       SPSR_hyp is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SPSR_hyp bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19              16 15              10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J          IL     GE             IT[7:2]       E A I F T              M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to Hyp mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Hyp mode.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to Hyp mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on executing
                                       an exception return operation in Hyp mode.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to Hyp mode, and copied to CPSR.C on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Hyp mode.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to Hyp mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Hyp mode.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to Hyp mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Hyp mode.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

G7-5388                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                    ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                    set state.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to Hyp
                                    mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in Hyp mode.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                    taken.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5389
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    I, bit [7]
                                      IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           Exception not masked.
                                      1           Exception masked.

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           Exception not masked.
                                      1           Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                      taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0           Taken from A32 state.
                                      1           Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1           Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                                                                                                   M[3:0]    Mode

                                                                                                                   0b0000    User

                                                                                                                   0b0001    FIQ

                                                                                                                   0b0010    IRQ

                                                                                                                   0b0011    Supervisor

                                                                                                                   0b0111    Abort

                                                                                                                   0b1010    Hyp

                                                                                                                   0b1011    Undefined

                                                                                                                   0b1111    System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the SPSR_hyp
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

G7-5390                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                 <banked_reg>        R       M     M1

                                                                                                 SPSR_hyp            1       1     1110

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2      EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a      RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         -        RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       -        RW

                  Using MRS (banked register) and MSR (banked register) instructions, this register is only accessible from Monitor
                  mode. In Hyp mode, this register is accessible as the current SPSR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5391
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.125        SPSR_irq, Saved Program Status Register (IRQ mode)
                    The SPSR_irq characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state when an exception is taken to IRQ mode.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register SPSR_irq is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       SPSR_irq.

                    Attributes
                                       SPSR_irq is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SPSR_irq bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19              16 15              10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J          IL     GE             IT[7:2]       E A I F T              M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to IRQ mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                       executing an exception return operation in IRQ mode.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to IRQ mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on executing
                                       an exception return operation in IRQ mode.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to IRQ mode, and copied to CPSR.C on
                                       executing an exception return operation in IRQ mode.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to IRQ mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                       executing an exception return operation in IRQ mode.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to IRQ mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                       executing an exception return operation in IRQ mode.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

G7-5392                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                    ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                    set state.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to IRQ
                                    mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in IRQ mode.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                    taken.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5393
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    I, bit [7]
                                      IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                      taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Taken from A32 state.
                                      1            Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                          M[3:0]      Mode

                                          0b0000      User

                                          0b0001      FIQ

                                          0b0010      IRQ

                                          0b0011      Supervisor

                                          0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                          0b0111      Abort

                                          0b1011      Undefined

                                          0b1111      System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the SPSR_irq
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

G7-5394                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                 <banked_reg>        R     M     M1

                                                                                                 SPSR_irq            1     1     0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Using MRS (banked register) and MSR (banked register) instructions, at PL1 this register is only accessible from
                  PE modes other than IRQ mode. In IRQ mode, it is accessible as the current SPSR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5395
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.126        SPSR_mon, Saved Program Status Register (Monitor mode)
                    The SPSR_mon characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state when an exception is taken to Monitor mode.

                    Configurations
                                       This register is only accessible in Secure state.
                                       AArch32 System register SPSR_mon can be mapped to AArch64 System register SPSR_EL3, but
                                       this is not architecturally mandated.

                    Attributes
                                       SPSR_mon is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SPSR_mon bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19              16 15              10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J          IL      GE             IT[7:2]      E A I F T              M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to Monitor mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Monitor mode.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to Monitor mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Monitor mode.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to Monitor mode, and copied to CPSR.C on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Monitor mode.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to Monitor mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Monitor mode.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to Monitor mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Monitor mode.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

G7-5396                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                    ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                    set state.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to
                                    Monitor mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in Monitor
                                    mode.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                    taken.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5397
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    I, bit [7]
                                      IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                      taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Taken from A32 state.
                                      1            Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                          M[3:0]      Mode

                                          0b0000      User

                                          0b0001      FIQ

                                          0b0010      IRQ

                                          0b0011      Supervisor

                                          0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                          0b0111      Abort

                                          0b1010      Hyp

                                          0b1011      Undefined

                                          0b1111      System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the SPSR_mon
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

G7-5398                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                 <banked_reg>        R       M     M1

                                                                                                 SPSR_mon            1       1     1100

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2      EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a      RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         -        RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       -        RW

                  Using MRS (banked register) and MSR (banked register) instructions, this register is only accessible from EL3
                  modes other than Monitor mode. In Monitor mode, it is accessible as the current SPSR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5399
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.127        SPSR_svc, Saved Program Status Register (Supervisor mode)
                    The SPSR_svc characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state when an exception is taken to Supervisor mode.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register SPSR_svc is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       SPSR_EL1.

                    Attributes
                                       SPSR_svc is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SPSR_svc bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19              16 15              10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J          IL     GE             IT[7:2]       E A I F T              M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to Supervisor mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Supervisor mode.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to Supervisor mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Supervisor mode.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to Supervisor mode, and copied to CPSR.C on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Supervisor mode.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to Supervisor mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Supervisor mode.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to Supervisor mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Supervisor mode.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

G7-5400                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                    ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                    set state.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to
                                    Supervisor mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in
                                    Supervisor mode.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                    taken.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5401
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    I, bit [7]
                                      IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                      taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Taken from A32 state.
                                      1            Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                          M[3:0]      Mode

                                          0b0000      User

                                          0b0001      FIQ

                                          0b0010      IRQ

                                          0b0011      Supervisor

                                          0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                          0b0111      Abort

                                          0b1011      Undefined

                                          0b1111      System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the SPSR_svc
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

G7-5402                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                 <banked_reg>        R     M     M1

                                                                                                 SPSR_svc            1     1     0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Using MRS (banked register) and MSR (banked register) instructions, at PL1 this register is only accessible from
                  PE modes other than Supervisor mode. In Supervisor mode, it is accessible as the current SPSR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5403
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.128        SPSR_und, Saved Program Status Register (Undefined mode)
                    The SPSR_und characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state when an exception is taken to Undefined mode.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register SPSR_und is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       SPSR_und.

                    Attributes
                                       SPSR_und is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SPSR_und bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19              16 15              10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J          IL     GE             IT[7:2]       E A I F T              M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN
      RES0

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on taking an exception to Undefined mode, and copied to CPSR.N on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Undefined mode.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on taking an exception to Undefined mode, and copied to CPSR.Z on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Undefined mode.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on taking an exception to Undefined mode, and copied to CPSR.C on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Undefined mode.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on taking an exception to Undefined mode, and copied to CPSR.V on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Undefined mode.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on taking an exception to Undefined mode, and copied to CPSR.Q on
                                       executing an exception return operation in Undefined mode.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

G7-5404                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                                    In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                    ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                    set state.

                  Bit [23]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on taking an exception to
                                    Undefined mode, and copied to CPSR.PAN on executing an exception return operation in
                                    Undefined mode.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Bit [21]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before the exception was
                                    taken.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5405
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    I, bit [7]
                                      IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the exception was
                                      taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Taken from A32 state.
                                      1            Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that the exception was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that an exception was taken from. The possible values are:

                                          M[3:0]      Mode

                                          0b0000      User

                                          0b0001      FIQ

                                          0b0010      IRQ

                                          0b0011      Supervisor

                                          0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                          0b0111      Abort

                                          0b1011      Undefined

                                          0b1111      System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the SPSR_und
                    This register can be read using MRS (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MRS <Rd>, <banked_reg>

                    This register can be written using MSR (banked register) with the following syntax:

                    MSR <banked_reg>, <Rd>

G7-5406                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                                 <banked_reg>        R     M     M1

                                                                                                 SPSR_und            1     1     0110

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Using MRS (banked register) and MSR (banked register) instructions, at PL1 this register is only accessible from
                  PE modes other than Undefined mode. In Undefined mode, it is accessible as the current SPSR.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5407
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.129      TCMTR, TCM Type Register
                    The TCMTR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Provides information about the implementation of the TCM.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                    Attributes
                                    TCMTR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TCMTR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                       IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:0]
                                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    Accessing the TCMTR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 2    000       010        0000         1111         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

G7-5408                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5409
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.130      TLBIALL, TLB Invalidate All
                    The TLBIALL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are from any level of the
                                    translation table walk. The entries that are invalidated are as follows:
                                    •     If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, all entries that would be required for
                                          the Secure EL1&0 translation regime.
                                    •     If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, all entries that would be required for
                                          the Secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                    •     If executed at Non-secure EL1, all stage 1 translation table entries that would be required for
                                          the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and, if EL2 is implemented, they must match the
                                          current VMID.
                                    •     If executed at EL2, the stage 1 or stage 2 translation table entries that would be required for
                                          the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and matches the current VMID.
                                    The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    TLBIALL is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    TLBIALL ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the TLBIALL instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c7, 0   000      000        1000         1111         0111

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE     NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x       0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0       1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1       1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIALLIS.

G7-5410                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5411
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.131      TLBIALLH, TLB Invalidate All, Hyp mode
                    The TLBIALLH characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                    from any level of the translation table walk that would be required for the Non-secure EL2
                                    translation regime.
                                    The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    TLBIALLH is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    TLBIALLH ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value to
                    the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the TLBIALLH instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                  <syntax>                  opc1    opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                  p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c7, 0   100     000        1000         1111         0111

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                 Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE    NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x      0       -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0      1       -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1      1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                    •      The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    •      The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                    •      The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

G7-5412                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5413
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.132      TLBIALLHIS, TLB Invalidate All, Hyp mode, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIALLHIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                    from any level of the translation table walk that would be required for the Non-secure EL2
                                    translation regime.
                                    The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                    executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    TLBIALLHIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    TLBIALLHIS ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value
                    to the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the TLBIALLHIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                  <syntax>                  opc1    opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                  p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c3, 0   100     000        1000         1111         0011

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                 Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE    NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x      0       -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0      1       -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1      1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                    •      The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    •      The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                    •      The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

G7-5414                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5415
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.133      TLBIALLIS, TLB Invalidate All, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIALLIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are from any level of the
                                    translation table walk. The entries that are invalidated are as follows:
                                    •     If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, all entries that would be required for
                                          the Secure EL1&0 translation regime.
                                    •     If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, all entries that would be required for
                                          the Secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                    •     If executed at Non-secure EL1, all stage 1 translation table entries that would be required for
                                          the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and, if EL2 is implemented, they must match the
                                          current VMID.
                                    •     If executed at EL2, the stage 1 or stage 2 translation table entries that would be required for
                                          the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime and matches the current VMID.
                                    The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                    executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    TLBIALLIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    TLBIALLIS ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a value
                    to the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the TLBIALLIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1     opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c3, 0   000      000        1000         1111         0011

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                 Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE     NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x       0       -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                                 x        0       1       -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                                 x        1       1       -          n/a          WO     WO

G7-5416                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5417
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.134      TLBIALLNSNH, TLB Invalidate All, Non-Secure Non-Hyp
                    The TLBIALLNSNH characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                    from any level of the translation table walk that would be required for stage 1 or stage 2 of the
                                    Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, regardless of the associated VMID.
                                    The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    TLBIALLNSNH is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    TLBIALLNSNH ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a
                    value to the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the TLBIALLNSNH instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                  <syntax>                  opc1    opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                  p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c7, 4   100     100        1000         1111         0111

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                 Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE    NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x      0       -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0      1       -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1      1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                    •      The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    •      The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                    •      The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

G7-5418                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5419
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.135      TLBIALLNSNHIS, TLB Invalidate All, Non-Secure Non-Hyp, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIALLNSNHIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                    from any level of the translation table walk that would be required for stage 1 or stage 2 of the
                                    Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, regardless of the associated VMID.
                                    The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                    executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                    There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                    TLBIALLNSNHIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    TLBIALLNSNHIS ignores the value in the register specified by the instruction. Software does not have to write a
                    value to the register before issuing this instruction.

                    Executing the TLBIALLNSNHIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                  <syntax>                  opc1    opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                  p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c3, 4   100     100        1000         1111         0011

                    Accessibility
                    The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                                   Control                 Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE    NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x      0       -          -            n/a    WO

                                                                                   x        0      1       -          -            WO     WO

                                                                                   x        1      1       -          n/a          WO     WO

                    If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                    •      The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                    •      The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                    •      The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

G7-5420                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5421
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.136      TLBIASID, TLB Invalidate by ASID match
                    The TLBIASID characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used for the specified ASID, and either:
                                          —      Is from a level of lookup above the final level.
                                          —      Is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIASID is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIASID input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                            8 7                    0

                                                      RES0                                                     ASID

                    Bits [31:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries for non-global pages that match the ASID values will be
                                   affected by this operation.

                    Executing the TLBIASID instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                               <syntax>                     opc1        opc2    CRn    coproc    CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c7, 2      000         010     1000   1111      0111

G7-5422                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     WO        n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     WO        WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIASIDIS.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5423
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.137      TLBIASIDIS, TLB Invalidate by ASID match, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIASIDIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used for the specified ASID, and either:
                                          —      Is from a level of lookup above the final level.
                                          —      Is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                   executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIASIDIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIASIDIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                        8 7                      0

                                                      RES0                                                ASID

                    Bits [31:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries for non-global pages that match the ASID values will be
                                   affected by this operation.

                    Executing the TLBIASIDIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5424                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c3, 2   000       010        1000         1111         0011

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5425
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.138      TLBIIPAS2, TLB Invalidate by Intermediate Physical Address, Stage 2
                    The TLBIIPAS2 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                        If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet
                                        the following requirements:
                                        •     The entry is a stage 2 only translation table entry, from any level of the translation table walk.
                                        •     SCR.NS is 1.
                                        •     The entry would be used for the specified IPA.
                                        •     The entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                        •     The entry would be required for the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                        The invalidation is not required to apply to caching structures that combine stage 1 and stage 2
                                        translation table entries.
                                        The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations

                                                Note
                                        This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                        TLBIIPAS2 is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIIPAS2 input value bit assignments are:

                    31          28 27                                                                                         0

                         RES0                                               IPA[39:12]

                    Bits [31:28]
                                        Reserved, RES0.

                    IPA[39:12], bits [27:0]
                                        Bits[39:12] of the intermediate physical address to match.

                    Executing the TLBIIPAS2 instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                   <syntax>                   opc1      opc2      CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                                   p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c4, 1    100       001       1000     1111        0100

G7-5426                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  If SCR.NS is 0, this instruction is a NOP.

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5427
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.139      TLBIIPAS2IS, TLB Invalidate by Intermediate Physical Address, Stage 2, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIIPAS2IS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                        If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet
                                        the following requirements:
                                        •     The entry is a stage 2 only translation table entry, from any level of the translation table walk.
                                        •     SCR.NS is 1.
                                        •     The entry would be used for the specified IPA.
                                        •     The entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                        •     The entry would be required for the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                        The invalidation is not required to apply to caching structures that combine stage 1 and stage 2
                                        translation table entries.
                                        The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                        executes this instructions.

                    Configurations

                                                Note
                                        This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                        TLBIIPAS2IS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIIPAS2IS input value bit assignments are:

                    31          28 27                                                                                         0

                         RES0                                               IPA[39:12]

                    Bits [31:28]
                                        Reserved, RES0.

                    IPA[39:12], bits [27:0]
                                        Bits[39:12] of the intermediate physical address to match.

                    Executing the TLBIIPAS2IS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                   <syntax>                   opc1      opc2      CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                                   p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c0, 1    100       001       1000     1111        0000

G7-5428                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  If SCR.NS is 0, this instruction is a NOP.

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5429
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.140      TLBIIPAS2L, TLB Invalidate by Intermediate Physical Address, Stage 2, Last level
                    The TLBIIPAS2L characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                        If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet
                                        the following requirements:
                                        •     The entry is a stage 2 only translation table entry, from the final level of the translation table
                                              walk.
                                        •     SCR.NS is 1.
                                        •     The entry would be used for the specified IPA.
                                        •     The entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                        •     The entry would be required for the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                        The invalidation is not required to apply to caching structures that combine stage 1 and stage 2
                                        translation table entries.
                                        The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations

                                                Note
                                        This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                        TLBIIPAS2L is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIIPAS2L input value bit assignments are:

                    31          28 27                                                                                         0

                         RES0                                               IPA[39:12]

                    Bits [31:28]
                                        Reserved, RES0.

                    IPA[39:12], bits [27:0]
                                        Bits[39:12] of the intermediate physical address to match.

                    Executing the TLBIIPAS2L instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                   <syntax>                    opc1     opc2      CRn       coproc      CRm

                                                                   p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c4, 5     100      101       1000      1111        0100

G7-5430                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  If SCR.NS is 0, this instruction is a NOP.

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5431
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.141  TLBIIPAS2LIS, TLB Invalidate by Intermediate Physical Address, Stage 2, Last level, Inner
Shareable
                    The TLBIIPAS2LIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                        If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet
                                        the following requirements:
                                        •     The entry is a stage 2 only translation table entry, from the final level of the translation table
                                              walk.
                                        •     SCR.NS is 1.
                                        •     The entry would be used for the specified IPA.
                                        •     The entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                        •     The entry would be required for the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                        The invalidation is not required to apply to caching structures that combine stage 1 and stage 2
                                        translation table entries.
                                        The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                        executes this instructions.

                    Configurations

                                                Note
                                        This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                        TLBIIPAS2LIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIIPAS2LIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31          28 27                                                                                         0

                         RES0                                               IPA[39:12]

                    Bits [31:28]
                                        Reserved, RES0.

                    IPA[39:12], bits [27:0]
                                        Bits[39:12] of the intermediate physical address to match.

                    Executing the TLBIIPAS2LIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                                   <syntax>                    opc1     opc2      CRn       coproc      CRm

                                                                   p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c0, 5     100      101       1000      1111        0000

G7-5432                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  If SCR.NS is 0, this instruction is a NOP.

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5433
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.142      TLBIMVA, TLB Invalidate by VA
                    The TLBIMVA characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address, and one of the following applies:
                                          —      The entry is from a level of lookup above the final level and matches the specified
                                                 ASID.
                                          —      The entry is a global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                          —      The entry is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup that matches the
                                                 specified ASID.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVA is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVA input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11          8 7                    0

                                                 VA                                      RES0                ASID

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected by
                                   this operation.
                                   Global TLB entries that match the VA value will be affected by this operation, regardless of the
                                   value of the ASID field.

G7-5434                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Executing the TLBIMVA instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c7, 1   000       001        1000         1111         0111

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIMVAIS.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5435
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.143      TLBIMVAA, TLB Invalidate by VA, All ASID
                    The TLBIMVAA characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry, from any level of the translation table walk.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAA is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAA input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                          12 11                                   0

                                                VA                                                  RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any unlocked TLB entries that match the VA will be affected by this
                                   operation, regardless of the ASID.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVAA instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2      CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c7, 3    000       011       1000     1111        0111

G7-5436                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     WO        n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     WO        WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIMVAAIS.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5437
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.144      TLBIMVAAIS, TLB Invalidate by VA, All ASID, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIMVAAIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry, from any level of the translation table walk.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                   executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAAIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAAIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                          12 11                                   0

                                                VA                                                  RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any unlocked TLB entries that match the VA will be affected by this
                                   operation, regardless of the ASID.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVAAIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2      CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c3, 3    000       011       1000     1111        0011

G7-5438                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     WO        n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     WO        WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5439
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.145      TLBIMVAAL, TLB Invalidate by VA, All ASID, Last level
                    The TLBIMVAAL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry, from the final level of the translation table walk.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations

                                            Note
                                   This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAAL is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAAL input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11                                     0

                                                 VA                                                  RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any unlocked TLB entries that match the VA will be affected by this
                                   operation, regardless of the ASID.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVAAL instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                               <syntax>                    opc1      opc2      CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c7, 7     000       111       1000     1111        0111

G7-5440                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     WO        n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     WO        WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIMVAALIS.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5441
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.146      TLBIMVAALIS, TLB Invalidate by VA, All ASID, Last level, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIMVAALIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry, from the final level of the translation table walk.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                   executes this instructions.

                    Configurations

                                            Note
                                   This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAALIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAALIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11                                     0

                                                 VA                                                  RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any unlocked TLB entries that match the VA will be affected by this
                                   operation, regardless of the ASID.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVAALIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5442                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c3, 7   000       111        1000         1111         0011

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5443
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.147      TLBIMVAH, TLB Invalidate by VA, Hyp mode
                    The TLBIMVAH characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                   from any level of the translation table walk that would be required for the Non-secure EL2
                                   translation regime and used to translate the specified address.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAH is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAH input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                          12 11                                 0

                                                VA                                                 RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVAH instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2      CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c7, 1    100       001       1000   1111       0111

G7-5444                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5445
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.148      TLBIMVAHIS, TLB Invalidate by VA, Hyp mode, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIMVAHIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                   from any level of the translation table walk that would be required for the Non-secure EL2
                                   translation regime and used to translate the specified address.
                                   The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                   executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAHIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAHIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                          12 11                                0

                                                VA                                                 RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVAHIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2   CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c3, 1    100       001    1000     1111        0011

G7-5446                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5447
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.149      TLBIMVAIS, TLB Invalidate by VA, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIMVAIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address, and one of the following applies:
                                          —      The entry is from a level of lookup above the final level and matches the specified
                                                 ASID.
                                          —      The entry is a global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                          —      The entry is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup that matches the
                                                 specified ASID.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                   executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                   There are no configuration notes.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11          8 7                    0

                                                 VA                                      RES0             ASID

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected by
                                   this operation.
                                   Global TLB entries that match the VA value will be affected by this operation, regardless of the
                                   value of the ASID field.

G7-5448                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Executing the TLBIMVAIS instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c3, 1   000       001        1000         1111         0011

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5449
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.150      TLBIMVAL, TLB Invalidate by VA, Last level
                    The TLBIMVAL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address, and one of the following applies:
                                          —      The entry is a global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                          —      The entry is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup that matches the
                                                 specified ASID.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                   This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVAL is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVAL input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11          8 7                    0

                                                 VA                                      RES0                ASID

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected by
                                   this operation.
                                   Global TLB entries that match the VA value will be affected by this operation, regardless of the
                                   value of the ASID field.

                    Executing the TLBIMVAL instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

G7-5450                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c7, 5   000       101        1000         1111         0111

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  When HCR.FB is 1, at Non-secure EL1 this instruction executes as a TLBIMVALIS.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5451
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.151      TLBIMVALH, TLB Invalidate by VA, Last level, Hyp mode
                    The TLBIMVALH characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                   from the final level of the translation table walk that would be required for the Non-secure EL2
                                   translation regime and used to translate the specified address.
                                   The invalidation only applies to the PE that executes this instruction.

                    Configurations
                                   This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVALH is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVALH input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                          12 11                                 0

                                                VA                                                 RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVALH instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2      CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c7, 5    100       101       1000   1111       0111

G7-5452                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5453
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.152      TLBIMVALHIS, TLB Invalidate by VA, Last level, Hyp mode, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIMVALHIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   If EL2 is implemented, invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that are
                                   from the final level of the translation table walk that would be required for the Non-secure EL2
                                   translation regime and used to translate the specified address.
                                   The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                   executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                   This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVALHIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVALHIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                          12 11                                0

                                                VA                                                 RES0

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Executing the TLBIMVALHIS instruction
                    This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2   CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c8, c3, 5    100       101    1000     1111        0011

G7-5454                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                              Control                   Accessibility

                                                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                              x        x        0       -     -         n/a    WO

                                                                              x        0        1       -     -         WO     WO

                                                                              x        1        1       -     n/a       WO     WO

                  If EL2 is not implemented, this instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  If this instruction is executed in a Secure privileged mode other than Monitor mode, then the behavior is
                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and one of the following behaviors must occur:

                  •     The instruction is UNDEFINED.

                  •     The instruction is treated as a NOP.

                  •     The instruction executes as if it had been executed in Monitor mode.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5455
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.153      TLBIMVALIS, TLB Invalidate by VA, Last level, Inner Shareable
                    The TLBIMVALIS characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Invalidate all cached copies of translation table entries from TLBs that meet the following
                                   requirements:
                                   •      The entry is a stage 1 translation table entry.
                                   •      The entry would be used to translate the specified address, and one of the following applies:
                                          —      The entry is a global entry from the final level of lookup.
                                          —      The entry is a non-global entry from the final level of lookup that matches the
                                                 specified ASID.
                                   •      If EL2 is implemented, the entry would be used with the current VMID.
                                   From the entries that match these requirement, the entries that are invalidated are required for the
                                   following translation regime:
                                   •      If executed at Secure EL1 when EL3 is using AArch64, the Secure EL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Secure state when EL3 is using AArch32, the Secure PL1&0 translation
                                          regime.
                                   •      If executed in Non-secure state, the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   The invalidation applies to all PEs in the same Inner Shareable shareability domain as the PE that
                                   executes this instructions.

                    Configurations
                                   This System instruction is not implemented in architecture versions before ARMv8.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBIMVALIS is a 32-bit System instruction.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBIMVALIS input value bit assignments are:

                    31                                                           12 11          8 7                    0

                                                 VA                                      RES0             ASID

                    VA, bits [31:12]
                                   Virtual address to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected
                                   by this operation.

                    Bits [11:8]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [7:0]
                                   ASID value to match. Any TLB entries that match the ASID value and VA value will be affected by
                                   this operation.
                                   Global TLB entries that match the VA value will be affected by this operation, regardless of the
                                   value of the ASID field.

G7-5456                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Executing the TLBIMVALIS instruction
                  This instruction is executed using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax uses the following encoding in the System instruction encoding space:

                                                              <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c8, c3, 5   000       101        1000         1111         0011

                  Accessibility
                  The instruction is executable as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          WO           n/a    WO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          WO           WO     WO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          WO     WO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HCR_EL2.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HCR.TTLB==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T8==1, Non-secure execution of this instruction at EL1 is trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5457
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.154      TLBTR, TLB Type Register
                    The TLBTR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides information about the TLB implementation. The register must define whether the
                                   implementation provides separate instruction and data TLBs, or a unified TLB. Normally, the
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED information in this register includes the number of lockable entries in
                                   the TLB.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                    Attributes
                                   TLBTR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TLBTR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              1 0

                                                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED                                           nU

                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, bits [31:1]
                                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                    nU, bit [0]
                                   Not Unified TLB. Indicates whether the implementation has a unified TLB:
                                   0           Unified TLB.
                                   1           Separate Instruction and Data TLBs.

                    Accessing the TLBTR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 3    000       011     0000     1111       0000

G7-5458                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RO        n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RO        RO     RO

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RO     RO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TID1==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5459
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.155      TPIDRPRW, PL1 Software Thread ID Register
                    The TPIDRPRW characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides a location where software executing at EL1 or higher can store thread identifying
                                   information that is not visible to software executing at EL0, for OS management purposes.
                                   The PE makes no use of this register.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register TPIDRPRW is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   TPIDR_EL1[31:0].
                                   The PE never updates this register. This means the register is always UNKNOWN on reset.

                    Attributes
                                   TPIDRPRW is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TPIDRPRW bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              0

                                                                Thread ID

                    Bits [31:0]
                                   Thread ID. Thread identifying information stored by software running at this Exception level.

                    Accessing the TPIDRPRW
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                    opc1      opc2   CRn    coproc         CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c13, c0, 4    000       100    1101   1111           0000

G7-5460                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                           Control                  Accessibility
                              Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                           E2H         TGE   NS     EL0     EL1      EL2    EL3

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           x     0      -       n/a      n/a    RW      TPIDRPRW_s

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           x     0      -       RW       n/a    n/a     TPIDRPRW

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           0     1      -       RW       RW     n/a     TPIDRPRW

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           1     1      -       n/a      RW     n/a     TPIDRPRW

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           x     0      -       RW       n/a    n/a     TPIDRPRW

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           0     1      -       RW       RW     n/a     TPIDRPRW

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           1     1      -       n/a      RW     n/a     TPIDRPRW

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           0     1      -       RW       RW     RW      TPIDRPRW_ns

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           1     1      -       n/a      RW     RW      TPIDRPRW_ns

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5461
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.156      TPIDRURO, PL0 Read-Only Software Thread ID Register
                    The TPIDRURO characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides a location where software executing at EL1 or higher can store thread identifying
                                   information that is visible to software executing at EL0, for OS management purposes.
                                   The PE makes no use of this register.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register TPIDRURO is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   TPIDRRO_EL0[31:0].
                                   The PE never updates this register. This means the register is always UNKNOWN on reset.

                    Attributes
                                   TPIDRURO is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TPIDRURO bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              0

                                                                Thread ID

                    Bits [31:0]
                                   Thread ID. Thread identifying information stored by software running at this Exception level.

                    Accessing the TPIDRURO
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                    opc1      opc2   CRn    coproc         CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c13, c0, 3    000       011    1101   1111           0000

G7-5462                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                           Control                  Accessibility
                              Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                           E2H         TGE   NS     EL0     EL1      EL2    EL3

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           x     0      RO      n/a      n/a    RW      TPIDRURO_s

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           0     1      RO      RW       RW     RW      TPIDRURO_ns

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           1     1      RO      n/a      RW     RW      TPIDRURO_ns

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           x     0      RO      RW       n/a    n/a     TPIDRURO

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           0     1      RO      RW       RW     n/a     TPIDRURO

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           1     1      RO      n/a      RW     n/a     TPIDRURO

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           x     0      RO      RW       n/a    n/a     TPIDRURO

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           0     1      RO      RW       RW     n/a     TPIDRURO

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           1     1      RO      n/a      RW     n/a     TPIDRURO

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5463
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.157      TPIDRURW, PL0 Read/Write Software Thread ID Register
                    The TPIDRURW characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides a location where software executing at EL0 can store thread identifying information, for
                                   OS management purposes.
                                   The PE makes no use of this register.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register TPIDRURW is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   TPIDR_EL0[31:0].
                                   The PE never updates this register. This means the register is always UNKNOWN on reset.

                    Attributes
                                   TPIDRURW is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TPIDRURW bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              0

                                                                Thread ID

                    Bits [31:0]
                                   Thread ID. Thread identifying information stored by software running at this Exception level.

                    Accessing the TPIDRURW
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                    opc1      opc2   CRn    coproc      CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c13, c0, 2    000       010    1101   1111        0000

G7-5464                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                           Control                  Accessibility
                              Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                           E2H         TGE   NS     EL0     EL1      EL2    EL3

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           x     0      RW      n/a      n/a    RW      TPIDRURW_s

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           0     1      RW      RW       RW     RW      TPIDRURW_ns

                              EL3 is using AArch32.        x           1     1      RW      n/a      RW     RW      TPIDRURW_ns

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           x     0      RW      RW       n/a    n/a     TPIDRURW

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           0     1      RW      RW       RW     n/a     TPIDRURW

                              EL3 is not implemented.      x           1     1      RW      n/a      RW     n/a     TPIDRURW

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           x     0      RW      RW       n/a    n/a     TPIDRURW

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           0     1      RW      RW       RW     n/a     TPIDRURW

                              EL3 is using AArch64.        x           1     1      RW      n/a      RW     n/a     TPIDRURW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T13==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5465
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.158      TTBCR, Translation Table Base Control Register
                    The TTBCR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    The control register for stage 1 of the PL1&0 translation regime. Its controls include:
                                    •     Where the VA range is split between addresses translated using TTBR0 and addresses
                                          translated using TTBR1.
                                    •     The translation table format used by this stage of translation.
                                    In ARMv8.2, when the value of TTBCR.{EAE, T2E} is {1, 1}, TTBCR is used with TTBCR2.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register TTBCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    TCR_EL1[31:0].
                                    The current translation table format determines which format of the register is used.
                                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to TTBCR(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                    signal is asserted HIGH.
                                    Some RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets into an
                                    Exception level that is using AArch32. If the PE resets into EL3 using AArch32 then:
                                    •     The EAE bit resets to 0 in both the Secure and the Non-secure instances of the register.
                                    •     Other reset values apply only to the Secure instance of the register.

                    Attributes
                                    TTBCR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TTBCR bit assignments are:

                    For all register layouts:

                    EAE, bit [31]
                                    Extended Address Enable. The meanings of the possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Use the VMSAv8-32 translation system with the Short-descriptor translation table
                                                format.
                                    1           Use the VMSAv8-32 translation system with the Long-descriptor translation table
                                                format.

                    When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                    31 30                                                                           6 5 4 3 2           0

                                                           RES0                                                     N

      EAE                                                                                                                        RES0
                                                                                                                                  PD0
                                                                                                                                  PD1

                    EAE, bit [31]
                                    Extended Address Enable. The meanings of the possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Use the VMSAv8-32 translation system with the Short-descriptor translation table
                                                format.

G7-5466                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Bits [30:6]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  PD1, bit [5]
                                   Translation table walk disable for translations using TTBR1. This bit controls whether a translation
                                   table walk is performed on a TLB miss, for an address that is translated using TTBR1. The encoding
                                   of this bit is:
                                   0           Perform translation table walks using TTBR1.
                                   1           A TLB miss on an address that is translated using TTBR1 generates a Translation fault.
                                               No translation table walk is performed.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  PD0, bit [4]
                                   Translation table walk disable for translations using TTBR0. This bit controls whether a translation
                                   table walk is performed on a TLB miss for an address that is translated using TTBR0. The encoding
                                   of this bit is:
                                   0           Perform translation table walks using TTBR0.
                                   1           A TLB miss on an address that is translated using TTBR0 generates a Translation fault.
                                               No translation table walk is performed.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Bit [3]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                  N, bits [2:0]
                                   Indicate the width of the base address held in TTBR0. In TTBR0, the base address field is
                                   bits[31:14-N]. The value of N also determines:
                                   •      Whether TTBR0 or TTBR1 is used as the base address for translation table walks.
                                   •      The size of the translation table pointed to by TTBR0.
                                   N can take any value from 0 to 7, that is, from 0b000 to 0b111.
                                   When N has its reset value of 0, the translation table base is compatible with ARMv5 and ARMv6.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  When TTBCR.EAE==1:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21       19 18     16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5              3 2          0

                        SH1                          RES0     T1SZ            SH0                         RES0      T0SZ

     EAE                                                                                                                           T2E
     IMP DEF                                                                                                                      EPD0
     ORGN1                                                                                                                       IRGN0
     IRGN1                                                                                                                      ORGN0
     EPD1                                                                                                                         RES0
     A1

                  EAE, bit [31]
                                   Extended Address Enable. The meanings of the possible values of this bit are:
                                   1           Use the VMSAv8-32 translation system with the Long-descriptor translation table
                                               format.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5467
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    IMP DEF, bit [30]
                                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    SH1, bits [29:28]
                                     Shareability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using TTBR1. Defined
                                     values are:
                                     00          Non-shareable
                                     10          Outer Shareable
                                     11          Inner Shareable
                                     Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                     is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                     registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    ORGN1, bits [27:26]
                                     Outer cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using TTBR1.
                                     00          Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable
                                     01          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                     10          Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                     11          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    IRGN1, bits [25:24]
                                     Inner cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using TTBR1.
                                     00          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable
                                     01          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                     10          Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                     11          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    EPD1, bit [23]
                                     Translation table walk disable for translations using TTBR1. This bit controls whether a translation
                                     table walk is performed on a TLB miss, for an address that is translated using TTBR1. The encoding
                                     of this bit is:
                                     0           Perform translation table walks using TTBR1.
                                     1           A TLB miss on an address that is translated using TTBR1 generates a Translation fault.
                                                 No translation table walk is performed.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    A1, bit [22]
                                     Selects whether TTBR0 or TTBR1 defines the ASID. The encoding of this bit is:
                                     0           TTBR0.ASID defines the ASID.
                                     1           TTBR1.ASID defines the ASID.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bits [21:19]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

G7-5468                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

                  T1SZ, bits [18:16]
                                  See Selecting between TTBR0 and TTBR1, VMSAv8-32 Long-descriptor translation table format on
                                  page G4-4877 for how TTBCR.{T1SZ, T0SZ} determine the input address ranges and memory
                                  region sizes translated using TTBR0 and TTBR1.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Bits [15:14]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  SH0, bits [13:12]
                                  Shareability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using TTBR0.
                                  00          Non-shareable
                                  10          Outer Shareable
                                  11          Inner Shareable
                                  Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                  is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                  registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  ORGN0, bits [11:10]
                                  Outer cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using TTBR0.
                                  00          Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable
                                  01          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                  10          Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                  11          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  IRGN0, bits [9:8]
                                  Inner cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using TTBR0.
                                  00          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable
                                  01          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                  10          Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                  11          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  EPD0, bit [7]
                                  Translation table walk disable for translations using TTBR0. This bit controls whether a translation
                                  table walk is performed on a TLB miss, for an address that is translated using TTBR0. The encoding
                                  of this bit is:
                                  0           Perform translation table walks using TTBR0.
                                  1           A TLB miss on an address that is translated using TTBR0 generates a Translation fault.
                                              No translation table walk is performed.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  T2E, bit [6]
                             In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                  TTBCR2 Enable.
                                  Defined values are:
                                  0           TTBCR2 is disabled. The contents of TTBCR2 are treated as 0 for all purposes other
                                              than reading or writing the register.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5469
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                      1           TTBCR2 is enabled.
                                      If TTBCR.EAE==0, then the behavior is as if the bit is 0.
                                      This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-AA32HPD is not implemented.
                                 In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Bits [5:3]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    T0SZ, bits [2:0]
                                      See Selecting between TTBR0 and TTBR1, VMSAv8-32 Long-descriptor translation table format on
                                      page G4-4877 for how TTBCR.{T1SZ, T0SZ} determine the input address ranges and memory
                                      region sizes translated using TTBR0 and TTBR1.
                                      When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Accessing the TTBCR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                  <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                                  p15, 0, <Rt>, c2, c0, 2    000       010      0010     1111       0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                    Control                  Accessibility
                                       Configuration                                                                            Instance
                                                                    E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1      EL2     EL3

                                       EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -        RW       n/a     n/a      TTBCR

                                       EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -        RW       RW      n/a      TTBCR

                                       EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -        n/a      RW      n/a      TTBCR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -        RW       n/a     n/a      TTBCR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -        RW       RW      n/a      TTBCR

                                       EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -        n/a      RW      n/a      TTBCR

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -        RW       RW      RW       TTBCR_ns

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -        n/a      RW      RW       TTBCR_ns

                                       EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -        n/a      n/a     RW       TTBCR_s

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to TTBCR_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

G7-5470                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5471
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.159      TTBCR2, Translation Table Base Control Register 2
                    The TTBCR2 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   The second control register for stage 1 of the PL1&0 translation regime.
                                   If ARMv8.2-AA32HPD is not implemented then this register is not implemented and its encoding
                                   is unallocated. Otherwise:
                                   •        When the value of TTBCR.{EAE, T2E} is not {1, 1} the contents of TTBCR2 are treated as
                                            zero for all purposes other than reading or writing the register.
                                   •        When the value of TTBCR.{EAE, T2E} is {1, 1} TTBCR2 is used with TTBCR.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register TTBCR2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   TCR_EL1[63:32].
                                   When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to TTBCR2(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                   signal is asserted HIGH.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.
                                   This register is introduced in ARMv8.2.

                    Attributes
                                   TTBCR2 is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The TTBCR2 bit assignments are:

                    31                                   19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8                            0

                                     RES0                                                                 RES0

      HWU162                                                                                                                  HPD0
      HWU161                                                                                                                  HPD1
      HWU160                                                                                                                HWU059
                                                                                                                            HWU060
                                                                                                                            HWU061
                                                                                                                            HWU062
                                                                                                                            HWU159

                    Bits [31:19]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    HWU162, bit [18]
                                   Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[62] of the stage 1
                                   translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR1.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0            For translations using TTBR1, bit[62] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   1            For translations using TTBR1, bit[62] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                                TTBCR2.HPD1 is 1.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.

G7-5472                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                           G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                               G7.2 General system control registers

                                The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD1 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                is 0.

                  HWU161, bit [17]
                                Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[61] of the stage 1
                                translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR1.
                                Defined values are:
                                0           For translations using TTBR1, bit[61] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                1           For translations using TTBR1, bit[61] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                            TTBCR2.HPD1 is 1.
                                This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD1 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                is 0.

                  HWU160, bit [16]
                                Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[60] of the stage 1
                                translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR1.
                                Defined values are:
                                0           For translations using TTBR1, bit[60] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                1           For translations using TTBR1, bit[60] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                            TTBCR2.HPD1 is 1.
                                This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD1 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                is 0.

                  HWU159, bit [15]
                                Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[59] of the stage 1
                                translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR1.
                                Defined values are:
                                0           For translations using TTBR1, bit[59] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                1           For translations using TTBR1, bit[59] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                            TTBCR2.HPD1 is 1.
                                This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD1 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                is 0.

                  HWU062, bit [14]
                                Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[62] of the stage 1
                                translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR0.
                                Defined values are:
                                0           For translations using TTBR0, bit[62] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                1           For translations using TTBR0, bit[62] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                            entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                            TTBCR2.HPD0 is 1.
                                This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.

ARM DDI 0487C.a            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5473
ID121917                                           Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                     The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD0 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                     is 0.

                    HWU061, bit [13]
                                     Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[61] of the stage 1
                                     translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR0.
                                     Defined values are:
                                     0           For translations using TTBR0, bit[61] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                 entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                     1           For translations using TTBR0, bit[61] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                 entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                                 TTBCR2.HPD0 is 1.
                                     This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                     The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD0 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                     is 0.

                    HWU060, bit [12]
                                     Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[60] of the stage 1
                                     translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR0.
                                     Defined values are:
                                     0           For translations using TTBR0, bit[60] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                 entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                     1           For translations using TTBR0, bit[60] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                 entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                                 TTBCR2.HPD0 is 1.
                                     This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                     The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD0 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                     is 0.

                    HWU059, bit [11]
                                     Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[59] of the stage 1
                                     translation table Block or Page entry for translations using TTBR0.
                                     Defined values are:
                                     0           For translations using TTBR0, bit[59] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                 entry cannot be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                     1           For translations using TTBR0, bit[59] of each stage 1 translation table Block or Page
                                                 entry can be used by hardware for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose if the value of
                                                 TTBCR2.HPD0 is 1.
                                     This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                                     The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR2.HPD0 is 0 or the value of TTBCR.T2E
                                     is 0.

                    HPD1, bit [10]
                                     Hierarchical Permission Disables. This affects the hierarchical control bits, APTable, XNTable, and
                                     PXNTable, in the translation tables pointed to by TTBR1.
                                     Defined values are:
                                     0           Hierarchical permissions are enabled.
                                     1           Hierarchical permissions are disabled if TTBCR.T2E == 1.
                                     When disabled, the permissions are treated as if the bits are 0.
                                     This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-AA32HPD is not implemented.
                                     The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR.T2E is 0.

G7-5474                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                  HPD0, bit [9]
                                    Hierarchical Permission Disables. This affects the hierarchical control bits, APTable, XNTable, and
                                    PXNTable, in the translation tables pointed to by TTBR0.
                                    Defined values are:
                                    0           Hierarchical permissions are enabled.
                                    1           Hierarchical permissions are disabled if TTBCR.T2E ==1.
                                    When disabled, the permissions are treated is as if the bits are 0.
                                    This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-AA32HPD is not implemented.
                                    The Effective value of this field is 0 if the value of TTBCR.T2E is 0.

                  Bits [8:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Accessing the TTBCR2
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc      CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c2, c0, 3    000       011      0010         1111        0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                 Control                  Accessibility
                                   Configuration                                                                                 Instance
                                                                 E2H     TGE      NS      EL0      EL1     EL2      EL3

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.         x       0        1       -        RW      RW       RW           TTBCR2_ns

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.         x       1        1       -        n/a     RW       RW           TTBCR2_ns

                                   EL3 is not implemented.       x       x        0       -        RW      n/a      n/a          TTBCR2

                                   EL3 is not implemented.       x       0        1       -        RW      RW       n/a          TTBCR2

                                   EL3 is not implemented.       x       1        1       -        n/a     RW       n/a          TTBCR2

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.         x       x        0       -        RW      n/a      n/a          TTBCR2

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.         x       0        1       -        RW      RW       n/a          TTBCR2

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.         x       1        1       -        n/a     RW       n/a          TTBCR2

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.         x       x        0       -        n/a     n/a      RW           TTBCR2_s

                  When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to TTBCR2_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is
                  asserted HIGH.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                             G7-5475
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5476                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.160    TTBR0, Translation Table Base Register 0
                  The TTBR0 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Holds the base address of the translation table for the initial lookup for stage 1 of the translation of
                                 an address from the lower VA range in the PL1&0 translation regime, and other information for this
                                 translation regime.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register TTBR0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 TTBR0_EL1.
                                 TTBCR.EAE determines which TTBR0 format is used:
                                 EAE==0        32-bit format is used. TTBR0[63:32] are ignored.
                                 EAE==1        64-bit format is used.
                                 When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to TTBR0(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                 signal is asserted HIGH.
                                 Used in conjunction with the TTBCR. When the 64-bit TTBR0 format is used, cacheability and
                                 shareability information is held in the TTBCR, not in TTBR0.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 TTBR0 is a 64-bit register that can also be accessed as a 32-bit value. If it is accessed as a 32-bit
                                 register, accesses read and write bits [31:0] and do not modify bits [63:32].

                  Field descriptions
                  The TTBR0 bit assignments are:

                  When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                  31                                                                               7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                        TTB0                                                RGN        S

                                                                                                                                  IRGN[1]
                                                                                                                                     IMP
                                                                                                                                     NOS
                                                                                                                                  IRGN[0]

                  TTB0, bits [31:7]
                                 Translation table base address, bits[31:x], where x is 14-(TTBCR.N). Register bits [x-1:7] are RES0,
                                 with the additional requirement that if these bits are not all zero, this is a misaligned translation table
                                 base address, with effects that are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:
                                 •        Register bits [x-1:7] are treated as if all the bits are zero. The value read back from these bits
                                          is either the value written or zero.
                                 •        The result of the calculation of an address for a translation table walk using this register can
                                          be corrupted in those bits that are nonzero.

                  IRGN[0], bit [6]
                                 See the IRGN[1] description.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              G7-5477
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    NOS, bit [5]
                                      Not Outer Shareable. When the value of TTBR0.S is 1, indicates whether the memory associated
                                      with a translation table walk is Inner Shareable or Outer Shareable:
                                      0           Memory is Outer Shareable.
                                      1           Memory is Inner Shareable.
                                      This bit is ignored when the value of TTBR0.S is 0.

                    RGN, bits [4:3]
                                      Region bits. Indicates the Outer cacheability attributes for the memory associated with the
                                      translation table walks:
                                      00          Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                      01          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Write-Allocate Cacheable.
                                      10          Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Cacheable.
                                      11          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back no Write-Allocate Cacheable.

                    IMP, bit [2]
                                      The effect of this bit is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. If the translation table implementation does not
                                      include any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED features this bit is UNK/SBZP.

                    S, bit [1]
                                      Shareable. Indicates whether the memory associated with the translation table walks is
                                      Non-shareable:
                                      0           Memory is Non-shareable.
                                      1           Memory is shareable. The TTBR0.NOS field indicates whether the memory is Inner
                                                  Shareable or Outer Shareable.

                    IRGN[1], bit [0]
                                      Inner region bits. IRGN[1:0] indicate the Inner Cacheability attributes for the memory associated
                                      with the translation table walks. The possible values of IRGN[1:0] are:
                                      00          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable.
                                      01          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Write-Allocate Cacheable.
                                      10          Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Cacheable.
                                      11          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back no Write-Allocate Cacheable.

                                               Note
                                      The encoding of the IRGN bits is counter-intuitive, with register bit[6] being IRGN[0] and register
                                      bit[0] being IRGN[1]. This encoding is chosen to give a consistent encoding of memory region
                                      types and to ensure that software written for ARMv7 without the Multiprocessing Extensions can
                                      run unmodified on an implementation that includes the functionality introduced by the ARMv7
                                      Multiprocessing Extensions.

                    When TTBCR.EAE==1:

              63           56 55              48 47                                                                  1 0

                   RES0              ASID                                        BADDR

                                                                                                                                    CnP

G7-5478                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                  Bits [63:56]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  ASID, bits [55:48]
                                 An ASID for the translation table base address. The TTBCR.A1 field selects either TTBR0.ASID
                                 or TTBR1.ASID.

                  BADDR, bits [47:1]
                                 Translation table base address, bits[47:x], Bits [x-1:1] are RES0, with the additional requirement that
                                 if bits[x-1:3] are not all zero, this is a misaligned translation table base address, with effects that are
                                 CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:

                                 •      Register bits [x-1:3] are treated as if all the bits are zero. The value read back from these bits
                                        is either the value written or zero.
                                 •      The result of the calculation of an address for a translation table walk using this register can
                                        be corrupted in those bits that are nonzero.
                                 x is determined from the value of TTBCR.T0SZ as follows:
                                 •      If TTBCR.T0SZ is 0 or 1, x = 5 - TTBCR.T0SZ.
                                 •      If TTBCR.T0SZ is greater than 1, x = 14 - TTBCR.T0SZ.
                                 If bits[47:40] of the translation table base address are not zero, an Address size fault is generated.

                  CnP, bit [0]
                             In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                 Common not Private. In an implementation that includes ARMv8.2-TTCNP, when TTBCR.EAE
                                 ==1, indicates whether each entry that is pointed to by TTBR0 is a member of a common set that
                                 can be used by every PE in the Inner Shareable domain for which the value of TTBR0.CnP is 1.
                                 0           The translation table entries pointed to by this instance of TTBR0, for the current ASID,
                                             are permitted to differ from corresponding entries for this instance of TTBR0 for other
                                             PEs in the Inner Shareable domain. This is not affected by:
                                             •       The value of TTBR0.CnP on those other PEs.
                                             •       The value of TTBCR.EAE on those other PEs.
                                             •       The value of the current ASID or, for the Non-secure instance of TTBR0, the
                                                     value of the current VMID.
                                 1           The translation table entries pointed to by this instance of TTBR0 are the same as the
                                             translation table entries for every other PE in the Inner Shareable domain for which the
                                             value of TTBR0.CnP is 1 for this instance of TTBR0 and all of the following apply:
                                             •       The translation table entries are pointed to by this instance of TTBR0.
                                             •       The value of the applicable TTBCR.EAE field is 1.
                                             •       The ASID is the same as the current ASID.
                                             •       For the Non-secure instance of TTBR0, the VMID is the same as the current
                                                     VMID.
                                 When a TLB combines entries from stage 1 translation and stage 2 translation into a single entry,
                                 that entry can only be shared between different PEs if the value of the CnP bit is 1 for both stage 1
                                 and stage 2.

                                          Note
                                 If the value of the TTBR0.CnP bit is 1 on multiple PEs in the same Inner Shareable domain and
                                 those TTBR0s do not point to the same translation table entries when the other conditions specified
                                 for the case when the value of CnP is 1 apply, then the results of translations are CONSTRAINED
                                 UNPREDICTABLE, see CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behaviors due to caching of control or
                                 data values on page K1-6395.

                                 In an implementation that does not include ARMv8.2-TTCNP this field is RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              G7-5479
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the TTBR0
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c2, c0, 0    000       000     0010    1111       0000

                    This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                    MRRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                    MCRR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                <syntax>                   opc1     coproc     CRm

                                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c2    0000     1111       0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                  Control                  Accessibility
                                     Configuration                                                                         Instance
                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1    EL2     EL3

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -        RW     n/a     n/a     TTBR0

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -        RW     RW      n/a     TTBR0

                                     EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -        n/a    RW      n/a     TTBR0

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -        RW     n/a     n/a     TTBR0

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -        RW     RW      n/a     TTBR0

                                     EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -        n/a    RW      n/a     TTBR0

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -        n/a    n/a     RW      TTBR0_s

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -        RW     RW      RW      TTBR0_ns

                                     EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -        n/a    RW      RW      TTBR0_ns

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to TTBR0_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

G7-5480                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5481
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.161      TTBR1, Translation Table Base Register 1
                    The TTBR1 characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Holds the base address of the translation table for the initial lookup for stage 1 of the translation of
                                   an address from the higher VA range in the PL1&0 translation regime, and other information for this
                                   translation regime.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register TTBR1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   TTBR1_EL1.
                                   TTBCR.EAE determines which TTBR1 format is used:
                                   EAE==0        32-bit format is used. TTBR1[63:32] are ignored.
                                   EAE==1        64-bit format is used.
                                   Used in conjunction with the TTBCR. When the 64-bit TTBR1 format is used, cacheability and
                                   shareability information is held in the TTBCR, not in TTBR1.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   TTBR1 is a 64-bit register that can also be accessed as a 32-bit value. If it is accessed as a 32-bit
                                   register, accesses read and write bits [31:0] and do not modify bits [63:32].

                    Field descriptions
                    The TTBR1 bit assignments are:

                    When TTBCR.EAE==0:

                    31                                                                              7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                          TTB1                                                RGN       S

                                                                                                                                    IRGN[1]
                                                                                                                                       IMP
                                                                                                                                       NOS
                                                                                                                                    IRGN[0]

                    TTB1, bits [31:7]
                                   Translation table base address, bits[31:14]. Register bits [13:7] are RES0, with the additional
                                   requirement that if these bits are not all zero, this is a misaligned translation table base address, with
                                   effects that are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:
                                   •        Register bits [13:7] are treated as if all the bits are zero. The value read back from these bits
                                            is either the value written or zero.
                                   •        The result of the calculation of an address for a translation table walk using this register can
                                            be corrupted in those bits that are nonzero.

                    IRGN[0], bit [6]
                                   See the IRGN[1] description.

G7-5482                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                   NOS, bit [5]
                                     Not Outer Shareable. When the value of TTBR1.S is 1, indicates whether the memory associated
                                     with a translation table walk is Inner Shareable or Outer Shareable:
                                     0           Memory is Outer Shareable.
                                     1           Memory is Inner Shareable.
                                     This bit is ignored when the value of TTBR1.S is 0.

                   RGN, bits [4:3]
                                     Region bits. Indicates the Outer cacheability attributes for the memory associated with the
                                     translation table walks:
                                     00          Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable.
                                     01          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Write-Allocate Cacheable.
                                     10          Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Cacheable.
                                     11          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back no Write-Allocate Cacheable.

                   IMP, bit [2]
                                     The effect of this bit is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. If the translation table implementation does not
                                     include any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED features this bit is UNK/SBZP.

                   S, bit [1]
                                     Shareable. Indicates whether the memory associated with the translation table walks is
                                     Non-shareable:
                                     0           Memory is Non-shareable.
                                     1           Memory is shareable. The TTBR1.NOS field indicates whether the memory is Inner
                                                 Shareable or Outer Shareable.

                   IRGN[1], bit [0]
                                     Inner region bits. IRGN[1:0] indicate the Inner Cacheability attributes for the memory associated
                                     with the translation table walks. The possible values of IRGN[1:0] are:
                                     00          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable.
                                     01          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Write-Allocate Cacheable.
                                     10          Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Cacheable.
                                     11          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back no Write-Allocate Cacheable.

                                              Note
                                     The encoding of the IRGN bits is counter-intuitive, with register bit[6] being IRGN[0] and register
                                     bit[0] being IRGN[1]. This encoding is chosen to give a consistent encoding of memory region
                                     types and to ensure that software written for ARMv7 without the Multiprocessing Extensions can
                                     run unmodified on an implementation that includes the functionality introduced by the ARMv7
                                     Multiprocessing Extensions.

                   When TTBCR.EAE==1:

            63            56 55              48 47                                                                   1 0

                  RES0              ASID                                        BADDR

                                                                                                                                    CnP

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5483
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Bits [63:56]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ASID, bits [55:48]
                                   An ASID for the translation table base address. The TTBCR.A1 field selects either TTBR0.ASID
                                   or TTBR1.ASID.

                    BADDR, bits [47:1]
                                   Translation table base address, bits[47:x], Bits [x-1:1] are RES0, with the additional requirement that
                                   if bits[x-1:3] are not all zero, this is a misaligned translation table base address, with effects that are
                                   CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:

                                   •      Register bits [x-1:3] are treated as if all the bits are zero. The value read back from these bits
                                          is either the value written or zero.
                                   •      The result of the calculation of an address for a translation table walk using this register can
                                          be corrupted in those bits that are nonzero.
                                   x is determined from the value of TTBCR.T1SZ as follows:
                                   •      If TTBCR.T1SZ is 0 or 1, x = 5 - TTBCR.T1SZ.
                                   •      If TTBCR.T1SZ is greater than 1, x = 14 - TTBCR.T1SZ.
                                   If bits[47:40] of the translation table base address are not zero, an Address size fault is generated.

                    CnP, bit [0]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Common not Private. In an implementation that includes ARMv8.2-TTCNP, when TTBCR.EAE
                                   ==1, indicates whether each entry that is pointed to by TTBR1 is a member of a common set that
                                   can be used by every PE in the Inner Shareable domain for which the value of TTBR1.CnP is 1.
                                   0           The translation table entries pointed to by this instance of TTBR1, for the current ASID,
                                               are permitted to differ from corresponding entries for this instance of TTBR1 for other
                                               PEs in the Inner Shareable domain. This is not affected by:
                                               •       The value of TTBR1.CnP on those other PEs.
                                               •       The value of TTBCR.EAE on those other PEs.
                                               •       The value of the current ASID or, for the Non-secure instance of TTBR1, the
                                                       value of the current VMID.
                                   1           The translation table entries pointed to by this instance of TTBR1 are the same as the
                                               translation table entries for every other PE in the Inner Shareable domain for which the
                                               value of TTBR1.CnP is 1 for this instance of TTBR1 and all of the following apply:
                                               •       The translation table entries are pointed to by this instance of TTBR1.
                                               •       The value of the applicable TTBCR.EAE field is 1.
                                               •       The ASID is the same as the current ASID.
                                               •       For the Non-secure instance of TTBR1, the VMID is the same as the current
                                                       VMID.
                                   When a TLB combines entries from stage 1 translation and stage 2 translation into a single entry,
                                   that entry can only be shared between different PEs if the value of the CnP bit is 1 for both stage 1
                                   and stage 2.

                                            Note
                                   If the value of the TTBR1.CnP bit is 1 on multiple PEs in the same Inner Shareable domain and
                                   those TTBR1s do not point to the same translation table entries when the other conditions specified
                                   for the case when the value of CnP is 1 apply, then the results of translations are CONSTRAINED
                                   UNPREDICTABLE, see CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behaviors due to caching of control or
                                   data values on page K1-6395.

                                   In an implementation that does not include ARMv8.2-TTCNP this field is RES0.

G7-5484                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.2 General system control registers

                             In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Accessing the TTBR1
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c2, c0, 1    000       001      0010     1111       0000

                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                  MCRR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                              <syntax>                     opc1     coproc     CRm

                                                                              p15, 1, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c2      0001     1111       0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                Control                  Accessibility
                                   Configuration                                                                           Instance
                                                                E2H      TGE      NS     EL0      EL1     EL2     EL3

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -        RW      n/a     n/a      TTBR1

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -        RW      RW      n/a      TTBR1

                                   EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a      TTBR1

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -        RW      n/a     n/a      TTBR1

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -        RW      RW      n/a      TTBR1

                                   EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      n/a      TTBR1

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -        RW      RW      RW       TTBR1_ns

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -        n/a     RW      RW       TTBR1_ns

                                   EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -        n/a     n/a     RW       TTBR1_s

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5485
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HCR_EL2.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HCR.TVM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HCR.TRVM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5486                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.162    VBAR, Vector Base Address Register
                  The VBAR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                    When high exception vectors are not selected, holds the vector base address for exceptions that are
                                    not taken to Monitor mode or to Hyp mode.
                                    Software must program VBAR(NS) with the required initial value as part of the PE boot sequence.

                  Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register VBAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    VBAR_EL1[31:0].
                                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to VBAR(S) is disabled when the CP15SDISABLE
                                    signal is asserted HIGH.
                                    Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                    into an Exception level that is using AArch32. If the PE resets into EL3 using AArch32 they apply
                                    only to the Secure instance of the register. Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to
                                    architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                    VBAR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The VBAR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                       5 4              0

                                                    Vector Base Address                                            RES0

                  Bits [31:5]
                                    Vector Base Address. Bits[31:5] of the base address of the exception vectors for exceptions taken to
                                    this Exception level. Bits[4:0] of an exception vector are the exception offset.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to an IMPLEMENTATION
                                    DEFINED value.

                  Bits [4:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Accessing the VBAR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2         CRn      coproc   CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c12, c0, 0    000       000          1100     1111     0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5487
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                   Control                  Accessibility
                                      Configuration                                                                      Instance
                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS     EL0     EL1     EL2   EL3

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x        0      -       n/a     n/a   RW     VBAR_s

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    RW     VBAR_ns

                                      EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    RW     VBAR_ns

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    VBAR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    VBAR

                                      EL3 is not implemented.      x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    VBAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x        0      -       RW      n/a   n/a    VBAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0        1      -       RW      RW    n/a    VBAR

                                      EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1        1      -       n/a     RW    n/a    VBAR

                    When EL3 is using AArch32, write access to VBAR_s is UNDEFINED when the CP15SDISABLE signal is asserted
                    HIGH.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T12==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5488                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                    G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.163    VMPIDR, Virtualization Multiprocessor ID Register
                  The VMPIDR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Holds the value of the Virtualization Multiprocessor ID. This is the value returned by Non-secure
                                     EL1 reads of MPIDR.

                  Configurations
                                     AArch32 System register VMPIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     VMPIDR_EL2[31:0].
                                     If EL2 is not implemented but EL3 is implemented, this register takes the value of the MPIDR.
                                     Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                     into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                     this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                     VMPIDR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The VMPIDR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29               25 24 23                      16 15                        8 7                       0

                  M U        RES0                          Aff2                     Aff1                        Aff0

     MT

                  M, bit [31]
                                     Indicates whether this implementation includes the functionality introduced by the ARMv7
                                     Multiprocessing Extensions. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0              This implementation does not include the ARMv7 Multiprocessing Extensions
                                                    functionality.
                                     1              This implementation includes the ARMv7 Multiprocessing Extensions functionality.
                                     In ARMv8 this bit is RES1.

                  U, bit [30]
                                     Indicates a Uniprocessor system, as distinct from PE 0 in a multiprocessor system. The possible
                                     values of this bit are:
                                     0              Processor is part of a multiprocessor system.
                                     1              Processor is part of a uniprocessor system.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                     MPIDR.U.

                  Bits [29:25]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  MT, bit [24]
                                     Indicates whether the lowest level of affinity consists of logical PEs that are implemented using a
                                     multithreading type approach. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0              Performance of PEs at the lowest affinity level is largely independent.
                                     1              Performance of PEs at the lowest affinity level is very interdependent.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5489
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                       MPIDR.MT.

                    Aff2, bits [23:16]
                                       Affinity level 2. The least significant affinity level field, for this PE in the system.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                       MPIDR.Aff2.

                    Aff1, bits [15:8]
                                       Affinity level 1. The intermediate affinity level field, for this PE in the system.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                       MPIDR.Aff1.

                    Aff0, bits [7:0]
                                       Affinity level 0. The most significant affinity level field, for this PE in the system.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                       MPIDR.Aff0.

                    Accessing the VMPIDR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                   <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                   p15, 4, <Rt>, c0, c0, 5     100       101        0000         1111         0000

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                      Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                      E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                      x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                      x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                      x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5490                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                                ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.2 General system control registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5491
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.164      VPIDR, Virtualization Processor ID Register
                     The VPIDR characteristics are:

                     Purpose
                                    Holds the value of the Virtualization Processor ID. This is the value returned by Non-secure EL1
                                    reads of MIDR.

                     Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register VPIDR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    VPIDR_EL2.
                                    If EL2 is not implemented but EL3 is implemented, this register takes the value of the MIDR.
                                    Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                    into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                    this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                     Attributes
                                    VPIDR is a 32-bit register.

                     Field descriptions
                     The VPIDR bit assignments are:

                     31                    24 23             20 19       16 15                             4 3           0

                          Implementer              Variant                            PartNum                   Revision

      Architecture

                     Implementer, bits [31:24]
                                    The Implementer code. This field must hold an implementer code that has been assigned by ARM.
                                    Assigned codes include the following:

                                    Hex representation               ASCII representation   Implementer

                                    0x41                             A                      ARM Limited

                                    0x42                             B                      Broadcom Corporation

                                    0x43                             C                      Cavium Inc.

                                    0x44                             D                      Digital Equipment Corporation

                                    0x49                             I                      Infineon Technologies AG

                                    0x4D                             M                      Motorola or Freescale Semiconductor Inc.

                                    0x4E                             N                      NVIDIA Corporation

                                    0x50                             P                      Applied Micro Circuits Corporation

                                    0x51                             Q                      Qualcomm Inc.

                                    0x56                             V                      Marvell International Ltd.

                                    0x69                             i                      Intel Corporation

G7-5492                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

                                 ARM can assign codes that are not published in this manual. All values not assigned by ARM are
                                 reserved and must not be used.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                 MIDR.Implementer.

                  Variant, bits [23:20]
                                 An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED variant number. Typically, this field is used to distinguish between
                                 different product variants, or major revisions of a product.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                 MIDR.Variant.

                  Architecture, bits [19:16]
                                 The permitted values of this field are:
                                 0001          ARMv4
                                 0010          ARMv4T
                                 0011          ARMv5 (obsolete)
                                 0100          ARMv5T
                                 0101          ARMv5TE
                                 0110          ARMv5TEJ
                                 0111          ARMv6
                                 1111          Architectural features are individually identified in the ID_* registers, see ID registers
                                               on page K13-6627.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                 MIDR.Architecture.

                  PartNum, bits [15:4]
                                 An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED primary part number for the device.
                                 On processors implemented by ARM, if the top four bits of the primary part number are 0x0 or 0x7,
                                 the variant and architecture are encoded differently.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                 MIDR.PartNum.

                  Revision, bits [3:0]
                                 An IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED revision number for the device.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                 MIDR.Revision.

                  Accessing the VPIDR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c0, c0, 0    100       000      0000     1111        0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5493
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T0==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5494                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.165     VTCR, Virtualization Translation Control Register
                  The VTCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  The control register for stage 2 of the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime.

                                            Note
                                  This stage of translation always uses the Long-descriptor translation table format.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register VTCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  VTCR_EL2.
                                  If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                  RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  VTCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The VTCR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24                               14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                    0

                                                        RES0                SH0                 SL0      S     T0SZ

     RES1                                                                                                                      RES0
     RES0                                                                                                                     IRGN0
     HWU62                                                                                                                   ORGN0
     HWU61
     HWU60
     HWU59

                  Bit [31]
                                  Reserved, RES1.

                  Bits [30:29]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  HWU62, bit [28]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                  Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[62] of the stage 2
                                  translation table Block or Page entry.
                                  Defined values are:
                                  0           Bit[62] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                              for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                  1           Bit[62] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                              for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                  This field is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                  Reserved, RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5495
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    HWU61, bit [27]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[61] of the stage 2
                                   translation table Block or Page entry.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0           Bit[61] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   1           Bit[61] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    HWU60, bit [26]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[60] of the stage 2
                                   translation table Block or Page entry.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0           Bit[60] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   1           Bit[60] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    HWU59, bit [25]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                   Hardware Use. Indicates IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED hardware use of bit[59] of the stage 2
                                   translation table Block or Page entry.
                                   Defined values are:
                                   0           Bit[59] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry cannot be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   1           Bit[59] of each stage 2 translation table Block or Page entry can be used by hardware
                                               for an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED purpose.
                                   This bit is RES0 if ARMv8.2-TTPBHA is not implemented.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    Bits [24:14]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    SH0, bits [13:12]
                                   Shareability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using VTTBR.
                                   00          Non-shareable
                                   10          Outer Shareable
                                   11          Inner Shareable
                                   Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                   is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                   registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

G7-5496                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.2 General system control registers

                  ORGN0, bits [11:10]
                                    Outer cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using VTTBR.
                                    00          Normal memory, Outer Non-cacheable
                                    01          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    10          Normal memory, Outer Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    11          Normal memory, Outer Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable

                  IRGN0, bits [9:8]
                                    Inner cacheability attribute for memory associated with translation table walks using VTTBR.
                                    00          Normal memory, Inner Non-cacheable
                                    01          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    10          Normal memory, Inner Write-Through Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable
                                    11          Normal memory, Inner Write-Back Read-Allocate No Write-Allocate Cacheable

                  SL0, bits [7:6]
                                    Starting level for translation table walks using VTTBR.
                                    00          Start at level 2
                                    01          Start at level 1
                                    All other values are reserved. If this field is programmed to a reserved value, or to a value that is not
                                    consistent with the programming of T0SZ, then a stage 2 level 1 Translation fault is generated.

                  Bit [5]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  S, bit [4]
                                    Sign extension bit. This bit must be programmed to the value of T0SZ[3]. If it is not, then the
                                    behavior is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE and the stage 2 T0SZ value is treated as an UNKNOWN
                                    value, see Misprogramming VTCR.S on page K1-6408.

                  T0SZ, bits [3:0]
                                    The size offset of the memory region addressed by VTTBR. The region size is 2(32-T0SZ) bytes.
                                    This field holds a four-bit signed integer value, meaning it supports values from -8 to 7.

                                             Note
                                    This is different from the other translation control registers, where TnSZ holds a three-bit unsigned
                                    integer, supporting values from 0 to 7.

                                    If this field is programmed to a value that is not consistent with the programming of SL0 then a stage
                                    2 level 1 Translation fault is generated.

                  Accessing the VTCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G7-5497
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 4, <Rt>, c2, c1, 2    100       010        0010         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

G7-5498                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                   G7.2 General system control registers

G7.2.166    VTTBR, Virtualization Translation Table Base Register
                   The VTTBR characteristics are:

                   Purpose
                                  Holds the base address of the translation table for the initial lookup for stage 2 of an address
                                  translation in the Non-secure PL1&0 translation regime, and other information for this translation
                                  regime.

                   Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register VTTBR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  VTTBR_EL2.
                                  If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                  Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                  into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                  this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                   Attributes
                                  VTTBR is a 64-bit register.

                   Field descriptions
                   The VTTBR bit assignments are:

            63           56 55            48 47                                                                        1 0

                  RES0            VMID                                         BADDR

                                                                                                                                        CnP

                   Bits [63:56]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                   VMID, bits [55:48]
                                  The VMID for the translation table.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                   BADDR, bits [47:1]
                                  Translation table base address, bits[47:x], Bits [x-1:1] are RES0, with the additional requirement that
                                  if bits[x-1:3] are not all zero, this is a misaligned translation table base address, with effects that are
                                  CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and must be one of the following:

                                  •      Register bits [x-1:3] are treated as if all the bits are zero. The value read back from these bits
                                         is either the value written or zero.
                                  •      The result of the calculation of an address for a translation table walk using this register can
                                         be corrupted in those bits that are nonzero.
                                  x is determined from the value of VTCR.SL0 and VTCR.T0SZ as follows:
                                  •      If VTCR.SL0 is 00, meaning that lookup starts at level 2, then x is 14 - VTCR.T0SZ.
                                  •      If VTCR.SL0 is 01, meaning that lookup starts at level 1, then x is 5 - VTCR.T0SZ.
                                  •      If VTCR.SL0 is either 10 or 11 then a stage 2 level 1 Translation fault is generated.
                                  If bits[47:40] of the translation table base address are not zero, an Address size fault is generated.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              G7-5499
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.2 General system control registers

                    CnP, bit [0]
                               In ARMv8.3 and ARMv8.2
                                    Common not Private. In an implementation that includes ARMv8.2-TTCNP, indicates whether each
                                    entry that is pointed to by VTTBR is a member of a common set that can be used by every PE in the
                                    Inner Shareable domain for which the value of VTTBR.CnP is 1.
                                    0           The translation table entries pointed to by VTTBR are permitted to differ from the
                                                entries for VTTBR for other PEs in the Inner Shareable domain. This is not affected by
                                                the value of the current VMID.
                                    1           The translation table entries pointed to by VTTBR are the same as the translation table
                                                entries for every other PE in the Inner Shareable domain for which the value of
                                                VTTBR.CnP is 1 and the VMID is the same as the current VMID.
                                    When a TLB combines entries from stage 1 translation and stage 2 translation into a single entry,
                                    that entry can only be shared between different PEs if the value of the CnP bit is 1 for both stage 1
                                    and stage 2.

                                             Note
                                    If the value of the VTTBR.CnP bit is 1 on multiple PEs in the same Inner Shareable domain and
                                    those VTTBRs do not point to the same translation table entries when the VMID value is the same
                                    as the current VMID, then the results of translations are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, see
                                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behaviors due to caching of control or data values on
                                    page K1-6395.

                                    In an implementation that does not include ARMv8.2-TTCNP this field is RES0.
                               In ARMv8.1 and ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the VTTBR
                    This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                    MRRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                    MCRR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                <syntax>                       opc1         coproc       CRm

                                                                                p15, 6, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c2        0110         1111         0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

G7-5500                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.2 General system control registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T2==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5501
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3         Debug registers
                    This section lists the Debug System registers in AArch32 state, in alphabetic order.

G7-5502                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                           ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                  G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.1      DBGAUTHSTATUS, Debug Authentication Status register
                  The DBGAUTHSTATUS characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                    Provides information about the state of the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface for
                                    debug.

                  Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register DBGAUTHSTATUS is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System
                                    register DBGAUTHSTATUS_EL1.
                                    AArch32 System register DBGAUTHSTATUS is architecturally mapped to External register
                                    DBGAUTHSTATUS_EL1.
                                    This register is required in all implementations.

                  Attributes
                                    DBGAUTHSTATUS is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGAUTHSTATUS bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                            8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                      RES0                                        SNID SID          NSID

                                                                                                                                 NSNID

                  Bits [31:8]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  SNID, bits [7:6]
                                    Secure non-invasive debug. Possible values of this field are:
                                    00          Not implemented. EL3 is not implemented and the implemented Security state is
                                                Non-secure state.
                                    10          Implemented and disabled. ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() == FALSE.
                                    11          Implemented and enabled. ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() == TRUE.
                                    Other values are reserved.

                  SID, bits [5:4]
                                    Secure invasive debug. Possible values of this field are:
                                    00          Not implemented. EL3 is not implemented and the implemented Security state is
                                                Non-secure state.
                                    10          Implemented and disabled. ExternalSecureInvasiveDebugEnabled() == FALSE.
                                    11          Implemented and enabled. ExternalSecureInvasiveDebugEnabled() == TRUE.
                                    Other values are reserved.

                  NSNID, bits [3:2]
                                    Non-secure non-invasive debug. Possible values of this field are:
                                    00          Not implemented. EL3 is not implemented and the implemented Security state is Secure
                                                state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5503
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                     10         Implemented and disabled. ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() == FALSE.
                                     11         Implemented and enabled. ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() == TRUE.
                                     Other values are reserved.

                    NSID, bits [1:0]
                                     Non-secure invasive debug. Possible values of this field are:
                                     00         Not implemented. EL3 is not implemented and the implemented Security state is Secure
                                                state.
                                     10         Implemented and disabled. ExternalInvasiveDebugEnabled() == FALSE.
                                     11         Implemented and enabled. ExternalInvasiveDebugEnabled() == TRUE.
                                     Other values are reserved.

                    Accessing the DBGAUTHSTATUS
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1       opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p14, 0, <Rt>, c7, c14, 6    000        110        0111         1110         1110

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                    Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE        NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x          0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0          1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1          1      -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —       If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5504                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                  G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.2      DBGBCR<n>, Debug Breakpoint Control Registers, n = 0 - 15
                  The DBGBCR<n> characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Holds control information for a breakpoint. Forms breakpoint n together with value register
                                  DBGBVR<n>. If EL2 is implemented and this breakpoint supports Context matching,
                                  DBGBVR<n> can be associated with a Breakpoint Extended Value Register DBGBXVR<n> for
                                  VMID matching.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register DBGBCR<n> is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  DBGBCR<n>_EL1.
                                  AArch32 System register DBGBCR<n> is architecturally mapped to External register
                                  DBGBCR<n>_EL1.
                                  If breakpoint n is not implemented then this register is unallocated.
                                  This register is in the Cold reset domain. On a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                  architecturally UNKNOWN values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                  Attributes
                                  DBGBCR<n> is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGBCR<n> bit assignments are:

                  31                     24 23         20 19         16 15 14 13 12          9 8         5 4 3 2 1 0

                           RES0                   BT           LBN      SSC           RES0         BAS           PMC E

                                                                                                                                   RES0
                                                                                                                                    HMC

                  When the E field is zero, all the other fields in the register are ignored.

                  Bits [31:24]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  BT, bits [23:20]
                                  Breakpoint Type. Possible values are:
                                  0000           Unlinked instruction address match.
                                  0001           Linked instruction address match.
                                  0010           Unlinked Context ID match.
                                  0011           Linked Context ID match.
                                  0100           Unlinked instruction address mismatch.
                                  0101           Linked instruction address mismatch.
                                  0110           Unlinked CONTEXTIDR_EL1 match (introduced in ARMv8.1).
                                  0111           Linked CONTEXTIDR_EL1 match (introduced in ARMv8.1).
                                  1000           Unlinked VMID match.
                                  1001           Linked VMID match.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5505
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                   1010         Unlinked VMID and Context ID match.
                                   1011         Linked VMID and Context ID match.
                                   1100         Unlinked CONTEXTIDR_EL2 match (introduced in ARMv8.1).
                                   1101         Linked CONTEXTIDR_EL2 match (introduced in ARMv8.1).
                                   1110         Unlinked Full Context ID match (introduced in ARMv8.1).
                                   1111         Linked Full Context ID match (introduced in ARMv8.1).
                                   The field breaks down as follows:
                                   •      BT[3:1]: Base type.
                                          000         Match address. DBGBVR<n> is the address of an instruction.
                                          001         Match Context ID. In most cases, the DBGBVR<n>.ContextID must match the
                                                      CONTEXTIDR_EL1 value. However, when ARMv8.1-VHE is implemented,
                                                      EL2 is using AArch64, and the Effective value of HCR_EL2.E2H is 1, if either
                                                      the PE is executing at Non-secure EL0 with HCR_EL2.TGE set to 1, or the PE
                                                      is executing at EL2, then DBGBVR<n>.ContextID must match the
                                                      CONTEXTIDR_EL2 value.
                                          010         Mismatch address. DBGBVR<n> is the address of an instruction to be stepped.
                                          011         Match CONTEXTIDR_EL1. DBGBVR<n>.ContextID is a Context ID
                                                      compared against CONTEXTIDR.
                                          100         Match VMID. DBGBXVR<n>.VMID is a VMID compared against
                                                      VTTBR.VMID.
                                          101         Match VMID and Context ID. DBGBVR<n>.ContextID is a Context ID
                                                      compared against CONTEXTIDR, and DBGBXVR<n>.VMID is a VMID
                                                      compared against VTTBR.VMID.
                                          110         Match CONTEXTIDR_EL2. DBGBXVR<n>.ContextID2 is a Context ID
                                                      compared against CONTEXTIDR_EL2.
                                          111         Match Full Context ID. DBGBVR<n>.ContextID is compared against
                                                      CONTEXTIDR_EL1, and DBGBXVR<n>.ContextID2 is compared against
                                                      CONTEXTIDR_EL2.
                                   •      BT[0]: Enable linking.
                                   Constraints on breakpoint programming mean some values are reserved under certain conditions.
                                   For more information, see Reserved DBGBCR<n>.BT values on page G2-4775.
                                   This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    LBN, bits [19:16]
                                   Linked breakpoint number. For Linked address matching breakpoints, this specifies the index of the
                                   Context-matching breakpoint linked to.
                                   For all other breakpoint types this field is ignored and reads of the register return an UNKNOWN
                                   value.
                                   This field is ignored when the value of DBGBCR<n>.E is 0.
                                   This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    SSC, bits [15:14]
                                   Security state control. Determines the Security states under which a Breakpoint debug event for
                                   breakpoint n is generated. This field must be interpreted along with the HMC and PMC fields, and
                                   there are constraints on the permitted values of the {HMC, SSC, PMC} fields. For more
                                   information, including the effect of programming the fields to a reserved set of values, see
                                   Breakpoint usage constraints on page G2-4775.
                                   For more information on the operation of the SSC, HMC, and PMC fields, see Execution conditions
                                   for which a breakpoint generates Breakpoint exceptions on page G2-4765.
                                   This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

G7-5506                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                 G7.3 Debug registers

                  HMC, bit [13]
                                    Higher mode control. Determines the debug perspective for deciding when a Breakpoint debug
                                    event for breakpoint n is generated. This field must be interpreted along with the SSC and PMC
                                    fields, and there are constraints on the permitted values of the {HMC, SSC, PMC} fields. For more
                                    information see the SSC, bits [15:14] description.
                                    For more information on the operation of the SSC, HMC, and PMC fields, see Execution conditions
                                    for which a breakpoint generates Breakpoint exceptions on page G2-4765.
                                    This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bits [12:9]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  BAS, bits [8:5]
                                    Byte address select. Defines which half-words an address-matching breakpoint matches, regardless
                                    of the instruction set and Execution state.
                                    The permitted values depend on the breakpoint type.
                                    For Address match breakpoints, the permitted values are:

                                                                    BAS      Match instruction at          Constraint for debuggers

                                                                    0011     DBGBVR<n>                     Use for T32 instructions.

                                                                    1100     DBGBVR<n>+2                   Use for T32 instructions.

                                                                    1111     DBGBVR<n>                     Use for A32 instructions.

                                    All other values are reserved. For more information, see Reserved DBGBCR<n>.{SSC, HMC,
                                    PMC} values on page G2-4776.
                                    For more information on using the BAS field in Address Match breakpoints, see Using the BAS field
                                    in Address Match breakpoints on page G2-4768.
                                    For Address mismatch breakpoints in an AArch32 stage 1 translation regime, the permitted values
                                    are:

                                                             BAS      Step instruction at       Constraint for debuggers

                                                             0000     -                         Use for a match anywhere breakpoint.

                                                             0011     DBGBVR<n>                 Use for stepping T32 instructions.

                                                             1100     DBGBVR<n>+2               Use for stepping T32 instructions.

                                                             1111     DBGBVR<n>                 Use for stepping A32 instructions.

                                    All other values are reserved. For more information, see Reserved DBGBCR<n>.{SSC, HMC,
                                    PMC} values on page G2-4776.
                                    For more information on using the BAS field in address mismatch breakpoints, see Using the BAS
                                    field in Address Match breakpoints on page G2-4768.
                                    For Context matching breakpoints, this field is RES1 and ignored.
                                    If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bits [4:3]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5507
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    PMC, bits [2:1]
                                      Privilege mode control. Determines the Exception level or levels at which a Breakpoint debug event
                                      for breakpoint n is generated. This field must be interpreted along with the SSC and HMC fields,
                                      and there are constraints on the permitted values of the {HMC, SSC, PMC} fields. For more
                                      information see the DBGBCR<n>.SSC description.
                                      For more information on the operation of the SSC, HMC, and PMC fields, see Execution conditions
                                      for which a breakpoint generates Breakpoint exceptions on page G2-4765.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    E, bit [0]
                                      Enable breakpoint DBGBVR<n>. Possible values are:
                                      0           Breakpoint disabled.
                                      1           Breakpoint enabled.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Accessing the DBGBCR<n>
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                         <syntax>                         opc1      opc2         CRn     coproc        CRm

                                                         p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, <CRm>, 5       000       101          0000    1110          n<3:0>

                    •      <CRm> is in the range c0 - c15.

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1      EL2     EL3

                                                                                   x        x         0      -          RW       n/a     RW

                                                                                   x        0         1      -          RW       RW      RW

                                                                                   x        1         1      -          n/a      RW      RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5508                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                            G7.3 Debug registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •   When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                      —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                  •   If the register access does not generate an exception then:
                      —     If EDSCR.TDA==1, and DBGOSLSR.OSLK==0, and halting is allowed, accesses to this register
                            from PL1 and PL2 generate a Software Access debug event.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5509
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.3        DBGBVR<n>, Debug Breakpoint Value Registers, n = 0 - 15
                    The DBGBVR<n> characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                      Holds a value for use in breakpoint matching, either the virtual address of an instruction or a context
                                      ID. Forms breakpoint n together with control register DBGBCR<n>. If EL2 is implemented and this
                                      breakpoint supports Context matching, DBGBVR<n> can be associated with a Breakpoint
                                      Extended Value Register DBGBXVR<n> for VMID matching.

                    Configurations
                                      There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                      AArch32 System register DBGBVR<n> is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                      DBGBVR<n>_EL1[31:0].

                                               Note
                                      Writes to DBGBVR<n> do not modify DBGBVR<n>_EL1[63:32].

                                      AArch32 System register DBGBVR<n> is architecturally mapped to External register
                                      DBGBVR<n>_EL1[31:0].
                                      If breakpoint n is not implemented then this register is unallocated.
                                      This register is in the Cold reset domain. On a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                      architecturally UNKNOWN values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                    Attributes
                                      How this register is interpreted depends on the value of DBGBCR<n>.BT.
                                      •      When DBGBCR<n>.BT is 0b0x0x, this register holds a virtual address.
                                      •      When DBGBCR<n>.BT is 0b001x, 0b101x, or 0b111x, this register holds a Context ID.
                                      For other values of DBGBCR<n>.BT, this register is RES0.
                                      Some breakpoints might not support Context ID comparison. For more information, see the
                                      description of the DBGDIDR.CTX_CMPs field.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGBVR<n> bit assignments are:

                    When DBGBCR<n>.BT==0b0x0x:

                    31                                                                                               2 1 0

                                                                 VA[31:2]

                                                                                                                                       RES0

                    VA[31:2], bits [31:2]
                                      Bits[31:2] of the address value for comparison.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [1:0]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

G7-5510                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

                  When DBGBCR<n>.BT==0b001x:

                  31                                                                                               0

                                                              ContextID

                  ContextID, bits [31:0]
                                 Context ID value for comparison.
                                 The value is compared against CONTEXTIDR in the following cases:
                                 •      The PE is in Secure state.
                                 •      EL2 is using AArch32.
                                 •      When ARMv8.1-VHE is not implemented.
                                 •      When ARMv8.1-VHE is implemented, EL2 is using AArch64, and HCR_EL2.E2H is 0.
                                 •      When ARMv8.1-VHE is implemented, EL2 is using AArch64, HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is
                                        {1, 0}, and the PE is in Non-secure EL0 or EL1.
                                 When ARMv8.1-VHE is implemented, EL2 is using AArch64, HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is {1, 1}
                                 and the PE is in Non-secure EL0, the value is compared against CONTEXTIDR_EL2.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  When DBGBCR<n>.BT==0b101x and EL2 implemented:

                  31                                                                                               0

                                                              ContextID

                  ContextID, bits [31:0]
                                 Context ID value for comparison against CONTEXTIDR.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  When DBGBCR<n>.BT==0b111x and EL2 implemented:

                  31                                                                                               0

                                                              ContextID

                  ContextID, bits [31:0]
                                 Context ID value for comparison against CONTEXTIDR_EL2.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Accessing the DBGBVR<n>
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5511
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                       <syntax>                          opc1     opc2         CRn     coproc        CRm

                                                       p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, <CRm>, 4        000      100          0000    1110          n<3:0>

                    •      <CRm> is in the range c0 - c15.

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1      EL2     EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RW       n/a     RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RW       RW      RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a      RW      RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                    •      If the register access does not generate an exception then:
                           —     If EDSCR.TDA==1, and DBGOSLSR.OSLK==0, and halting is allowed, accesses to this register
                                 from PL1 and PL2 generate a Software Access debug event.

G7-5512                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.4      DBGBXVR<n>, Debug Breakpoint Extended Value Registers, n = 0 - 15
                  The DBGBXVR<n> characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Holds a value for use in breakpoint matching, to support VMID matching. Used in conjunction with
                                  a control register DBGBCR<n> and a value register DBGBVR<n>, where EL2 is implemented and
                                  breakpoint n supports Context matching.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register DBGBXVR<n> is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  DBGBVR<n>_EL1[63:32].

                                           Note
                                  Writes to DBGBXVR<n> do not modify DBGBVR<n>_EL1[31:0].

                                  AArch32 System register DBGBXVR<n> is architecturally mapped to External register
                                  DBGBVR<n>_EL1[63:32].
                                  This register is unallocated in any of the following cases:
                                  •     Breakpoint n is not implemented.
                                  •     Breakpoint n does not support Context matching.
                                  •     EL2 is not implemented.
                                  For more information, see the description of the DBGDIDR.CTX_CMPs field.
                                  This register is in the Cold reset domain. On a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                  architecturally UNKNOWN values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                  Attributes
                                  How this register is interpreted depends on the value of DBGBCR<n>.BT.
                                  •     When DBGBCR<n>.BT is 0b10xx, this register holds a VMID.
                                  •     When DBGBCR<n>.BT is 0b11xx, this register holds a Context ID.
                                  For other values of DBGBCR<n>.BT, this register is RES0.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGBXVR<n> bit assignments are:

                  When DBGBCR<n>.BT==0b10xx and EL2 implemented:

                  31                                             16 15                      8 7                        0

                                       RES0                                 VMID[15:8]                  VMID[7:0]

                  Bits [31:16]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  VMID[15:8], bits [15:8]
                               In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                  Extension to VMID[7:0]. See VMID[7:0] for more details.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5513
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                               In ARMv8.0.
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    VMID[7:0], bits [7:0]
                                   VMID value for comparison.
                                   The VMID is 8 bits in the following cases.
                                   •      EL2 is using AArch32.
                                   •      ARMv8.1-VMID16 is not implemented.
                                   When ARMv8.1-VMID16 is implemented and EL2 is using AArch64, it is IMPLEMENTATION
                                   DEFINED whether the VMID is 8 bits or 16 bits.

                                   VMID[15:8] is RES0 if any of the following applies:
                                   •      The implementation has an 8-bit VMID.
                                   •      VTCR_EL2.VS has a value of 0.
                                   •      EL2 is using AArch32.
                                   This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    When DBGBCR<n>.BT==0b11xx and EL2 implemented:

                    31                                                                                                  0

                                                                ContextID2

                    ContextID2, bits [31:0]
                                   Context ID value for comparison against CONTEXTIDR_EL2.
                                   This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Accessing the DBGBXVR<n>
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                      <syntax>                         opc1      opc2     CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                      p14, 0, <Rt>, c1, <CRm>, 1       000       001      0001   1110       n<3:0>

                    •      <CRm> is in the range c0 - c15.

G7-5514                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                  •     If the register access does not generate an exception then:
                        —      If EDSCR.TDA==1, and DBGOSLSR.OSLK==0, and halting is allowed, accesses to this register
                               from PL1 and PL2 generate a Software Access debug event.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5515
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.5        DBGCLAIMCLR, Debug Claim Tag Clear register
                    The DBGCLAIMCLR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Used by software to read the values of the CLAIM tag bits, and to clear these bits to 0.
                                   The architecture does not define any functionality for the CLAIM tag bits.

                                            Note
                                   CLAIM tags are typically used for communication between the debugger and target software.

                                   Used in conjunction with the DBGCLAIMSET register.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register DBGCLAIMCLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   DBGCLAIMCLR_EL1.
                                   AArch32 System register DBGCLAIMCLR is architecturally mapped to External register
                                   DBGCLAIMCLR_EL1.
                                   An implementation must include 8 CLAIM tag bits.
                                   This register is in the Cold reset domain. See the CLAIM field description for the effect of a Cold
                                   reset on the value returned by this register. This register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                    Attributes
                                   DBGCLAIMCLR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGCLAIMCLR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                        8 7                       0

                                                    RAZ/SBZ                                               CLAIM

                    Bits [31:8]
                                   Reserved, RAZ/SBZ. Software can rely on these bits reading as zero, and must use a should-be-zero
                                   policy on writes. Implementations must ignore writes.

                    CLAIM, bits [7:0]
                                   Read or clear CLAIM tag bits. Reading this field returns the current value of the CLAIM tag bits.
                                   Writing a 1 to one of these bits clears the corresponding CLAIM tag bit to 0. This is an indirect write
                                   to the CLAIM tag bits. A single write operation can clear multiple CLAIM tag bits to 0.
                                   Writing 0 to one of these bits has no effect.
                                   A cold reset clears the CLAIM tag bits to 0.

                    Accessing the DBGCLAIMCLR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5516                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p14, 0, <Rt>, c7, c9, 6    000       110        0111         1110         1001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5517
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.6        DBGCLAIMSET, Debug Claim Tag Set register
                    The DBGCLAIMSET characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Used by software to set the CLAIM tag bits to 1.
                                   The architecture does not define any functionality for the CLAIM tag bits.

                                            Note
                                   CLAIM tags are typically used for communication between the debugger and target software.

                                   Used in conjunction with the DBGCLAIMCLR register.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register DBGCLAIMSET is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   DBGCLAIMSET_EL1.
                                   AArch32 System register DBGCLAIMSET is architecturally mapped to External register
                                   DBGCLAIMSET_EL1.
                                   An implementation must include 8 CLAIM tag bits.

                    Attributes
                                   DBGCLAIMSET is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGCLAIMSET bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                        8 7                      0

                                                    RAZ/SBZ                                               CLAIM

                    Bits [31:8]
                                   Reserved, RAZ/SBZ. Software can rely on these bits reading as zero, and must use a should-be-zero
                                   policy on writes. Implementations must ignore writes.

                    CLAIM, bits [7:0]
                                   Set CLAIM tag bits. RAO.
                                   Writing a 1 to one of these bits sets the corresponding CLAIM tag bit to 1. This is an indirect write
                                   to the CLAIM tag bits. A single write operation can set multiple CLAIM tag bits to 1.
                                   Writing 0 to one of these bits has no effect.
                                   A cold reset clears the CLAIM tag bits to 0.

                    Accessing the DBGCLAIMSET
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5518                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p14, 0, <Rt>, c7, c8, 6    000       110        0111         1110         1000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5519
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.7        DBGDCCINT, DCC Interrupt Enable Register
                    The DBGDCCINT characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Enables interrupt requests to be signaled based on the DCC status flags.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register DBGDCCINT is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    MDCCINT_EL1.
                                    This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                    values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                    using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                    architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    DBGDCCINT is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGDCCINT bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28                                                                                              0

                      RX TX                                              RES0

      RES0

                    Bit [31]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    RX, bit [30]
                                    DCC interrupt request enable control for DTRRX. Enables a common COMMIRQ interrupt request
                                    to be signaled based on the DCC status flags.
                                    0           No interrupt request generated by DTRRX.
                                    1           Interrupt request will be generated on RXfull == 1.
                                    If legacy COMMRX and COMMTX signals are implemented, then these are not affected by the
                                    value of this bit.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    TX, bit [29]
                                    DCC interrupt request enable control for DTRTX. Enables a common COMMIRQ interrupt request
                                    to be signaled based on the DCC status flags.
                                    0           No interrupt request generated by DTRTX.
                                    1           Interrupt request will be generated on TXfull == 0.
                                    If legacy COMMRX and COMMTX signals are implemented, then these are not affected by the
                                    value of this bit.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bits [28:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

G7-5520                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

                  Accessing the DBGDCCINT
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 0    000       000        0000         1110         0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —        If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5521
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.8        DBGDEVID, Debug Device ID register 0
                    The DBGDEVID characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Adds to the information given by the DBGDIDR by describing other features of the debug
                                     implementation.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     This register is required in all implementations.

                    Attributes
                                     DBGDEVID is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGDEVID bit assignments are:

                    31       28 27          24 23        20 19        16 15       12 11         8 7          4 3         0

                     CIDMask     AuxRegs      DoubleLock      VirtExtns                                         PCSample

                                                                                                                             WPAddrMask
                                                                                                                             BPAddrMask
                                                                                                                             VectorCatch

                    CIDMask, bits [31:28]
                                     Indicates the level of support for the Context ID matching breakpoint masking capability. Permitted
                                     values of this field are:
                                     0000           Context ID masking is not implemented.
                                     0001           Context ID masking is implemented.
                                     All other values are reserved. The value of this for ARMv8 is 0000.

                    AuxRegs, bits [27:24]
                                     Indicates support for Auxiliary registers. Permitted values for this field are:
                                     0000           None supported.
                                     0001           Support for External Debug Auxiliary Control Register, EDACR.
                                     All other values are reserved.

                    DoubleLock, bits [23:20]
                                     Indicates the presence of the DBGOSDLR, OS Double Lock Register. Permitted values of this field
                                     are:
                                     0000           The DBGOSDLR is not present.
                                     0001           The DBGOSDLR is present.
                                     All other values are reserved. The value of this for ARMv8 is 0001.

                    VirtExtns, bits [19:16]
                                     Indicates whether EL2 is implemented. Permitted values of this field are:
                                     0000           EL2 is not implemented.
                                     0001           EL2 is implemented.
                                     All other values are reserved.

G7-5522                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                  VectorCatch, bits [15:12]
                                 Defines the form of Vector Catch exception implemented. Permitted values of this field are:
                                 0000         Address matching Vector Catch exception implemented.
                                 0001         Exception matching Vector Catch exception implemented.
                                 All other values are reserved.

                  BPAddrMask, bits [11:8]
                                 Indicates the level of support for the instruction address matching breakpoint masking capability.
                                 Permitted values of this field are:
                                 0000         Breakpoint address masking might be implemented. If not implemented,
                                              DBGBCR<n>[28:24] is RAZ/WI.
                                 0001         Breakpoint address masking is implemented.
                                 1111         Breakpoint address masking is not implemented. DBGBCR<n>[28:24] is RES0.
                                 All other values are reserved. The value of this for ARMv8 is 1111.

                  WPAddrMask, bits [7:4]
                                 Indicates the level of support for the data address matching watchpoint masking capability.
                                 Permitted values of this field are:
                                 0000         Watchpoint address masking might be implemented. If not implemented,
                                              DBGWCR<n>.MASK (Address mask) is RAZ/WI.
                                 0001         Watchpoint address masking is implemented.
                                 1111         Watchpoint address masking is not implemented. DBGWCR<n>.MASK (Address
                                              mask) is RES0.
                                 All other values are reserved. The value of this for ARMv8 is 0001.

                  PCSample, bits [3:0]
                                 Indicates the level of PC Sample-based Profiling support using external debug registers. Permitted
                                 values of this field are:
                                 0000         PC Sample-based Profiling Extension is not implemented in the external debug registers
                                              space.
                                 0010         Only EDPCSR and EDCIDSR are implemented. This option is only permitted if EL3
                                              and EL2 are not implemented.
                                 0011         EDPCSR, EDCIDSR, and EDVIDSR are implemented.
                                 All other values are reserved.
                                 When ARMv8.2-PCSample is implemented, the only permitted value is 0b0000.

                                          Note
                                 ARMv8.2-PCSample implements the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension in the Performance
                                 Monitors register space, as indicated by the value of PMDEVID.PCSample.

                  Accessing the DBGDEVID
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc       CRm

                                                            p14, 0, <Rt>, c7, c2, 7    000       111      0111    1110         0010

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5523
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RO    RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5524                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.9      DBGDEVID1, Debug Device ID register 1
                  The DBGDEVID1 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Adds to the information given by the DBGDIDR by describing other features of the debug
                                 implementation.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 This register is required in all implementations.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGDEVID1 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDEVID1 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                    4 3          0

                                                          RES0                                            PCSROffset

                  Bits [31:4]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  PCSROffset, bits [3:0]
                                 This field indicates the offset applied to PC samples returned by reads of EDPCSR. Permitted values
                                 of this field in ARMv8 are:
                                 0000        EDPCSR not implemented.
                                                      Note
                                             In ARMv7, a PCSROffset value of 0000 has an alternative meaning that EDPCSR is
                                             implemented and returns values that have an offset applied and indicate the Instruction
                                             set state. This implementation option is not permitted in ARMv8.

                                 0010        EDPCSR implemented. Samples have no offset applied and do not sample the
                                             instruction set state in AArch32 state.
                                 When ARMv8.2-PCSample is implemented, the only permitted value is 0b0000.

                                           Note
                                 ARMv8.2-PCSample implements the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension in the Performance
                                 Monitors register space, as indicated by the value of PMDEVID.PCSample.

                  Accessing the DBGDEVID1
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5525
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p14, 0, <Rt>, c7, c1, 7    000       111        0111         1110         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5526                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.10     DBGDEVID2, Debug Device ID register 2
                  The DBGDEVID2 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Reserved for future descriptions of features of the debug implementation.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                  Attributes
                                  DBGDEVID2 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDEVID2 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                        0

                                                                  RES0

                  Bits [31:0]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Accessing the DBGDEVID2
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p14, 0, <Rt>, c7, c0, 7    000       111        0111         1110         0000

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RO     RO

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5527
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5528                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                  G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.11     DBGDIDR, Debug ID Register
                  The DBGDIDR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                      Specifies which version of the Debug architecture is implemented, and some features of the debug
                                      implementation.

                  Configurations
                                      There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                      If EL1 cannot use AArch32 then the implementation of this register is OPTIONAL and deprecated.

                  Attributes
                                      DBGDIDR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDIDR bit assignments are:

                  31          28 27          24 23      20 19         16 15 14 13 12 11                                   0

                       WRPs           BRPs     CTX_CMPs       Version                                 RES0

                                                                                                                                 SE_imp
                                                                                                                                  RES0
                                                                                                                              nSUHD_imp
                                                                                                                                  RES1

                  WRPs, bits [31:28]
                                      The number of watchpoints implemented, minus 1.
                                      Permitted values of this field are from 0b0001 for 2 implemented watchpoints, to 0b1111 for 16
                                      implemented watchpoints.
                                      The value of 0b0000 is reserved.
                                      If AArch64 is implemented, this field has the same value as ID_AA64DFR0_EL1.WRPs.

                  BRPs, bits [27:24]
                                      The number of breakpoints implemented, minus 1.
                                      Permitted values of this field are from 0b0001 for 2 implemented breakpoint, to 0b1111 for 16
                                      implemented breakpoints.
                                      The value of 0b0000 is reserved.
                                      If AArch64 is implemented, this field has the same value as ID_AA64DFR0_EL1.BRPs.

                  CTX_CMPs, bits [23:20]
                                      The number of breakpoints that can be used for Context matching, minus 1.
                                      Permitted values of this field are from 0b0000 for 1 Context matching breakpoint, to 0b1111 for 16
                                      Context matching breakpoints.
                                      The Context matching breakpoints must be the highest addressed breakpoints. For example, if six
                                      breakpoints are implemented and two are Context matching breakpoints, they must be breakpoints
                                      4 and 5.
                                      If AArch64 is implemented, this field has the same value as ID_AA64DFR0_EL1.CTX_CMPs.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5529
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Version, bits [19:16]
                                    The Debug architecture version. Defined values are:
                                    0001         ARMv6, v6 Debug architecture.
                                    0010         ARMv6, v6.1 Debug architecture.
                                    0011         ARMv7, v7 Debug architecture, with baseline CP14 registers implemented.
                                    0100         ARMv7, v7 Debug architecture, with all CP14 registers implemented.
                                    0101         ARMv7, v7.1 Debug architecture.
                                    0110         ARMv8, v8 Debug architecture.
                                    0111         ARMv8.1, v8 Debug architecture, with Virtualization Host Extensions.
                                    1000         ARMv8.2, v8.2 Debug architecture.
                                    All other values are reserved.
                                    ARMv8.2-Debug adds the functionality indicated by the value 1000.
                                    •       In any ARMv8 implementation, the values 0001, 0010, 0011, 0100, and 0101 are not permitted.
                                    •       If ARMv8.1-VHE is not implemented the only permitted value is 0110.
                                    •       In an ARMv8.0 implementation the value 1000 is not permitted.

                    Bit [15]
                                    Reserved, RES1.

                    nSUHD_imp, bit [14]
                                    In ARMv7-A, was Secure User Halting Debug not implemented.
                                    The value of this bit must match the value of the SE_imp bit.

                    Bit [13]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    SE_imp, bit [12]
                                    EL3 implemented. The meanings of the values of this bit are:
                                    0            EL3 not implemented.
                                    1            EL3 implemented.
                                    The value of this bit must match the value of the nSUHD_imp bit.

                    Bits [11:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the DBGDIDR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2    CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                               p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 0    000       000     0000   1110        0000

G7-5530                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       RO    RO        n/a    RO

                                                                               x        0        1       RO    RO        RO     RO

                                                                               x        1        1       RO    n/a       RO     RO

                  ARM deprecates any access to this register from EL0.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                        —      If DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                               mode.
                        —      If MDSCR_EL1.TDCC==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                               EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                               mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5531
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.12       DBGDRAR, Debug ROM Address Register
                    The DBGDRAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                     Defines the base physical address of a 4KB-aligned memory-mapped debug component, usually a
                                     ROM table that locates and describes the memory-mapped debug components in the system.
                                     ARMv8 deprecates any use of this register.

                    Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register DBGDRAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     MDRAR_EL1.
                                     If EL1 cannot use AArch32 then the implementation of this register is OPTIONAL and deprecated.

                    Attributes
                                     DBGDRAR is a 64-bit register that can also be accessed as a 32-bit value. If it is accessed as a 32-bit
                                     register, bits [31:0] are read.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGDRAR bit assignments are:

                    When accessing as a 32-bit register:

                    31                                                            12 11                             2 1 0

                                           ROMADDR[31:12]                                          RES0                Valid

                    ROMADDR[31:12], bits [31:12]
                                     Bits[31:12] of the ROM table physical address. Bits [11:0] of the address are zero.
                                     In an implementation that includes EL3, ROMADDR is an address in Non-secure memory. It is
                                     IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the ROM table is also accessible in Secure memory.

                    Bits [11:2]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                    Valid, bits [1:0]
                                     This field indicates whether the ROM Table address is valid. The permitted values of this field are:
                                     00          ROM Table address is not valid. Software must ignore ROMADDR.
                                     11          ROM Table address is valid.
                                     Other values are reserved.

                    When accessing as a 64-bit register:

              63                   48 47                                                         12 11              2 1 0

                      RES0                                 ROMADDR[47:12]                                  RES0        Valid

                    Bits [63:48]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

G7-5532                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                 G7.3 Debug registers

                  ROMADDR[47:12], bits [47:12]
                                  Bits[47:12] of the ROM table physical address.
                                  If the physical address size in bits (PAsize) is less than 48 then the register bits corresponding to
                                  ROMADDR [47:PAsize] are RES0.
                                  Bits [11:0] of the ROM table physical address are zero.
                                  ARM strongly recommends that bits ROMADDR[(PAsize-1):32] are zero in any system that
                                  supports AArch32 at the highest implemented Exception level.
                                  In an implementation that includes EL3, ROMADDR is an address in Non-secure memory. It is
                                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the ROM table is also accessible in Secure memory.

                  Bits [11:2]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  Valid, bits [1:0]
                                  This field indicates whether the ROM Table address is valid. The permitted values of this field are:
                                  00          ROM Table address is not valid. Software must ignore ROMADDR.
                                  11          ROM Table address is valid.
                                  Other values are reserved.

                  Accessing the DBGDRAR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                  opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p14, 0, <Rt>, c1, c0, 0   000       000      0001         1110         0000

                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                               <syntax>                    opc1          coproc       CRm

                                                                               p14, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c1     0000          1110         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                E2H      TGE       NS     EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                x        x         0      RO       RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                x        0         1      RO       RO           RO     RO

                                                                                x        1         1      RO       n/a          RO     RO

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                G7-5533
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.
                           —     If MDSCR_EL1.TDCC==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDRA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped
                                 to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDRA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.

G7-5534                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                               G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                 G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.13     DBGDSAR, Debug Self Address Register
                  The DBGDSAR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  In earlier versions of the ARM Architecture, this register defines the offset from the base address
                                  defined in DBGDRAR of the physical base address of the debug registers for the PE. ARMv8
                                  deprecates any use of this register.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  If EL1 cannot use AArch32 then the implementation of this register is OPTIONAL and deprecated.

                  Attributes
                                  DBGDSAR is a 64-bit register that can also be accessed as a 32-bit value. If it is accessed as a 32-bit
                                  register, bits [31:0] are read.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDSAR bit assignments are:

                  When accessing as a 32-bit register:

                  31                                                                                                    0

                                                                   Offset

                  Offset, bits [31:0]
                                  This register value is RAZ.

                  When accessing as a 64-bit register:

            63                                                                                                          0

                                                                Offset

                  Offset, bits [63:0]
                                  This register value is RAZ.

                  Accessing the DBGDSAR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                             p14, 0, <Rt>, c2, c0, 0     000       000      0010     1110        0000

                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5535
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                <syntax>                    opc1         coproc       CRm

                                                                                p14, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c2     0000         1110         0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0     EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO      RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO      RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO      n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.
                           —     If MDSCR_EL1.TDCC==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDRA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped
                                 to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDRA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5536                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.14     DBGDSCRext, Debug Status and Control Register, External View
                  The DBGDSCRext characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Main control register for the debug implementation.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register DBGDSCRext is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  MDSCR_EL1.
                                  This register is required in all implementations.
                                  This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                  values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                  using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                  architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  DBGDSCRext is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDSCRext bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11                7 6 5          2 1 0

                                                           NS                          RES0              MOE

     RES0                                                                                                                       RES0
     RXfull                                                                                                                      ERR
     TXfull                                                                                                                   UDCCdis
     RES0                                                                                                                       RES0
     RXO                                                                                                                         HDE
     TXU                                                                                                                      MDBGen
     RES0
     INTdis
     TDA
     RES0
     RES0
     SPNIDdis
     SPIDdis

                  Bit [31]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  RXfull, bit [30]
                                  DTRRX full. Used for save/restore of EDSCR.RXfull.
                                  When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                  as UNK/SBZP.
                                  When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                  EDSCR.RXfull.
                                  ARM deprecates use of this bit other than for save/restore. Use DBGDSCRint to access the DTRRX
                                  full status.
                                  Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.RXfull.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5537
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                    The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                    TXfull, bit [29]
                                    DTRTX full. Used for save/restore of EDSCR.TXfull.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                    as UNK/SBZP.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                    EDSCR.TXfull.
                                    ARM deprecates use of this bit other than for save/restore. Use DBGDSCRint to access the DTRTX
                                    full status.
                                    Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.TXfull.
                                    The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                    Bit [28]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    RXO, bit [27]
                                    Used for save/restore of EDSCR.RXO.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                    as UNK/SBZP.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                    EDSCR.RXO.
                                    Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.RXO.
                                    The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                    TXU, bit [26]
                                    Used for save/restore of EDSCR.TXU.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                    as UNK/SBZP.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                    EDSCR.TXU.
                                    Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.TXU.
                                    The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                    Bits [25:24]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    INTdis, bits [23:22]
                                    Used for save/restore of EDSCR.INTdis.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this field is RO, and software must treat
                                    it as UNK/SBZP.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this field is RW and holds the value of
                                    EDSCR.INTdis.
                                    Reads and writes of this field are indirect accesses to EDSCR.INTdis.
                                    The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                    TDA, bit [21]
                                    Used for save/restore of EDSCR.TDA.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                    as UNK/SBZP.
                                    When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                    EDSCR.TDA.

G7-5538                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                                  Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.TDA.
                                  The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                  Bit [20]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  SC2, bit [19]
                             In ARMv8.1
                                  Used for save/restore of EDSCR.SC2.
                                  When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                  as UNK/SBZP.
                                  When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                  EDSCR.SC2.
                                  Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.SC2.
                                  If the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension is not implemented, then this field is RES0.
                             In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.0.
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  NS, bit [18]
                                  Non-secure status. Returns the inverse of IsSecure(). This bit is RO.
                                  ARM deprecates use of this field.

                  SPNIDdis, bit [17]
                                  Secure privileged profiling disabled status bit. This bit is RO. Permitted values are:
                                  0           If EL3 is implemented, profiling allowed in Secure privileged modes.
                                  1           If EL3 is implemented, profiling prohibited in Secure privileged modes.
                                  This field is RES0 if EL3 is not implemented.
                                  Otherwise, the field reads as zero if any of the following apply, and as one otherwise:
                                  •      ARMv8.2-Debug is not implemented and ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled()
                                         returns TRUE.
                                  •      EL3 is using AArch32 and the value of SDCR.SPME is 1.
                                  •      EL3 is using AArch64 and the value of MDCR_EL3.SPME is 1.

                  SPIDdis, bit [16]
                                  Secure privileged AArch32 invasive self-hosted debug disabled status bit. This bit is RO and
                                  depends on the value of SDCR.SPD and the pseudocode function
                                  AArch32.SelfHostedSecurePrivilegedInvasiveDebugEnabled(). Permitted values are:
                                  0           Self-hosted debug enabled in Secure privileged AArch32 modes.
                                  1           Self-hosted debug disabled in Secure privileged AArch32 modes.
                                  This bit reads as 1 if any of the following is true and reads as 0 otherwise:
                                  •      SDCR.SPD has the value 10.
                                  •      SDCR.SPD has the value 00 and
                                         AArch32.SelfHostedSecurePrivilegedInvasiveDebugEnabled() returns FALSE.
                                  ARM deprecates use of this field.

                  MDBGen, bit [15]
                                  Monitor debug events enable. Enable Breakpoint, Watchpoint, and Vector Catch exceptions.
                                  0           Breakpoint, Watchpoint, and Vector Catch exceptions disabled.
                                  1           Breakpoint, Watchpoint, and Vector Catch exceptions enabled.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5539
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    HDE, bit [14]
                                      Used for save/restore of EDSCR.HDE.
                                      When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                      as UNK/SBZP.
                                      When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                      EDSCR.HDE.
                                      Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.HDE.
                                      The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                    Bit [13]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    UDCCdis, bit [12]
                                      Traps EL0 accesses to the DCC registers to Undefined mode.
                                      0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                      1           EL0 accesses to the DBGDSCRint, DBGDTRRXint, DBGDTRTXint, DBGDIDR,
                                                  DBGDSAR, and DBGDRAR are trapped to Undefined mode.

                                               Note
                                      All accesses to these registers are trapped, including LDC and STC accesses to DBGDTRTXint and
                                      DBGDTRRXint, and MRRC accesses to DBGDSAR and DBGDRAR.

                                      Traps of EL0 accesses to the DBGDTRRXint and DBGDTRTXint are ignored in Debug state.
                                      When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bits [11:7]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    ERR, bit [6]
                                      Used for save/restore of EDSCR.ERR.
                                      When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock is unlocked), this bit is RO, and software must treat it
                                      as UNK/SBZP.
                                      When DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 1 (the OS lock is locked), this bit is RW and holds the value of
                                      EDSCR.ERR.
                                      Reads and writes of this bit are indirect accesses to EDSCR.ERR.
                                      The architected behavior of this field determines the value it returns after a reset.

                    MOE, bits [5:2]
                                      Method of Entry for debug exception. When a debug exception is taken to an Exception level using
                                      AArch32, this field is set to indicate the event that caused the exception:
                                      0001        Breakpoint
                                      0011        Software breakpoint (BKPT) instruction
                                      0101        Vector catch
                                      1010        Watchpoint
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [1:0]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the DBGDSCRext
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

G7-5540                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c2, 2    000       010        0000         1110         0010

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  Individual fields within this register might have restricted accessibility when DBGOSLSR.OSLK == 0 (the OS lock
                  is unlocked.) See the field descriptions for more detail.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —        If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5541
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.15       DBGDSCRint, Debug Status and Control Register, Internal View
                    The DBGDSCRint characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Main control register for the debug implementation. This is an internal, read-only view.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    This register is required in all implementations.
                                    DBGDSCRint.{NS, SPNIDdis, SPIDdis, MDBGen, UDCCdis, MOE} are UNKNOWN when the
                                    register is accessed at EL0. However, although these values are not accessible at EL0 by instructions
                                    that are neither UNPREDICTABLE nor return UNKNOWN values, it is permissible for an
                                    implementation to return the values of DBGDSCRext.{NS, SPNIDdis, SPIDdis, MDBGen,
                                    UDCCdis, MOE} for these fields at EL0.
                                    It is also permissible for an implementation to return the same values as defined for a read of
                                    DBGDSCRint at EL1 or above. (This is the case even if the implementation does not support
                                    AArch32 at EL1 or above.)

                    Attributes
                                    DBGDSCRint is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGDSCRint bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28                           19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11                 6 5         2 1 0

                                          RES0               NS                            RES0            MOE

      RES0                                                                                                                        RES0
      RXfull                                                                                                                    UDCCdis
      TXfull                                                                                                                      RES0
      SPNIDdis                                                                                                                  MDBGen
      SPIDdis

                    Bit [31]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    RXfull, bit [30]
                                    DTRRX full. Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the EDSCR.

                    TXfull, bit [29]
                                    DTRTX full. Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the EDSCR.

                    Bits [28:19]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    NS, bit [18]
                                    Non-secure status.
                                    Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the DBGDSCRext. ARM deprecates use of this field.

                    SPNIDdis, bit [17]
                                    Secure privileged non-invasive debug disable.

G7-5542                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                  G7.3 Debug registers

                                    Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the DBGDSCRext. ARM deprecates use of this field.

                  SPIDdis, bit [16]
                                    Secure privileged invasive debug disable.
                                    Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the DBGDSCRext. ARM deprecates use of this field.

                  MDBGen, bit [15]
                                    Monitor debug events enable.
                                    Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the DBGDSCRext.

                  Bits [14:13]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  UDCCdis, bit [12]
                                    User mode access to Debug Communications Channel disable.
                                    Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the DBGDSCRext. ARM deprecates use of this field.

                  Bits [11:6]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  MOE, bits [5:2]
                                    Method of Entry for debug exception. When a debug exception is taken to an Exception level using
                                    AArch32, this field is set to indicate the event that caused the exception:
                                    0001        Breakpoint
                                    0011        Software breakpoint (BKPT) instruction
                                    0101        Vector catch
                                    1010        Watchpoint
                                    Read-only view of the equivalent bit in the DBGDSCRext.

                  Bits [1:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  Accessing the DBGDSCRint
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                               p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c1, 0    000       000      0000    1110       0001

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5543
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO    RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO    RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO    n/a       RO    RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.
                           —     If MDSCR_EL1.TDCC==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5544                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.16     DBGDTRRXext, Debug OS Lock Data Transfer Register, Receive, External View
                  The DBGDTRRXext characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Used for save/restore of DBGDTRRXint. It is a component of the Debug Communications Channel.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGDTRRXext is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 OSDTRRX_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGDTRRXext is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDTRRXext bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                  Update DTRRX without side-effect

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Update DTRRX without side-effect.
                                 Writes to this register update the value in DTRRX and do not change RXfull.
                                 Reads of this register return the last value written to DTRRX and do not change RXfull.
                                 For the full behavior of the Debug Communications Channel, see Chapter H4 The Debug
                                 Communication Channel and Instruction Transfer Register.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Accessing the DBGDTRRXext
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                            p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c0, 2    000       010      0000    1110       0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5545
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RW        n/a   RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RW        RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    ARM deprecates reads and writes of DBGDTRRXext through the System register interface when the OS lock is
                    unlocked.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5546                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.17     DBGDTRRXint, Debug Data Transfer Register, Receive
                  The DBGDTRRXint characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Transfers data from an external debugger to the PE. For example, it is used by a debugger
                                 transferring commands and data to a debug target. It is a component of the Debug Communications
                                 Channel.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGDTRRXint is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 DBGDTRRX_EL0.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGDTRRXint is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 DBGDTRRX_EL0.
                                 This register is in the Cold reset domain. On a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                 architecturally UNKNOWN values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGDTRRXint is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDTRRXint bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                  0

                                                            Update DTRRX

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Update DTRRX.
                                 If RXfull is set to 1, then reads of this register return the last value written to DTRRX and clear
                                 RXfull to 0.
                                 For the full behavior of the Debug Communications Channel, see Chapter H4 The Debug
                                 Communication Channel and Instruction Transfer Register.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Accessing the DBGDTRRXint
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc         CRm

                                                            p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c5, 0    000       000      0000     1110           0101

                  Data can be stored to memory from this register using STC.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5547
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO    RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO    RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO    n/a       RO    RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules, in Non-debug state:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.
                           —     If MDSCR_EL1.TDCC==1, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                             Note
                    Read accesses to this register are not trapped in Debug state.

G7-5548                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.18     DBGDTRTXext, Debug OS Lock Data Transfer Register, Transmit
                  The DBGDTRTXext characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Used for save/restore of DBGDTRTXint. It is a component of the Debug Communication Channel.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGDTRTXext is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 OSDTRTX_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGDTRTXext is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDTRTXext bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                   Return DTRTX without side-effect

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Return DTRTX without side-effect.
                                 Reads of this register return the value in DTRTX and do not change TXfull.
                                 Writes of this register update the value in DTRTX and do not change TXfull.
                                 For the full behavior of the Debug Communications Channel, see Chapter H4 The Debug
                                 Communication Channel and Instruction Transfer Register.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Accessing the DBGDTRTXext
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                            p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c3, 2    000       010      0000    1110       0011

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5549
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RW        n/a   RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RW        RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    ARM deprecates reads and writes of DBGDTRTXext through the System register interface when the OS lock is
                    unlocked.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5550                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.19     DBGDTRTXint, Debug Data Transfer Register, Transmit
                  The DBGDTRTXint characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Transfers data from the PE to an external debugger. For example, it is used by a debug target to
                                 transfer data to the debugger. It is a component of the Debug Communication Channel.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGDTRTXint is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 DBGDTRTX_EL0.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGDTRTXint is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 DBGDTRTX_EL0.
                                 This register is in the Cold reset domain. On a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                 architecturally UNKNOWN values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGDTRTXint is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGDTRTXint bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                  0

                                                            Return DTRTX

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Return DTRTX.
                                 If TXfull is set to 0, then writes of this register update the value in DTRTX and set TXfull to 1.
                                 For the full behavior of the Debug Communications Channel, see Chapter H4 The Debug
                                 Communication Channel and Instruction Transfer Register.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Accessing the DBGDTRTXint
                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc         CRm

                                                            p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c5, 0    000       000      0000     1110           0101

                  Data can be loaded from memory into this register using LDC (immediate) and LDC (literal).

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5551
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       WO    WO        n/a   WO

                                                                                 x        0        1       WO    WO        WO    WO

                                                                                 x        1        1       WO    n/a       WO    WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules, in Non-debug state:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis==1, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.
                           —     If MDSCR_EL1.TDCC==1, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, write accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                             Note
                    Write accesses to this register are not trapped in Debug state.

G7-5552                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.20     DBGOSDLR, Debug OS Double Lock Register
                  The DBGOSDLR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Locks out the external debug interface.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGOSDLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 OSDLR_EL1.
                                 This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                 values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                 using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                 architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGOSDLR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGOSDLR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                1 0

                                                               RES0

                                                                                                                                DLK

                  Bits [31:1]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  DLK, bit [0]
                                 OS Double Lock control bit. Possible values are:
                                 0           OS Double Lock unlocked.
                                 1           OS Double Lock locked, if DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ (Core no powerdown request)
                                             bit is set to 0 and the PE is in Non-debug state.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Accessing the DBGOSDLR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc    CRm

                                                             p14, 0, <Rt>, c1, c3, 4    000       100      0001     1110      0011

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5553
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RW        n/a   RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RW        RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDOSA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDOSA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDOSA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5554                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.21     DBGOSECCR, Debug OS Lock Exception Catch Control Register
                  The DBGOSECCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides a mechanism for an operating system to access the contents of EDECCR that are otherwise
                                 invisible to software, so it can save/restore the contents of EDECCR over powerdown on behalf of
                                 the external debugger.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGOSECCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 OSECCR_EL1.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGOSECCR is architecturally mapped to External register EDECCR.
                                 If OSLSR.OSLK == 0 then DBGOSECCR returns an UNKNOWN value on reads and ignores writes.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGOSECCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGOSECCR bit assignments are:

                  When OSLSR.OSLK==1:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                               EDECCR

                  EDECCR, bits [31:0]
                                 Used for save/restore to EDECCR over powerdown.
                                 Reads or writes to this field are indirect accesses to EDECCR.

                  Accessing the DBGOSECCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                            p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c6, 2    000       010      0000    1110       0110

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5555
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     RW        n/a   RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     RW        RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5556                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.22     DBGOSLAR, Debug OS Lock Access Register
                  The DBGOSLAR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides a lock for the debug registers. The OS lock also disables some debug exceptions and debug
                                 events.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGOSLAR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 OSLAR_EL1.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGOSLAR is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 OSLAR_EL1.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGOSLAR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGOSLAR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                           OS Lock Access

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 OS Lock Access. Writing the value 0xC5ACCE55 to the DBGOSLAR sets the OS lock to 1. Writing
                                 any other value sets the OS lock to 0.
                                 Use DBGOSLSR.OSLK to check the current status of the lock.

                  Accessing the DBGOSLAR
                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                            p14, 0, <Rt>, c1, c0, 4    000       100      0001    1110       0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5557
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     WO        n/a   WO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     WO        WO    WO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       WO    WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TDOSA==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2
                                 using AArch64.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TDOSA==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDOSA==1, write accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3
                                 using AArch64.

G7-5558                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.23     DBGOSLSR, Debug OS Lock Status Register
                  The DBGOSLSR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Provides status information for the OS lock.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register DBGOSLSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  OSLSR_EL1.
                                  The OS lock status is also visible in the external debug interface through EDPRSR.
                                  This register is in the Cold reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                  values. On a Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is using
                                  AArch32. Otherwise, on a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN
                                  values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                  Attributes
                                  DBGOSLSR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGOSLSR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                       4 3 2 1 0

                                                           RES0

                                                                                                                              OSLM[0]
                                                                                                                                 OSLK
                                                                                                                                  nTT
                                                                                                                              OSLM[1]

                  Bits [31:4]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  OSLM[1], bit [3]
                                  See below for description of the OSLM field.

                  nTT, bit [2]
                                  Not 32-bit access. This bit is always RAZ. It indicates that a 32-bit access is needed to write the key
                                  to the OS Lock Access Register.

                  OSLK, bit [1]
                                  OS Lock Status. The possible values are:
                                  0           OS lock unlocked.
                                  1           OS lock locked.
                                  The OS lock is locked and unlocked by writing to the OS Lock Access Register.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5559
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    OSLM[0], bit [0]
                                     OS lock model implemented. Identifies the form of OS save and restore mechanism implemented.
                                     In ARMv8 these bits are as follows:
                                     10          OS lock implemented. DBGOSSRR not implemented.
                                     All other values are reserved.

                    Accessing the DBGOSLSR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p14, 0, <Rt>, c1, c1, 4   000       100        0001         1110         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If MDCR_EL2.TDOSA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HDCR.TDOSA==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —       If MDCR_EL3.TDOSA==1, read accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5560                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.24     DBGPRCR, Debug Power Control Register
                  The DBGPRCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Controls behavior of the PE on powerdown request.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register DBGPRCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 DBGPRCR_EL1.
                                 Bit [0] of this register is mapped to EDPRCR.CORENPDRQ, bit [0] of the external view of this
                                 register.
                                 The other bits in these registers are not mapped to each other.
                                 This register is in the Cold reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                 values. On a Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is using
                                 AArch32. Otherwise, on a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN
                                 values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                  Attributes
                                 DBGPRCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGPRCR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                               1 0

                                                               RES0

                                                                                                                         CORENPDRQ

                  Bits [31:1]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  CORENPDRQ, bit [0]
                                 Core no powerdown request. Requests emulation of powerdown. Possible values of this bit are:
                                 0           If the system responds to a powerdown request, it powers down Core power domain.
                                 1           If the system responds to a powerdown request, it does not powerdown the Core power
                                             domain, but instead emulates a powerdown of that domain.
                                 Writes to this bit are permitted regardless of the state of the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                 authentication interface. This means that a debugger can request Core no powerdown regardless of
                                 whether invasive debug is permitted.
                                 It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this bit is reset to the value of EDPRCR.COREPURQ on
                                 exit from an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED software-visible retention state.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to the value of
                                 EDPRCR.COREPURQ.

                  Accessing the DBGPRCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5561
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p14, 0, <Rt>, c1, c4, 4    000       100        0001         1110         0100

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If MDCR_EL2.TDOSA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HDCR.TDOSA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —       If MDCR_EL3.TDOSA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5562                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.25     DBGVCR, Debug Vector Catch Register
                  The DBGVCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Controls Vector Catch debug events.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register DBGVCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  DBGVCR32_EL2.
                                  This register is required in all implementations.
                                  This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                  to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  DBGVCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The DBGVCR bit assignments are:

                  When EL3 implemented and using AArch32:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24                         16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                    RES0                 MI                        SI      SP SS SU

     NSF                                                                                                                       RES0
     NSI                                                                                                                         SD
     RES0                                                                                                                      RES0
     NSD                                                                                                                         SF
     NSP                                                                                                                       RES0
     NSS                                                                                                                         MS
     NSU                                                                                                                         MP
                                                                                                                                 MD
                                                                                                                               RES0
                                                                                                                                 MF

                  NSF, bit [31]
                                  FIQ vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                  The exception vector offset is 0x1C.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  NSI, bit [30]
                                  IRQ vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                  The exception vector offset is 0x18.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bit [29]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  NSD, bit [28]
                                  Data Abort vector catch enable in Non-secure state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5563
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                      The exception vector offset is 0x10.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    NSP, bit [27]
                                      Prefetch Abort vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x0C.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    NSS, bit [26]
                                      Supervisor Call (SVC) vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x08.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    NSU, bit [25]
                                      Undefined Instruction vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x04.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [24:16]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    MF, bit [15]
                                      FIQ vector catch enable in Monitor mode.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x1C.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    MI, bit [14]
                                      IRQ vector catch enable in Monitor mode.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x18.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bit [13]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    MD, bit [12]
                                      Data Abort vector catch enable in Monitor mode.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x10.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    MP, bit [11]
                                      Prefetch Abort vector catch enable in Monitor mode.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x0C.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    MS, bit [10]
                                      Secure Monitor Call (SMC) vector catch enable in Monitor mode.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x08.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [9:8]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

G7-5564                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                  G7.3 Debug registers

                  SF, bit [7]
                                     FIQ vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x1C.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SI, bit [6]
                                     IRQ vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x18.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bit [5]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  SD, bit [4]
                                     Data Abort vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x10.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SP, bit [3]
                                     Prefetch Abort vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x0C.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SS, bit [2]
                                     Supervisor Call (SVC) vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x08.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SU, bit [1]
                                     Undefined Instruction vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x04.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bit [0]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  When EL3 implemented and using AArch64:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24                                                       8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                                   RES0                               SI     SP SS SU

     NSF                                                                                                                        RES0
     NSI                                                                                                                          SD
     RES0                                                                                                                       RES0
     NSD                                                                                                                          SF
     NSP
     NSS
     NSU

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5565
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    NSF, bit [31]
                                       FIQ vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x1C.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    NSI, bit [30]
                                       IRQ vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x18.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bit [29]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    NSD, bit [28]
                                       Data Abort vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x10.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    NSP, bit [27]
                                       Prefetch Abort vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x0C.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    NSS, bit [26]
                                       Supervisor Call (SVC) vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x08.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    NSU, bit [25]
                                       Undefined Instruction vector catch enable in Non-secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x04.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [24:8]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    SF, bit [7]
                                       FIQ vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x1C.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    SI, bit [6]
                                       IRQ vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x18.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bit [5]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

                    SD, bit [4]
                                       Data Abort vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                       The exception vector offset is 0x10.

G7-5566                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                  G7.3 Debug registers

                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SP, bit [3]
                                     Prefetch Abort vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x0C.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SS, bit [2]
                                     Supervisor Call (SVC) vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x08.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SU, bit [1]
                                     Undefined Instruction vector catch enable in Secure state.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x04.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bit [0]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  When EL3 not implemented:

                  31                                                                            8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                       RES0                                        F I      D P S U

                                                                                                                                RES0
                                                                                                                                RES0

                  Bits [31:8]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  F, bit [7]
                                     FIQ vector catch enable.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x1C.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  I, bit [6]
                                     IRQ vector catch enable.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x18.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  Bit [5]
                                     Reserved, RES0.

                  D, bit [4]
                                     Data Abort vector catch enable.
                                     The exception vector offset is 0x10.
                                     This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  P, bit [3]
                                     Prefetch Abort vector catch enable.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5567
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                      The exception vector offset 0x0C.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    S, bit [2]
                                      Supervisor Call (SVC) vector catch enable.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x08.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    U, bit [1]
                                      Undefined Instruction vector catch enable.
                                      The exception vector offset is 0x04.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bit [0]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the DBGVCR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                 <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                 p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c7, 0    000       000        0000         1110         0111

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                   x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                                   x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5568                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                            G7.3 Debug registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •   When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                      —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5569
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.26       DBGWCR<n>, Debug Watchpoint Control Registers, n = 0 - 15
                    The DBGWCR<n> characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Holds control information for a watchpoint. Forms watchpoint n together with value register
                                    DBGWVR<n>.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register DBGWCR<n> is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    DBGWCR<n>_EL1.
                                    AArch32 System register DBGWCR<n> is architecturally mapped to External register
                                    DBGWCR<n>_EL1.
                                    If breakpoint n is not implemented then this register is unallocated.
                                    This register is in the Cold reset domain. On a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                    architecturally UNKNOWN values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                    Attributes
                                    DBGWCR<n> is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGWCR<n> bit assignments are:

                    31    29 28             24 23     21 20 19         16 15 14 13 12                      5 4 3 2 1 0

                     RES0          MASK         RES0             LBN      SSC                BAS             LSC PAC E

      WT                                                                                                                             HMC

                    When the E field is zero, all the other fields in the register are ignored.

                    Bits [31:29]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    MASK, bits [28:24]
                                    Address mask. Only objects up to 2GB can be watched using a single mask.
                                    00000           No mask.
                                    00001           Reserved.
                                    00010           Reserved.
                                    If programmed with a reserved value, a watchpoint must behave as if either:
                                    •       MASK has been programmed with a defined value, which might be 0 (no mask), other than
                                            for a direct read of DBGWCRn_EL1.
                                    •       The watchpoint is disabled.
                                    Software must not rely on this property because the behavior of reserved values might change in a
                                    future revision of the architecture.
                                    Other values mask the corresponding number of address bits, from 0b00011 masking 3 address bits
                                    (0x00000007 mask for address) to 0b11111 masking 31 address bits (0x7FFFFFFF mask for address).
                                    This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

G7-5570                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

                  Bits [23:21]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  WT, bit [20]
                                  Watchpoint type. Possible values are:
                                  0           Unlinked data address match.
                                  1           Linked data address match.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  LBN, bits [19:16]
                                  Linked breakpoint number. For Linked data address watchpoints, this specifies the index of the
                                  Context-matching breakpoint linked to.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  SSC, bits [15:14]
                                  Security state control. Determines the Security states under which a Watchpoint debug event for
                                  watchpoint n is generated. This field must be interpreted along with the HMC and PAC fields.
                                  For more information on the operation of the SSC, HMC, and PAC fields, see Execution conditions
                                  for which a watchpoint generates Watchpoint exceptions on page G2-4784.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  HMC, bit [13]
                                  Higher mode control. Determines the debug perspective for deciding when a Watchpoint debug
                                  event for watchpoint n is generated. This field must be interpreted along with the SSC and PAC
                                  fields.
                                  For more information on the operation of the SSC, HMC, and PAC fields, see Execution conditions
                                  for which a watchpoint generates Watchpoint exceptions on page G2-4784.
                                  This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  BAS, bits [12:5]
                                  Byte address select. Each bit of this field selects whether a byte from within the word or
                                  double-word addressed by DBGWVR<n> is being watched.

                                                                                      BAS           Description

                                                                                      xxxxxxx1      Match byte at DBGWVR<n>

                                                                                      xxxxxx1x      Match byte at DBGWVR<n>+1

                                                                                      xxxxx1xx      Match byte at DBGWVR<n>+2

                                                                                      xxxx1xxx      Match byte at DBGWVR<n>+3

                                  In cases where DBGWVR<n> addresses a double-word:

                                                                             BAS          Description, if DBGWVR<n>[2] == 0

                                                                             xxx1xxxx     Match byte at DBGWVR<n>+4

                                                                             xx1xxxxx     Match byte at DBGWVR<n>+5

                                                                             x1xxxxxx     Match byte at DBGWVR<n>+6

                                                                             1xxxxxxx     Match byte at DBGWVR<n>+7

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5571
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                      If DBGWVR<n>[2] == 1, only BAS[3:0] are used and BAS[7:4] are ignored. ARM deprecates
                                      setting DBGWVR<n>[2] == 1.
                                      The valid values for BAS are non-zero binary numbers all of whose set bits are contiguous. All other
                                      values are reserved and must not be used by software. See Reserved DBGWCR<n>.BAS values on
                                      page G2-4792
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    LSC, bits [4:3]
                                      Load/store control. This field enables watchpoint matching on the type of access being made.
                                      Possible values of this field are:
                                      01          Match instructions that load from a watchpointed address.
                                      10          Match instructions that store to a watchpointed address.
                                      11          Match instructions that load from or store to a watchpointed address.
                                      All other values are reserved, but must behave as if the watchpoint is disabled. Software must not
                                      rely on this property as the behavior of reserved values might change in a future revision of the
                                      architecture.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    PAC, bits [2:1]
                                      Privilege of access control. Determines the Exception level or levels at which a Watchpoint debug
                                      event for watchpoint n is generated. This field must be interpreted along with the SSC and HMC
                                      fields.
                                      For more information on the operation of the SSC, HMC, and PAC fields, see Execution conditions
                                      for which a watchpoint generates Watchpoint exceptions on page G2-4784.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    E, bit [0]
                                      Enable watchpoint n. Possible values are:
                                      0           Watchpoint disabled.
                                      1           Watchpoint enabled.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Accessing the DBGWCR<n>
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                         <syntax>                         opc1      opc2     CRn    coproc      CRm

                                                         p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, <CRm>, 7       000       111      0000   1110        n<3:0>

                    •      <CRm> is in the range c0 - c15.

G7-5572                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                 Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H    TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x      x        0       -     RW        n/a    RW

                                                                                 x      0        1       -     RW        RW     RW

                                                                                 x      1        1       -     n/a       RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                  •     If the register access does not generate an exception:
                        —      If EDSCR.TDA==1, and DBGOSLSR.OSLK==0, and halting is allowed, accesses to this register
                               from PL1 and PL2 generate a Software Access debug event.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5573
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.27       DBGWFAR, Debug Watchpoint Fault Address Register
                    The DBGWFAR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Previously returned information about the address of the instruction that accessed a watchpointed
                                    address. Is now deprecated and RES0.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.

                    Attributes
                                    DBGWFAR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGWFAR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                        0

                                                                    RES0

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the DBGWFAR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, c6, 0    000       000        0000         1110         0110

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

G7-5574                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5575
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.28       DBGWVR<n>, Debug Watchpoint Value Registers, n = 0 - 15
                    The DBGWVR<n> characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                      Holds a data address value for use in watchpoint matching. Forms watchpoint n together with
                                      control register DBGWCR<n>.

                    Configurations
                                      There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                      AArch32 System register DBGWVR<n> is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                      DBGWVR<n>_EL1[31:0].
                                      AArch32 System register DBGWVR<n> is architecturally mapped to External register
                                      DBGWVR<n>_EL1[31:0].
                                      If breakpoint n is not implemented then this register is unallocated.
                                      This register is in the Cold reset domain. On a Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                      architecturally UNKNOWN values.The register is not affected by a Warm reset.

                    Attributes
                                      DBGWVR<n> is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DBGWVR<n> bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              2 1 0

                                                                    VA

                                                                                                                                       RES0

                    VA, bits [31:2]
                                      Bits[31:2] of the address value for comparison.
                                      ARM deprecates setting DBGWVR<n>[2] == 1.
                                      This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    Bits [1:0]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the DBGWVR<n>
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5576                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                     <syntax>                         opc1      opc2         CRn     coproc       CRm

                                                     p14, 0, <Rt>, c0, <CRm>, 6       000       110          0000    1110         n<3:0>

                  •     <CRm> is in the range c0 - c15.

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1     EL2     EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       -          RW      n/a     RW

                                                                               x        0        1       -          RW      RW      RW

                                                                               x        1        1       -          n/a     RW      RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TDA==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

                  •     If the register access does not generate an exception then:
                        —      If EDSCR.TDA==1, and DBGOSLSR.OSLK==0, and halting is allowed, accesses to this register
                               from PL1 and PL2 generate a Software Access debug event.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            G7-5577
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.29       DLR, Debug Link Register
                    The DLR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    In Debug state, holds the address to restart from.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register DLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    DLR_EL0[31:0].

                    Attributes
                                    DLR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DLR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                      0

                                                                Restart address

                    Bits [31:0]
                                    Restart address.

                    Accessing the DLR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                  opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 3, <Rt>, c4, c5, 1   011       001      0100         1111         0101

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H     TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x       x        0       RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                  x       0        1       RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                                  x       1        1       RW       n/a          RW     RW

G7-5578                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                  Access to this register is from Debug state only. During normal execution this register is unallocated.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5579
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.30         DSPSR, Debug Saved Program Status Register
                    The DSPSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Holds the saved process state on entry to Debug state.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register DSPSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       DSPSR_EL0.

                    Attributes
                                       DSPSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The DSPSR bit assignments are:

                    When entering Debug state from AArch32 and exiting Debug state to AArch32:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19             16 15               10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3                   0

                    N Z C V Q                  J      SS IL      GE             IT[7:2]        E A I F T             M[3:0]

      IT[1:0]                                                                                                                           M[4]
      RES0
      PAN

                    N, bit [31]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.N on entering Debug state, and copied to CPSR.N on exiting Debug state.

                    Z, bit [30]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Z on entering Debug state, and copied to CPSR.Z on exiting Debug state.

                    C, bit [29]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.C on entering Debug state, and copied to CPSR.C on exiting Debug state.

                    V, bit [28]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.V on entering Debug state, and copied to CPSR.V on exiting Debug state.

                    Q, bit [27]
                                       Set to the value of CPSR.Q on entering Debug state, and copied to CPSR.Q on exiting Debug state.

                    IT[1:0], bits [26:25]
                                       IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. See IT[7:2] for explanation of this field.

                    J, bit [24]
                                       RES0.

                                       In previous versions of the architecture, the {J, T} bits determined the AArch32 Instruction set state.
                                       ARMv8 does not support either Jazelle state or T32EE state, and the T bit determines the Instruction
                                       set state.

                    Bit [23]
                                       Reserved, RES0.

G7-5580                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                  G7.3 Debug registers

                  PAN, bit [22]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is implemented, set to the value of CPSR.PAN on entering Debug state, and
                                    copied to CPSR.PAN on exiting Debug state.
                                    When ARMv8.1-PAN is not implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                 In ARMv8.0.
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                  SS, bit [21]
                                    Software step. Shows the value of PSTATE.SS immediately before Debug state was entered.

                  IL, bit [20]
                                    Illegal Execution state bit. Shows the value of PSTATE.IL immediately before Debug state was
                                    entered.

                  GE, bits [19:16]
                                    Greater than or Equal flags, for parallel addition and subtraction.

                  IT[7:2], bits [15:10]
                                    IT block state bits for the T32 IT (If-Then) instruction. This field must be interpreted in two parts.
                                    •      IT[7:5] holds the base condition for the IT block. The base condition is the top 3 bits of the
                                           condition code specified by the first condition field of the IT instruction.
                                    •      IT[4:0] encodes the size of the IT block, which is the number of instructions that are to be
                                           conditionally executed, by the position of the least significant 1 in this field. It also encodes
                                           the value of the least significant bit of the condition code for each instruction in the block.
                                    The IT field is 0b00000000 when no IT block is active.

                  E, bit [9]
                                    Endianness state bit. Controls the load and store endianness for data accesses:
                                    0           Little-endian operation
                                    1           Big-endian operation.
                                    Instruction fetches ignore this bit.
                                    When the reset value of the SCTLR.EE bit is defined by a configuration input signal, that value also
                                    applies to the CPSR.E bit on reset, and therefore applies to software execution from reset.
                                    If an implementation does not provide Big-endian support, this bit is RES0. If it does not provide
                                    Little-endian support, this bit is RES1.
                                    If an implementation provides Big-endian support but only at EL0, this bit is RES0 for an exception
                                    return to any Exception level other than EL0.
                                    Likewise, if it provides Little-endian support only at EL0, this bit is RES1 for an exception return to
                                    any Exception level other than EL0.

                  A, bit [8]
                                    SError interrupt mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

                  I, bit [7]
                                    IRQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Exception not masked.
                                    1           Exception masked.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5581
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    F, bit [6]
                                      FIQ mask bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Exception not masked.
                                      1            Exception masked.

                    T, bit [5]
                                      T32 Instruction set state bit. Determines the AArch32 instruction set state that the Debug state entry
                                      was taken from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      0            Taken from A32 state.
                                      1            Taken from T32 state.

                    M[4], bit [4]
                                      Execution state that Debug state was entered from. Possible values of this bit are:
                                      1            Exception taken from AArch32.

                    M[3:0], bits [3:0]
                                      AArch32 mode that Debug state was entered from. The possible values are:

                                          M[3:0]      Mode

                                          0b0000      User

                                          0b0001      FIQ

                                          0b0010      IRQ

                                          0b0011      Supervisor

                                          0b0110      Monitor (only valid in Secure state, if EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32)

                                          0b0111      Abort

                                          0b1010      Hyp

                                          0b1011      Undefined

                                          0b1111      System

                                      Other values are reserved. The effect of programming this field to a Reserved value is that behavior
                                      is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, as described in Reserved values in System and memory-mapped
                                      registers and translation table entries on page K1-6411.

                    Accessing the DSPSR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                   <syntax>                  opc1     opc2     CRn      coproc      CRm

                                                                   p15, 3, <Rt>, c4, c5, 0   011      000      0100     1111        0101

G7-5582                          Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                               G7.3 Debug registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       RW    RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       RW    RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       RW    n/a       RW     RW

                  Access to this register is from Debug state only. During normal execution this register is unallocated.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5583
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.31       HDCR, Hyp Debug Control Register
                    The HDCR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Controls the trapping to Hyp mode of Non-secure accesses, at EL1 or lower, to functions provided
                                    by the debug and trace architectures and the Performance Monitors Extension.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register HDCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    MDCR_EL2.
                                    If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                    This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                    values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                    using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                    architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    HDCR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The HDCR bit assignments are:

                    31                                       18 17 16            12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4                        0

                                        RES0                             RES0                                    HPMN

      HPMD                                                                                                                       TPMCR
                                                                                                                                   TPM
                                                                                                                                  HPME
                                                                                                                                   TDE
                                                                                                                                   TDA
                                                                                                                                 TDOSA
                                                                                                                                  TDRA

                    Bits [31:18]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    HPMD, bit [17]
                                 In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                    Guest Performance Monitors Disable. This control prohibits event counting at EL2. Permitted
                                    values are:
                                    0           Event counting allowed in Hyp mode.
                                    1           Event counting prohibited in Hyp mode.
                                                In an ARMv8.1 implementation, event counting is prohibited unless enabled by the
                                                IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface
                                                ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled().
                                    This control applies only to:
                                    •      The event counters in the range [0..(HPMN-1)].
                                    •      If PMCR.DP is set to 1, PMCCNTR.
                                    The other event counters are unaffected. When PMCR.DP is set to 0, PMCCNTR is unaffected.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

G7-5584                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

                             In ARMv8.0.
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  Bits [16:12]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  TDRA, bit [11]
                                 Trap Debug ROM Address register access. Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 System register accesses
                                 to the Debug ROM registers to Hyp mode.
                                 0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                 1           Non-secure EL0 and EL1 System register accesses to the DBGDRAR or DBGDSAR
                                             are trapped to Hyp mode, unless it is trapped by DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis.
                                 If HCR.TGE or HDCR.TDE is 1, behavior is as if this bit is 1 other than for the purpose of a direct
                                 read.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TDOSA, bit [10]
                                 Trap debug OS-related register access. Traps Non-secure EL1 System register accesses to the
                                 powerdown debug registers to Hyp mode.
                                 0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                 1           Non-secure EL1 System register accesses to the powerdown debug registers are trapped
                                             to Hyp mode.
                                 The registers for which accesses are trapped are as follows:
                                 •      DBGOSLSR, DBGOSLAR, DBGOSDLR, and the DBGPRCR.
                                 •      Any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED register with similar functionality that the implementation
                                        specifies as trapped by this bit.

                                          Note
                                 These registers are not accessible at EL0.

                                 If HCR.TGE or HDCR.TDE is 1, behavior is as if this bit is 1 other than for the purpose of a direct
                                 read.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TDA, bit [9]
                                 Trap debug access. Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 System register accesses to those debug System
                                 registers in the (coproc==1110) encoding space that are not trapped by either of the following:
                                 •      HDCR.TDRA.
                                 •      HDCR.TDOSA.
                                 0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                 1           Non-secure EL0 or EL1 System register accesses to the debug registers, other than the
                                             registers trapped by HDCR.TDRA and HDCR.TDOSA, are trapped to Hyp mode,
                                             unless it is trapped by DBGDSCRext.UDCCdis.
                                 Traps of AArch32 accesses to DBGDTRRXint and DBGDTRTXint are ignored in Debug state.
                                 If HCR.TGE or HDCR.TDE is 1, behavior is as if this bit is 1 other than for the purpose of a direct
                                 read.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  TDE, bit [8]
                                 Trap Debug exceptions. The possible values of this bit are:
                                 0           This control has no effect on the routing of debug exceptions, and has no effect on
                                             Non-secure accesses to debug registers.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5585
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                    1           In Non-secure state:
                                                •      Debug exceptions generated at EL1 or EL0 are routed to EL2.
                                                •      The HDCR.{TDRA, TDOSA, TDA} fields are treated as being 1 for all purposes
                                                       other than returning the result of a direct read of the register.
                                    When HCR.TGE == 1, the PE behaves as if the value of this field is 1 for all purposes other than
                                    returning the value of a direct read of the register.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    HPME, bit [7]
                                    Hypervisor Performance Monitors Counters Enable. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           Hyp mode Performance Monitors counters disabled.
                                    1           Hyp mode Performance Monitors counters enabled.
                                    When the value of this bit is 1, the Performance Monitors counters that are reserved for use from
                                    Hyp mode or Secure state are enabled. For more information see the description of the HPMN field.
                                    If the Performance Monitors Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.
                                    If this field is implemented as an RW field, it resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    TPM, bit [6]
                                    Trap Performance Monitors accesses. Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to all Performance
                                    Monitors registers to Hyp mode.
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to all Performance Monitors registers are trapped to
                                                Hyp mode.

                                             Note
                                    EL2 does not provide traps on Performance Monitor register accesses through the optional
                                    memory-mapped external debug interface.

                                    If the Performance Monitors Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                    TPMCR, bit [5]
                                    Trap PMCR accesses. Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to the PMCR to Hyp mode.
                                    0           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    1           Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to the PMCR are trapped to Hyp mode, unless it is
                                                trapped by PMUSERENR.EN.

                                             Note
                                    EL2 does not provide traps on Performance Monitor register accesses through the optional
                                    memory-mapped external debug interface.

                                    If the Performance Monitors Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                    HPMN, bits [4:0]
                                    Defines the number of Performance Monitors counters that are accessible from Non-secure EL1
                                    modes, and from Non-secure EL0 modes if unprivileged access is enabled.
                                    If the Performance Monitors Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.

G7-5586                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

                                  In Non-secure state, HPMN divides the Performance Monitors counters as follows. If software is
                                  accessing Performance Monitors counter n then, in Non-secure state:
                                  •      If n is in the range 0<=n<HPMN, the counter is accessible from EL1 and EL2, and from EL0
                                         if unprivileged access to the counters is enabled. PMCR.E enables the operation of counters
                                         in this range.
                                  •      If n is in the range HPMN<=n<PMCR.N, the counter is accessible only from EL2 and from
                                         Secure state. HDCR.HPME enables the operation of counters in this range.
                                  If this field is set to 0, or to a value larger than PMCR.N, then the following CONSTRAINED
                                  UNPREDICTABLE behavior applies:

                                  •      The value returned by a direct read of HDCR.HPMN is UNKNOWN.
                                  •      Either:
                                         —      An UNKNOWN number of counters are reserved for EL2 use. That is, the PE behaves
                                                as if HDCR.HPMN is set to an UNKNOWN non-zero value less than PMCR.N.
                                         —      All counters are reserved for EL2 use, meaning no counters are accessible from
                                                Non-secure EL1 and Non-secure EL0.
                                  When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                  field, it resets to the value of PMCR.N.

                  Accessing the HDCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 4, <Rt>, c1, c1, 1    100       001        0001         1111         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          -            n/a    -

                                                                               x        0         1      -          -            RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5587
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TDA==1, accesses to this register from EL2 are trapped to EL3 using AArch64.

G7-5588                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.32      SDCR, Secure Debug Control Register
                  The SDCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 When EL3 is implemented and can use AArch32, controls debug and performance monitors
                                 functionality in Secure state.

                  Configurations
                                 This register is only accessible in Secure state.
                                 AArch32 System register SDCR can be mapped to AArch64 System register MDCR_EL3, but this
                                 is not architecturally mandated.
                                 This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                 values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                 using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                 architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 SDCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The SDCR bit assignments are:

                  31                         22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13                                          0

                               RES0                                  SPD                      RES0

     EPMAD
     EDAD
     RES0
     SPME
     RES0

                  Bits [31:22]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  EPMAD, bit [21]
                                 External debug interface Performance Monitors registers disable. This disables access to these
                                 registers by an external debugger:
                                 0           Access to Performance Monitors registers from external debugger is permitted.
                                 1           Access to Performance Monitors registers from external debugger is disabled, unless
                                             overridden by the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface.
                                 If the Performance Monitors Extension is not implemented or does not support external debug
                                 interface accesses this bit is RES0.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                 field, it resets to 0.

                  EDAD, bit [20]
                                 External debug interface breakpoint and watchpoint register access disable. This disables access to
                                 these registers by an external debugger:
                                 0           Access to breakpoint and watchpoint registers from external debugger is permitted.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5589
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

                                    1           Access to breakpoint and watchpoint registers from external debugger is disabled,
                                                unless overridden by the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface.
                                                In ARMv8.0 and ARMv8.1 implementations, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether
                                                this disable applies to the external register OSLAR_EL1.
                                                From ARMv8.2, this disable is required to apply to the external register OSLAR_EL1.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bits [19:18]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    SPME, bit [17]
                                    Secure Performance Monitors enable. This allows event counting in Secure state:
                                    0           Event counting prohibited in Secure state.
                                                In an ARMv8.0 or ARMv8.1 implementation, event counting is prohibited unless
                                                ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() is TRUE, meaning this control is
                                                overridden by the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface.
                                    1           Event counting allowed in Secure state.
                                    If the Performance Monitors Extension is not implemented, this field is RES0.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bit [16]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    SPD, bits [15:14]
                                    AArch32 Secure privileged debug. Enables or disables debug exceptions from Secure state, other
                                    than Breakpoint Instruction exceptions. Valid values for this field are:
                                    00          Legacy mode. Debug exceptions from Secure EL1 are enabled by the authentication
                                                interface.
                                    10          Secure privileged debug disabled. Debug exceptions from Secure EL1 are disabled.
                                    11          Secure privileged debug enabled. Debug exceptions from Secure EL1 are enabled.
                                    Other values are reserved, and have the CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior that they must
                                    have the same behavior as 0b00. Software must not rely on this property as the behavior of reserved
                                    values might change in a future revision of the architecture.
                                    If debug exceptions from Secure EL1 are enabled, then debug exceptions from Secure EL0 are also
                                    enabled.
                                    Otherwise, debug exceptions from Secure EL0 are enabled only if SDER32_EL3.SUIDEN == 1.
                                    Ignored in Non-secure state. Debug exceptions from Breakpoint Instruction exceptions are always
                                    enabled.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Bits [13:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the SDCR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5590                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c3, 1    000       001        0001         1111         0011

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          -            n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          -            -      RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          -      RW

                  If EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64, any read or write to SDCR from Secure EL1 using AArch32 is trapped
                  as an exception to EL3.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5591
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.3 Debug registers

G7.3.33       SDER, Secure Debug Enable Register
                    The SDER characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Controls invasive and non-invasive debug in the Secure EL0 mode.

                    Configurations
                                   This register is only accessible in Secure state.
                                   AArch32 System register SDER is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   SDER32_EL3.
                                   If EL3 is not implemented and EL1 supports AArch32, SDER is implemented only if the
                                   implemented Security state is Secure state.
                                   This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                   values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                   using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                   architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   SDER is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The SDER bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                            2 1 0

                                                                RES0

                                                                                                                              SUIDEN
                                                                                                                             SUNIDEN

                    Bits [31:2]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    SUNIDEN, bit [1]
                                   Secure User Non-Invasive Debug Enable:
                                   0           Performance Monitors event counting prohibited in Secure EL0 unless allowed by
                                               MDCR_EL3.SPME, SDCR.SPME.
                                               In an ARMv8.0 or ARMv8.1 implementation, event counting can also be allowed using
                                               the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface
                                               ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled().
                                   1           Performance Monitors event counting allowed in Secure EL0.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    SUIDEN, bit [0]
                                   Secure User Invasive Debug Enable:
                                   0           Debug exceptions other than Breakpoint Instruction exceptions from Secure EL0 are
                                               disabled, unless enabled by MDCR_EL3.SPD32 or SDCR.SPD.
                                   1           Debug exceptions from Secure EL0 are enabled.
                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

G7-5592                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                                G7.3 Debug registers

                  Accessing the SDER
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c1, c1, 1    000       001        0001         1111         0001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility
                                                  Configuration
                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                  EL3 is not implemented.      x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    n/a

                                                  EL3 is not implemented.      x        0         1      -          -            -      n/a

                                                  EL3 is not implemented.      x        1         1      -          n/a          -      n/a

                                                  EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    n/a

                                                  EL3 is using AArch64.        x        0         1      -          -            -      n/a

                                                  EL3 is using AArch64.        x        1         1      -          n/a          -      n/a

                                                  EL3 is using AArch32.        x        x         0      -          n/a          n/a    RW

                                                  EL3 is using AArch32.        x        0         1      -          -            -      RW

                                                  EL3 is using AArch32.        x        1         1      -          n/a          -      RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HSTR.T1==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5593
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4         Performance Monitors registers
                    This section lists the Performance Monitors registers in AArch32.

G7-5594                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.1      PMCCFILTR, Performance Monitors Cycle Count Filter Register
                  The PMCCFILTR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Determines the modes in which the Cycle Counter, PMCCNTR, increments.

                  Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register PMCCFILTR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     PMCCFILTR_EL0.
                                     AArch32 System register PMCCFILTR is architecturally mapped to External register
                                     PMCCFILTR_EL0.
                                     This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                     values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                     using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                     architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                     PMCCFILTR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCCFILTR bit assignments are:

                  31 30 29 28 27 26                                                                                           0

                  P U                                                        RES0

     NSK
     NSU
     NSH

                  P, bit [31]
                                     Privileged filtering bit. Controls counting in EL1. If EL3 is implemented, then counting in
                                     Non-secure EL1 is further controlled by the NSK bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0           Count cycles in EL1.
                                     1           Do not count cycles in EL1.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  U, bit [30]
                                     User filtering bit. Controls counting in EL0. If EL3 is implemented, then counting in Non-secure
                                     EL0 is further controlled by the NSU bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                     0           Count cycles in EL0.
                                     1           Do not count cycles in EL0.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  NSK, bit [29]
                                     Non-secure EL1 (kernel) modes filtering bit. Controls counting in Non-secure EL1. If EL3 is not
                                     implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                     If the value of this bit is equal to the value of P, cycles in Non-secure EL1 are counted.
                                     Otherwise, cycles in Non-secure EL1 are not counted.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5595
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                    NSU, bit [28]
                                    Non-secure EL0 (Unprivileged) filtering. Controls counting in Non-secure EL0. If EL3 is not
                                    implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                    If the value of this bit is equal to the value of U, cycles in Non-secure EL0 are counted.
                                    Otherwise, cycles in Non-secure EL0 are not counted.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                    NSH, bit [27]
                                    Non-secure EL2 (Hyp mode) filtering bit. Controls counting in Non-secure EL2. If EL2 is not
                                    implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                    0           Do not count cycles in EL2.
                                    1           Count cycles in EL2.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                    field, it resets to 0.

                    Bits [26:0]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

                    Accessing the PMCCFILTR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                     opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c15, 7    000       111      1110         1111         1111

                    PMCCFILTR can also be accessed by using PMXEVTYPER with PMSELR.SEL set to 0b11111.

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       RW       n/a          RW     RW

G7-5596                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                        —      If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                        —      If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5597
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.2        PMCCNTR, Performance Monitors Cycle Count Register
                    The PMCCNTR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Holds the value of the processor Cycle Counter, CCNT, that counts processor clock cycles. See Time
                                   as measured by the Performance Monitors cycle counter on page D5-2227 for more information.
                                   PMCCFILTR determines the modes and states in which the PMCCNTR can increment.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register PMCCNTR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   PMCCNTR_EL0.
                                   AArch32 System register PMCCNTR is architecturally mapped to External register
                                   PMCCNTR_EL0.
                                   All counters are subject to any changes in clock frequency, including clock stopping caused by the
                                   WFI and WFE instructions. This means that it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether or not
                                   PMCCNTR continues to increment when clocks are stopped by WFI and WFE instructions.
                                   This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                   to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   PMCCNTR is a 64-bit register that can also be accessed as a 32-bit value. If it is accessed as a 32-bit
                                   register, accesses read and write bits [31:0] and do not modify bits [63:32].

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMCCNTR bit assignments are:

                    When accessing as a 32-bit register:

                    31                                                                                                  0

                                                                   CCNT

                    CCNT, bits [31:0]
                                   Cycle count. Depending on the values of PMCR.{LC,D}, this field increments in one of the
                                   following ways:
                                   •      Every processor clock cycle.
                                   •      Every 64th processor clock cycle.
                                   Writing 1 to PMCR.C sets this field to 0.

                    When accessing as a 64-bit register:

              63                                                                                                        0

                                                               CCNT

G7-5598                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  CCNT, bits [63:0]
                                  Cycle count. Depending on the values of PMCR.{LC,D}, this field increments in one of the
                                  following ways:
                                  •      Every processor clock cycle.
                                  •      Every 64th processor clock cycle.
                                  Writing 1 to PMCR.C sets this field to 0.

                  Accessing the PMCCNTR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c13, 0    000       000      1001         1111         1101

                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                  MCRR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                              <syntax>                    opc1          coproc       CRm

                                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c9     0000          1111         1001

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      RW       n/a          RW     RW

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G7-5599
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.CR==0, and PMUSERENR.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are
                                 trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.CR==0, and PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, read accesses to this register from
                                 EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5600                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.3      PMCEID0, Performance Monitors Common Event Identification register 0
                  The PMCEID0 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Defines which common architectural events and common microarchitectural events are
                                 implemented, or counted, using PMU events in the range 0x000 to 0x01F
                                 When the value of a bit in the register is 1 the corresponding common event is implemented or
                                 counted.

                                          Note
                                 ARM recommends that, if a common event is never counted, the value of the corresponding register
                                 bit is 0.

                                 For more information about the common events and the use of the PMCEIDn registers see The PMU
                                 event number space and common events on page D5-2244.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID0 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 PMCEID0_EL0[31:0].
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID0 is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 PMCEID0[31:0].

                  Attributes
                                 PMCEID0 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCEID0 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                                ID[31:0]

                  ID[31:0], bits [31:0]
                                 ID[n] corresponds to common event n.
                                 For each bit:
                                 0           The common event is not implemented, or not counted.
                                 1           The common event is implemented.
                                 A bit that corresponds to a reserved event number is reserved. The value might be used in a future
                                 revision of the architecture to identify an additional common event.

                                          Note
                                 Such an event might be added retrospectively to an earlier version of the PMU architecture,
                                 provided the event does not require any additional PMU features and has an event number that can
                                 be represented in the PMCEID<n> registers of that earlier version of the PMU architecture.

                  Accessing the PMCEID0
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5601
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 6    000       110      1001         1111         1100

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO       RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO       RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO       n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5602                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.4      PMCEID1, Performance Monitors Common Event Identification register 1
                  The PMCEID1 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Defines which common architectural events and common microarchitectural events are
                                 implemented, or counted, using PMU events in the range 0x020 to 0x03F.
                                 When the value of a bit in the register is 1 the corresponding common event is implemented or
                                 counted.

                                           Note
                                 ARM recommends that, if a common event is never counted, the value of the corresponding register
                                 bit is 0.

                                 For more information about the common events and the use of the PMCEIDn registers see The PMU
                                 event number space and common events on page D5-2244.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID1 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 PMCEID1_EL0[31:0].
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID1 is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 PMCEID1[31:0].

                  Attributes
                                 PMCEID1 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCEID1 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                               ID[63:32]

                  ID[63:32], bits [31:0]
                                 ID[n] corresponds to common event n.
                                 For each bit:
                                 0           The common event is not implemented, or not counted.
                                 1           The common event is implemented.
                                 A bit that corresponds to a reserved event number is reserved. The value might be used in a future
                                 revision of the architecture to identify an additional common event.

                                           Note
                                 Such an event might be added retrospectively to an earlier version of the PMU architecture,
                                 provided the event does not require any additional PMU features and has an event number that can
                                 be represented in the PMCEID<n> registers of that earlier version of the PMU architecture.

                  Accessing the PMCEID1
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5603
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 7    000       111      1001         1111         1100

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO       RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO       RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO       n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5604                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.5      PMCEID2, Performance Monitors Common Event Identification register 2
                  The PMCEID2 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Defines which common architectural events and common microarchitectural events are
                                 implemented, or counted, using PMU events in the range 0x4000 to 0x401F.
                                 When the value of a bit in the register is 1 the corresponding common event is implemented or
                                 counted.

                                            Note
                                 ARM recommends that, if a common event is never counted, the value of the corresponding register
                                 bit is 0.

                                 For more information about the common events and the use of the PMCEIDn registers see The PMU
                                 event number space and common events on page D5-2244.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID2 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 PMCEID0_EL0[63:32].
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID2 is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 PMCEID2[63:32].
                                 This register is introduced in ARMv8.1.

                  Attributes
                                 PMCEID2 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCEID2 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                               IDhi[31:0]

                  IDhi[31:0], bits [31:0]
                                 IDhi[n] corresponds to common event (0x4000 + n).
                                 For each bit:
                                 0            The common event is not implemented, or not counted.
                                 1            The common event is implemented.
                                 A bit that corresponds to a reserved event number is reserved. The value might be used in a future
                                 revision of the architecture to identify an additional common event.

                                            Note
                                 Such an event might be added retrospectively to an earlier version of the PMU architecture,
                                 provided the event does not require any additional PMU features and has an event number that can
                                 be represented in the PMCEID<n> registers of that earlier version of the PMU architecture.

                  Accessing the PMCEID2
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5605
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c14, 4    000       100      1001         1111         1110

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO       RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO       RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO       n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —       If PMUSERENR.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —       If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                   EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                   mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —       If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5606                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.6      PMCEID3, Performance Monitors Common Event Identification register 3
                  The PMCEID3 characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Defines which common architectural events and common microarchitectural events are
                                 implemented, or counted, using PMU events in the range 0x4020 to 0x403F.
                                 When the value of a bit in the register is 1 the corresponding common event is implemented or
                                 counted.

                                             Note
                                 ARM recommends that, if a common event is never counted, the value of the corresponding register
                                 bit is 0.

                                 For more information about the common events and the use of the PMCEIDn registers see The PMU
                                 event number space and common events on page D5-2244.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID3 is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 PMCEID1_EL0[63:32].
                                 AArch32 System register PMCEID3 is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 PMCEID3[63:32].
                                 This register is introduced in ARMv8.1.

                  Attributes
                                 PMCEID3 is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCEID3 bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                              IDhi[63:32]

                  IDhi[63:32], bits [31:0]
                                 IDhi[n] corresponds to common event (0x4000 + n).
                                 For each bit:
                                 0             The common event is not implemented, or not counted.
                                 1             The common event is implemented.
                                 A bit that corresponds to a reserved event number is reserved. The value might be used in a future
                                 revision of the architecture to identify an additional common event.

                                             Note
                                 Such an event might be added retrospectively to an earlier version of the PMU architecture,
                                 provided the event does not require any additional PMU features and has an event number that can
                                 be represented in the PMCEID<n> registers of that earlier version of the PMU architecture.

                  Accessing the PMCEID3
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5607
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c14, 5    000       101      1001         1111         1110

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO       RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO       RO           RO     RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO       n/a          RO     RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —       If PMUSERENR.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —       If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                   EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —       If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                   mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —       If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —       If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, read accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5608                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.7      PMCNTENCLR, Performance Monitors Count Enable Clear register
                  The PMCNTENCLR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Disables the Cycle Count Register, PMCCNTR, and any implemented event counters
                                     PMEVCNTR<n>. Reading this register shows which counters are enabled.
                                     PMCNTENCLR is used in conjunction with the PMCNTENSET register.

                  Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register PMCNTENCLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     PMCNTENCLR_EL0.
                                     AArch32 System register PMCNTENCLR is architecturally mapped to External register
                                     PMCNTENCLR_EL0.
                                     This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                     to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                     PMCNTENCLR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCNTENCLR bit assignments are:

                  31 30                                                                                                  0

                  C                                                P<n>, bit [n]

                  C, bit [31]
                                     PMCCNTR disable bit. Disables the cycle counter register. Possible values are:
                                     0           When read, means the cycle counter is disabled. When written, has no effect.
                                     1           When read, means the cycle counter is enabled. When written, disables the cycle
                                                 counter.

                  P<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 30
                                     Event counter disable bit for PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                     Bits [30:N] are RAZ/WI. When EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0, N is the value in
                                     MDCR_EL2.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch64 or in HDCR.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch32.
                                     Otherwise, N is the value in PMCR.N.
                                     Possible values of each bit are:
                                     0           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> is disabled. When written, has no effect.
                                     1           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> is enabled. When written, disables
                                                 PMEVCNTR<n>.

                  Accessing the PMCNTENCLR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5609
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 2    000       010      1001         1111         1100

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       RW       n/a          RW     RW

                    If EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0 modes, the value of HDCR.HPMN or MDCR_EL2.HPMN can
                    change the behavior of accesses to PMCNTENCLR. See the description of the P<n> bit.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5610                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                                G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                    G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.8      PMCNTENSET, Performance Monitors Count Enable Set register
                  The PMCNTENSET characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                     Enables the Cycle Count Register, PMCCNTR, and any implemented event counters
                                     PMEVCNTR<n>. Reading this register shows which counters are enabled.
                                     PMCNTENSET is used in conjunction with the PMCNTENCLR register.

                  Configurations
                                     There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                     AArch32 System register PMCNTENSET is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                     PMCNTENSET_EL0.
                                     AArch32 System register PMCNTENSET is architecturally mapped to External register
                                     PMCNTENSET_EL0.
                                     This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                     to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                     PMCNTENSET is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCNTENSET bit assignments are:

                  31 30                                                                                                  0

                  C                                                P<n>, bit [n]

                  C, bit [31]
                                     PMCCNTR enable bit. Enables the cycle counter register. Possible values are:
                                     0           When read, means the cycle counter is disabled. When written, has no effect.
                                     1           When read, means the cycle counter is enabled. When written, enables the cycle
                                                 counter.

                  P<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 30
                                     Event counter enable bit for PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                     Bits [30:N] are RAZ/WI. When EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0, N is the value in
                                     MDCR_EL2.HPMN, if EL2 is using AArch64 or in HDCR.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch32.
                                     Otherwise, N is the value in PMCR.N.
                                     Possible values of each bit are:
                                     0           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> is disabled. When written, has no effect.
                                     1           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> event counter is enabled. When written,
                                                 enables PMEVCNTR<n>.

                  Accessing the PMCNTENSET
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5611
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 1    000       001      1001         1111         1100

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       RW       n/a          RW     RW

                    If EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0 modes, the value of HDCR.HPMN can change the behavior of
                    accesses to PMCNTENSET. See the description of the P<n> bit.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5612                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.9      PMCR, Performance Monitors Control Register
                  The PMCR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                    Provides details of the Performance Monitors implementation, including the number of counters
                                    implemented, and configures and controls the counters.

                  Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register PMCR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    PMCR_EL0.
                                    AArch32 System register PMCR[6:0] is architecturally mapped to External register
                                    PMCR_EL0[6:0].
                                    This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                    values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                    using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                    architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                    PMCR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMCR bit assignments are:

                  31                     24 23                     16 15            11 10          7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                            IMP                       IDCODE                 N              RES0    LC DP X D C P E

                  IMP, bits [31:24]
                                    Implementer code. This field is RO with an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED value.
                                    The implementer codes are allocated by ARM. Values have the same interpretation as bits [31:24]
                                    of the MIDR.

                  IDCODE, bits [23:16]
                                    Identification code. This field is RO with an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED value.
                                    Each implementer must maintain a list of identification codes that is specific to the implementer. A
                                    specific implementation is identified by the combination of the implementer code and the
                                    identification code.

                  N, bits [15:11]
                                    Number of event counters. A RO field that indicates the number counters implemented. A value of
                                    0b00000 in this field indicates that only the Cycle Count Register PMCCNTR is implemented.
                                    The value of this field is the number of event counters implemented. This value is in the range of
                                    0b00000, in which case only the PMCCNTR is implemented, to 0b11111, which indicates that the
                                    PMCCNTR and 31 event counters are implemented.
                                    In an implementation that includes EL2, reads of this field from Non-secure EL1 and Non-secure
                                    EL0 return the value of HDCR.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch32, or the value of
                                    MDCR_EL2.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch64.

                  Bits [10:7]
                                    Reserved, RES0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5613
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    LC, bit [6]
                                       Long cycle counter enable. Determines which PMCCNTR bit generates an overflow recorded by
                                       PMOVSR[31].
                                       0           Cycle counter overflow on increment that changes PMCCNTR[31] from 1 to 0.
                                       1           Cycle counter overflow on increment that changes PMCCNTR[63] from 1 to 0.
                                       ARM deprecates use of PMCR.LC = 0.
                                       This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    DP, bit [5]
                                       Disable cycle counter when event counting is prohibited. The possible values of this bit are:
                                       0           PMCCNTR, if enabled, counts when event counting is prohibited.
                                       1           PMCCNTR does not count when event counting is prohibited.
                                       Counting events is never prohibited in Non-secure state. However, there are some restrictions on
                                       counting events in Secure state. For more information about the interaction between the
                                       Performance Monitors and EL3, see Interaction with EL3 on page D5-2233
                                       When EL3 is not implemented, this field is RES0:
                                       •      When ARMv8.1-PMU is not implemented.
                                       •      When ARMv8.1-PMU is implemented, only if EL2 is not implemented.
                                       Otherwise this field is RW.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                       field, it resets to 0.

                    X, bit [4]
                                       Enable export of events in an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event stream. The possible values of this
                                       bit are:
                                       0           Do not export events.
                                       1           Export events where not prohibited.
                                       This field enables the exporting of events over an event bus to another device, for example to an
                                       OPTIONAL trace macrocell. If the implementation does not include such an event bus then this field
                                       is RAZ/WI, otherwise it is an RW field.
                                       In an implementation that includes an event bus, no events are exported when counting is prohibited.
                                       This field does not affect the generation of Performance Monitors overflow interrupt requests or
                                       signaling to a cross-trigger interface (CTI) that can be implemented as signals exported from the PE.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, if this field is implemented as an RW
                                       field, it resets to 0.

                    D, bit [3]
                                       Clock divider. The possible values of this bit are:
                                       0           When enabled, PMCCNTR counts every clock cycle.
                                       1           When enabled, PMCCNTR counts once every 64 clock cycles.
                                       This bit is RW.
                                       If PMCR.LC == 1, this bit is ignored and the cycle counter counts every clock cycle.
                                       ARM deprecates use of PMCR.D = 1.
                                       When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    C, bit [2]
                                       Cycle counter reset. This bit is WO. The effects of writing to this bit are:
                                       0           No action.
                                       1           Reset PMCCNTR to zero.

G7-5614                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                 G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                     G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                                    This bit is always RAZ.
                                    Resetting PMCCNTR does not clear the PMCCNTR overflow bit to 0.

                  P, bit [1]
                                    Event counter reset. This bit is WO. The effects of writing to this bit are:
                                    0           No action.
                                    1           Reset all event counters accessible in the current EL, not including PMCCNTR, to zero.
                                    This bit is always RAZ.
                                    In Non-secure EL0 and EL1, if EL2 is implemented, a write of 1 to this bit does not reset event
                                    counters that HDCR.HPMN or MDCR_EL2.HPMN reserves for EL2 use.
                                    In EL2 and EL3, a write of 1 to this bit resets all the event counters.
                                    Resetting the event counters does not clear any overflow bits to 0.

                  E, bit [0]
                                    Enable. The possible values of this bit are:
                                    0           All counters that are accessible at Non-secure EL1, including PMCCNTR, are disabled.
                                    1           All counters that are accessible at Non-secure EL1 are enabled by PMCNTENSET.
                                    This bit is RW.
                                    If EL2 is implemented, this bit does not affect the operation of event counters that HDCR.HPMN
                                    or MDCR_EL2.HPMN reserves for EL2 use.
                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Accessing the PMCR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                     opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 0     000       000        1001         1111         1100

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                    Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H     TGE       NS       EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x       x         0        RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                   x       0         1        RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                                   x       1         1        RW       n/a          RW     RW

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                  G7-5615
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPMCR==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HDCR.TPMCR==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5616                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.10     PMEVCNTR<n>, Performance Monitors Event Count Registers, n = 0 - 30
                  The PMEVCNTR<n> characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Holds event counter n, which counts events, where n is 0 to 30.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register PMEVCNTR<n> is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 PMEVCNTR<n>_EL0.
                                 AArch32 System register PMEVCNTR<n> is architecturally mapped to External register
                                 PMEVCNTR<n>_EL0.
                                 This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                 to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 PMEVCNTR<n> is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMEVCNTR<n> bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                  0

                                                            Event counter n

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Event counter n. Value of event counter n, where n is the number of this register and is a number
                                 from 0 to 30.

                  Accessing the PMEVCNTR<n>
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                        <syntax>                                opc1     opc2           CRn    coproc     CRm

                                        p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, <CRm>, <opc2>        000      n<2:0>         1110   1111       10:n<4:3>

                  •     <opc2> is in the range 0 - 7.

                  •     <CRm> is in the range c8 - c11.

                  PMEVCNTR<n> can also be accessed by using PMXEVCNTR with PMSELR.SEL set to the value of <n>.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5617
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RW    RW        n/a   RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       RW    RW        RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       RW    n/a       RW    RW

                    If <n> is greater than or equal to the number of accessible counters, reads and writes of PMEVCNTR<n> are
                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and the following behaviors are permitted:

                    •      Accesses to the register are UNDEFINED.

                    •      Accesses to the register behave as RAZ/WI.

                    •      Accesses to the register execute as a NOP.

                    •      In Non-secure state, for an access from PL1 or a permitted access from PL0, if PMSELR.SEL, or
                           PMSELR_EL0.SEL if EL1 is using AArch64, is greater than or equal to the number of accessible counters
                           but is less than the number of implemented counters, the register access is trapped to EL2. Accesses from
                           PL0 are permitted when:
                           —     EL1 is using AArch32 and the value of PMUSERENR.EN is 1.
                           —     EL1 is using AArch64 and the value of PMUSERENR_EL0.EN is 1.

                             Note
                    In an implementation that includes EL2, in Non-secure state at EL0 and EL1:

                    •      If EL2 is using AArch32, HDCR.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.

                    •      If EL2 is using AArch64, MDCR_EL2.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.

                    Otherwise, the number of accessible counters is the number of implemented counters.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, and PMUSERENR.ER==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are
                                 trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, and PMUSERENR_EL0.ER==0, read accesses to this register from
                                 EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5618                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •   When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                      —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5619
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.11       PMEVTYPER<n>, Performance Monitors Event Type Registers, n = 0 - 30
                    The PMEVTYPER<n> characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Configures event counter n, where n is 0 to 30.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register PMEVTYPER<n> is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.
                                       AArch32 System register PMEVTYPER<n> is architecturally mapped to External register
                                       PMEVTYPER<n>_EL0.
                                       This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                       to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                       PMEVTYPER<n> is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMEVTYPER<n> bit assignments are:

                    31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24                            16 15              10 9                             0

                    P U                                 RES0               evtCount[15:10]             evtCount[9:0]

      NSK
      NSU
      NSH
      RES0
      MT

                    P, bit [31]
                                       Privileged filtering bit. Controls counting in EL1. If EL3 is implemented, then counting in
                                       Non-secure EL1 is further controlled by the NSK bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                       0           Count events in EL1.
                                       1           Do not count events in EL1.

                    U, bit [30]
                                       User filtering bit. Controls counting in EL0. If EL3 is implemented, then counting in Non-secure
                                       EL0 is further controlled by the NSU bit. The possible values of this bit are:
                                       0           Count events in EL0.
                                       1           Do not count events in EL0.

                    NSK, bit [29]
                                       Non-secure EL1 (kernel) modes filtering bit. Controls counting in Non-secure EL1. If EL3 is not
                                       implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                       If the value of this bit is equal to the value of P, events in Non-secure EL1 are counted.
                                       Otherwise, events in Non-secure EL1 are not counted.

G7-5620                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  NSU, bit [28]
                                  Non-secure EL0 (Unprivileged) filtering. Controls counting in Non-secure EL0. If EL3 is not
                                  implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                  If the value of this bit is equal to the value of U, events in Non-secure EL0 are counted.
                                  Otherwise, events in Non-secure EL0 are not counted.

                  NSH, bit [27]
                                  Non-secure EL2 (Hyp mode) filtering bit. Controls counting in Non-secure EL2. If EL2 is not
                                  implemented, this bit is RES0.
                                  0           Do not count events in EL2.
                                  1           Count events in EL2.

                  Bit [26]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  MT, bit [25]
                                  Multithreading. When the implementation is multi-threaded, the valid values for this bit are:
                                  0           Count events only on controlling PE.
                                  1           Count events from any PE with the same affinity at level 1 and above as this PE.
                                  When the implementation is not multi-threaded, this bit is RES0.

                                           Note
                                  •      An implementation is described as multi-threaded when the lowest level of affinity consists
                                         of logical PEs that are implemented using a multi-threading type approach. That is, the
                                         performance of PEs at the lowest affinity level is highly interdependent. On such an
                                         implementation, the value of MPIDR_EL1.MT, when read at the highest implemented
                                         Exception level, is 1.
                                  •      Events from a different thread of a multithreaded implementation are not Attributable to the
                                         thread counting the event.

                  Bits [24:16]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  evtCount[15:10], bits [15:10]
                             In ARMv8.3, ARMv8.2 and ARMv8.1
                                  Extension to evtCount[9:0]. See evtCount[9:0] for more details.
                             In ARMv8.0.
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  evtCount[9:0], bits [9:0]
                                  Event to count. The event number of the event that is counted by event counter PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                  Software must program this field with an event that is supported by the PE being programmed.
                                  There are three types of event:
                                  •      Common architectural and microarchitectural events.
                                  •      ARM recommended common architectural and microarchitectural events.
                                  •      IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events.

                                  The ranges of event numbers allocated to each type of event are shown in Allocation of the PMU
                                  event number space on page D5-2244.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5621
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                                    If evtCount is programmed to an event that is reserved or not supported by the PE, the behavior
                                    depends on the event type:
                                    •      For the range 0x000 to 0x03F, no events are counted, and the value returned by a direct or
                                           external read of the evtCount field is the value written to the field.
                                    •      For IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED events, it is UNPREDICTABLE what event, if any, is counted,
                                           and the value returned by a direct or external read of the evtCount field is UNKNOWN.

                                             Note
                                    UNPREDICTABLE means the event must not expose privileged information.

                                    ARM recommends that the behavior across a family of implementations is defined such that if a
                                    given implementation does not include an event from a set of common IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                                    events, then no event is counted and the value read back on evtCount is the value written.

                    Accessing the PMEVTYPER<n>
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                          <syntax>                                   opc1       opc2        CRn     coproc     CRm

                                          p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, <CRm>, <opc2>           000        n<2:0>      1110    1111       11:n<4:3>

                    •      <opc2> is in the range 0 - 7.

                    •      <CRm> is in the range c12 - c15.

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                      Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H        TGE        NS     EL0    EL1      EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x          x          0      RW     RW       n/a    n/a

                                                                                 x          0          1      RW     RW       RW     n/a

                                                                                 x          1          1      RW     n/a      RW     n/a

                    This register is accessible at EL0 when PMUSERENR.EN is set to 1.

                    PMEVTYPER<n> can also be accessed by using PMXEVTYPER with PMSELR.SEL set to n.

                    If <n> is greater or equal to the number of accessible counters, reads and writes of PMEVTYPER<n> are
                    CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and the following behaviors are permitted:

                    •      Accesses to the register are UNDEFINED.

                    •      Accesses to the register behave as RAZ/WI.

                    •      Accesses to the register execute as a NOP.

G7-5622                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  •     In Non-secure state, for an access from PL1 or a permitted access from PL0, if PMSELR.SEL, or
                        PMSELR_EL0.SEL if EL1 is using AArch64, is greater than or equal to the number of accessible counters
                        but is less than the number of implemented counters, the register access is trapped to EL2. Accesses from
                        PL0 are permitted when:
                        —      EL1 is using AArch32 and the value of PMUSERENR.EN is 1.
                        —      EL1 is using AArch64 and the value of PMUSERENR_EL0.EN is 1.

                          Note
                  In an implementation that includes EL2, in Non-secure state at EL0 and EL1:

                  •     If EL2 is using AArch32, HDCR.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.

                  •     If EL2 is using AArch64, MDCR_EL2.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.

                  Otherwise, the number of accessible counters is the number of implemented counters.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                        —      If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                        —      If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5623
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.12       PMINTENCLR, Performance Monitors Interrupt Enable Clear register
                    The PMINTENCLR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Disables the generation of interrupt requests on overflows from the Cycle Count Register,
                                       PMCCNTR, and the event counters PMEVCNTR<n>. Reading the register shows which overflow
                                       interrupt requests are enabled.
                                       PMINTENCLR is used in conjunction with the PMINTENSET register.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register PMINTENCLR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       PMINTENCLR_EL1.
                                       AArch32 System register PMINTENCLR is architecturally mapped to External register
                                       PMINTENCLR_EL1.
                                       This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                       to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                       PMINTENCLR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMINTENCLR bit assignments are:

                    31 30                                                                                                  0

                    C                                                P<n>, bit [n]

                    C, bit [31]
                                       PMCCNTR overflow interrupt request disable bit. Possible values are:
                                       0           When read, means the cycle counter overflow interrupt request is disabled. When
                                                   written, has no effect.
                                       1           When read, means the cycle counter overflow interrupt request is enabled. When
                                                   written, disables the cycle count overflow interrupt request.

                    P<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 30
                                       Event counter overflow interrupt request disable bit for PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                       When EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0, N is the value in HDCR.HPMN.
                                       Otherwise, N is the value in PMCR.N.
                                       Bits [30:N] are RAZ/WI.
                                       Possible values are:
                                       0           When read, means that the PMEVCNTR<n> event counter interrupt request is disabled.
                                                   When written, has no effect.
                                       1           When read, means that the PMEVCNTR<n> event counter interrupt request is enabled.
                                                   When written, disables the PMEVCNTR<n> interrupt request.

                    Accessing the PMINTENCLR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

G7-5624                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c14, 2    000       010        1001         1111         1110

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  If EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0 modes, the value of HDCR.HPMN can change the behavior of
                  accesses to PMINTENCLR. See the description of the P<n> bit.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —        If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5625
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.13       PMINTENSET, Performance Monitors Interrupt Enable Set register
                    The PMINTENSET characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Enables the generation of interrupt requests on overflows from the Cycle Count Register,
                                       PMCCNTR, and the event counters PMEVCNTR<n>. Reading the register shows which overflow
                                       interrupt requests are enabled.
                                       PMINTENSET is used in conjunction with the PMINTENCLR register.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register PMINTENSET is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       PMINTENSET_EL1.
                                       AArch32 System register PMINTENSET is architecturally mapped to External register
                                       PMINTENSET_EL1.
                                       This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                       to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                       PMINTENSET is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMINTENSET bit assignments are:

                    31 30                                                                                                  0

                    C                                                P<n>, bit [n]

                    C, bit [31]
                                       PMCCNTR overflow interrupt request enable bit. Possible values are:
                                       0           When read, means the cycle counter overflow interrupt request is disabled. When
                                                   written, has no effect.
                                       1           When read, means the cycle counter overflow interrupt request is enabled. When
                                                   written, enables the cycle count overflow interrupt request.

                    P<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 30
                                       Event counter overflow interrupt request enable bit for PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                       When EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0, N is the value in HDCR.HPMN.
                                       Otherwise, N is the value in PMCR.N.
                                       Bits [30:N] are RAZ/WI.
                                       Possible values are:
                                       0           When read, means that the PMEVCNTR<n> event counter interrupt request is disabled.
                                                   When written, has no effect.
                                       1           When read, means that the PMEVCNTR<n> event counter interrupt request is enabled.
                                                   When written, enables the PMEVCNTR<n> interrupt request.

                    Accessing the PMINTENSET
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

G7-5626                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c14, 1    000       001        1001         1111         1110

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      -          n/a          RW     RW

                  If EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0 modes, the value of HDCR.HPMN can change the behavior of
                  accesses to PMINTENSET. See the description of the P<n> bit.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —        If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL1 and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 G7-5627
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.14       PMOVSR, Performance Monitors Overflow Flag Status Register
                    The PMOVSR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Contains the state of the overflow bit for the Cycle Count Register, PMCCNTR, and each of the
                                       implemented event counters PMEVCNTR<n>. Writing to this register clears these bits.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register PMOVSR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       PMOVSCLR_EL0.
                                       AArch32 System register PMOVSR is architecturally mapped to External register
                                       PMOVSCLR_EL0.
                                       This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                       to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                       PMOVSR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMOVSR bit assignments are:

                    31 30                                                                                                  0

                    C                                                P<n>, bit [n]

                    C, bit [31]
                                       PMCCNTR overflow bit. Possible values are:
                                       0           When read, means the cycle counter has not overflowed. When written, has no effect.
                                       1           When read, means the cycle counter has overflowed. When written, clears the overflow
                                                   bit to 0.
                                       PMCR.LC controls whether an overflow is detected from PMCCNTR[31] or from PMCCNTR[63].

                    P<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 30
                                       Event counter overflow clear bit for PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                       Bits [30:N] are RAZ/WI. When EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0, N is the value in
                                       MDCR_EL2.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch64 or in HDCR.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch32.
                                       Otherwise, N is the value in PMCR.N.
                                       Possible values of each bit are:
                                       0           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> has not overflowed. When written, has no
                                                   effect.
                                       1           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> has overflowed. When written, clears the
                                                   PMEVCNTR<n> overflow bit to 0.

                    Accessing the PMOVSR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

G7-5628                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 3    000       011      1001         1111         1100

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      RW       n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                        —        If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                        —        If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —        If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —        If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —        If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G7-5629
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.15       PMOVSSET, Performance Monitors Overflow Flag Status Set register
                    The PMOVSSET characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                       Sets the state of the overflow bit for the Cycle Count Register, PMCCNTR, and each of the
                                       implemented event counters PMEVCNTR<n>.

                    Configurations
                                       There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                       AArch32 System register PMOVSSET is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                       PMOVSSET_EL0.
                                       AArch32 System register PMOVSSET is architecturally mapped to External register
                                       PMOVSSET_EL0.
                                       This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                       to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                       PMOVSSET is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMOVSSET bit assignments are:

                    31 30                                                                                                  0

                    C                                                P<n>, bit [n]

                    C, bit [31]
                                       PMCCNTR overflow bit. Possible values are:
                                       0           When read, means the cycle counter has not overflowed. When written, has no effect.
                                       1           When read, means the cycle counter has overflowed. When written, sets the overflow
                                                   bit to 1.

                    P<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 30
                                       Event counter overflow set bit for PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                       Bits [30:N] are RAZ/WI. When EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0, N is the value in
                                       MDCR_EL2.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch64 or in HDCR.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch32.
                                       Otherwise, N is the value in PMCR.N.
                                       Possible values are:
                                       0           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> has not overflowed. When written, has no
                                                   effect.
                                       1           When read, means that PMEVCNTR<n> has overflowed. When written, sets the
                                                   PMEVCNTR<n> overflow bit to 1.

                    Accessing the PMOVSSET
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5630                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c14, 3    000       011      1001         1111         1110

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      RW       n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                        —      If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                        —      If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                        —      If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •     When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                        —      If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G7-5631
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.16       PMSELR, Performance Monitors Event Counter Selection Register
                    The PMSELR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                      Selects the current event counter PMEVCNTR<n> or the cycle counter, CCNT.
                                      PMSELR is used in conjunction with PMXEVTYPER to determine the event that increments a
                                      selected event counter, and the modes and states in which the selected counter increments.
                                      It is also used in conjunction with PMXEVCNTR, to determine the value of a selected event
                                      counter.

                    Configurations
                                      There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                      AArch32 System register PMSELR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                      PMSELR_EL0.
                                      This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                      to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                      PMSELR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMSELR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                    5 4             0

                                                             RES0                                                 SEL

                    Bits [31:5]
                                      Reserved, RES0.

                    SEL, bits [4:0]
                                      Selects event counter, PMEVCNTR<n>, where n is the value held in this field. This value identifies
                                      which event counter is accessed when a subsequent access to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR
                                      occurs.
                                      This field can take any value from 0 (0b00000) to (PMCR.N)-1, or 31 (0b11111).
                                      When PMSELR.SEL is 0b11111, it selects the cycle counter and:
                                      •     A read of the PMXEVTYPER returns the value of PMCCFILTR.
                                      •     A write of the PMXEVTYPER writes to PMCCFILTR.
                                      •     A read or write of PMXEVCNTR has CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE effects, that can be one
                                            of the following:
                                            —      Access to PMXEVCNTR is UNDEFINED.
                                            —      Access to PMXEVCNTR behaves as a NOP.
                                            —      Access to PMXEVCNTR behaves as if the register is RAZ/WI.
                                            —      Access to PMXEVCNTR behaves as if the PMSELR.SEL field contains an UNKNOWN
                                                   value.
                                      If this field is set to a value greater than or equal to the number of implemented counters, but not
                                      equal to 31:
                                      •     Direct reads of this field return an UNKNOWN value.

G7-5632                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                                   •     The results of access to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR are CONSTRAINED
                                         UNPREDICTABLE, and can be one of the following:

                                         —      Access to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR is UNDEFINED.
                                         —      Access to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR behaves as a NOP.
                                         —      Access to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR behaves as if the register is RAZ/WI.
                                         —      Access to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR behaves as if the PMSELR.SEL field
                                                contains an UNKNOWN value.
                                         —      Access to PMXEVTYPER or PMXEVCNTR behaves as if the PMSELR.SEL field
                                                contains 0b11111.

                  Accessing the PMSELR
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 5    000       101      1001         1111         1100

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE       NS     EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x         0      RW       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0         1      RW       RW           RW     RW

                                                                               x        1         1      RW       n/a          RW     RW

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                        —        If PMUSERENR.EN==0, and PMUSERENR.ER==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped
                                 to Undefined mode.
                        —        If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, and PMUSERENR_EL0.ER==0, accesses to this register from EL0
                                 are trapped to EL1.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —        If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                               G7-5633
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5634                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                             ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                  G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.17     PMSWINC, Performance Monitors Software Increment register
                  The PMSWINC characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Increments a counter that is configured to count the Software increment event, event 0x00. For more
                                  information, see SW_INCR.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register PMSWINC is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  PMSWINC_EL0.
                                  AArch32 System register PMSWINC is architecturally mapped to External register
                                  PMSWINC_EL0.

                  Attributes
                                  PMSWINC is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMSWINC bit assignments are:

                  31 30                                                                                               0

                                                                 P<n>, bit [n]

     RES0

                  Bit [31]
                                  Reserved, RES0.

                  P<n>, bit [n], for n = 0 to 30
                                  Event counter software increment bit for PMEVCNTR<n>.
                                  Bits [30:N] are WI.
                                  When EL2 is implemented, in Non-secure EL1 and EL0, N is the value in MDCR_EL2.HPMN if
                                  EL2 is using AArch64 or in HDCR.HPMN if EL2 is using AArch32. Otherwise, N is the value in
                                  PMCR.N.
                                  The effects of writing to this bit are:
                                  0           No action. The write to this bit is ignored.
                                  1           If PMEVCNTR<n> is enabled and configured to count the software increment event,
                                              increments PMEVCNTR<n> by 1. If PMEVCNTR<n> is disabled, or not configured to
                                              count the software increment event, the write to this bit is ignored.

                  Accessing the PMSWINC
                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                   opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c12, 4   000       100      1001    1111       1100

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5635
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       WO    WO        n/a   WO

                                                                                 x        0        1       WO    WO        WO    WO

                                                                                 x        1        1       WO    n/a       WO    WO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, and PMUSERENR.SW==0, write accesses to this register from EL0 are
                                 trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, and PMUSERENR_EL0.SW==0, write accesses to this register from
                                 EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp
                                 mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, write accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5636                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.18     PMUSERENR, Performance Monitors User Enable Register
                  The PMUSERENR characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Enables or disables User mode access to the Performance Monitors.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register PMUSERENR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 PMUSERENR_EL0.
                                 This register is in the Warm reset domain. Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset
                                 values. On a Warm or Cold reset these apply only if the PE resets into an Exception level that is
                                 using AArch32. Otherwise, on a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset to
                                 architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 PMUSERENR is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMUSERENR bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                      4 3 2 1 0

                                                          RES0

                                                                                                                                 EN
                                                                                                                                 SW
                                                                                                                                 CR
                                                                                                                                 ER

                  Bits [31:4]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  ER, bit [3]
                                 Event counter read trap control:
                                 0           EL0 reads of the PMXEVCNTR and PMEVCNTR<n>, and EL0 read/write access to
                                             the PMSELR, are trapped to Undefined mode if PMUSERENR.EN is also 0.
                                 1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  CR, bit [2]
                                 Cycle counter read trap control:
                                 0           EL0 reads of the PMCCNTR are trapped to Undefined mode if PMUSERENR.EN is
                                             also 0.
                                 1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                 When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  SW, bit [1]
                                 Software increment write trap control:
                                 0           EL0 writes to the PMSWINC are trapped to Undefined mode if PMUSERENR.EN is
                                             also 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5637
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                                     1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    EN, bit [0]
                                     Traps EL0 accesses to the Performance Monitors registers to Undefined mode:
                                     0           EL0 accesses to the Performance Monitors registers are trapped to Undefined mode,
                                                 unless enabled by one of PMUSERENR.{ER, CR, SW}.
                                     1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped. Software can access all PMU
                                                 registers at EL0.

                                              Note
                                     •      The PMUSERENR is register is always RO at EL0 and not trapped by this bit.
                                     •      EL0 cannot read or write PMINTENSET and PMINTENCLR.

                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Accessing the PMUSERENR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                     opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c14, 0     000       000      1001         1111         1110

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                   Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                   E2H      TGE      NS      EL0      EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                   x        x        0       RO       RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                   x        0        1       RO       RW           RW     RW

                                                                                   x        1        1       RO       n/a          RW     RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —       If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5638                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •   When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                      —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5639
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.19       PMXEVCNTR, Performance Monitors Selected Event Count Register
                    The PMXEVCNTR characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Reads or writes the value of the selected event counter, PMEVCNTR<n>. PMSELR.SEL
                                   determines which event counter is selected.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register PMXEVCNTR is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   PMXEVCNTR_EL0.
                                   This register is in the Warm reset domain. On a Warm or Cold reset RW fields in this register reset
                                   to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   PMXEVCNTR is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The PMXEVCNTR bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                                 0

                                                             PMEVCNTR<n>

                    PMEVCNTR<n>, bits [31:0]
                                   Value of the selected event counter, PMEVCNTR<n>, where n is the value stored in PMSELR.SEL.

                    Accessing the PMXEVCNTR
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                    opc1      opc2    CRn      coproc     CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c13, 2    000       010     1001     1111       1101

G7-5640                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                               Control                   Accessibility

                                                                               E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2    EL3

                                                                               x        x        0       RW    RW        n/a    RW

                                                                               x        0        1       RW    RW        RW     RW

                                                                               x        1        1       RW    n/a       RW     RW

                  If PMSELR.SEL is greater than or equal to the number of accessible counters then reads and writes of
                  PMXEVCNTR are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and the following behaviors are permitted:

                  •     Accesses to the register are UNDEFINED.

                  •     Accesses to the register behave as RAZ/WI.

                  •     Accesses to the register execute as a NOP.

                  •     Accesses to the register behave as if PMSELR.SEL has an UNKNOWN value less than the number of counters
                        accessible at the current Exception level and Security state.

                  •     Accesses to the register behave as if PMSELR.SEL is 31.

                  •     In Non-secure state, for an access from PL1 or a permitted access from PL0, if PMSELR.SEL, or
                        PMSELR_EL0.SEL if EL1 is using AArch64, is greater than or equal to the number of accessible counters
                        but is less than the number of implemented counters, the register access is trapped to EL2. Accesses from
                        PL0 are permitted when:
                        —      EL1 is using AArch32 and the value of PMUSERENR.EN is 1.
                        —      EL1 is using AArch64 and the value of PMUSERENR_EL0.EN is 1.

                          Note
                  In an implementation that includes EL2, in Non-secure state at EL0 and EL1:

                  •     If EL2 is using AArch32, HDCR.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.

                  •     If EL2 is using AArch64, MDCR_EL2.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.
                  Otherwise, the number of accessible counters is the number of implemented counters.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                        —      If PMUSERENR.EN==0, and PMUSERENR.ER==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are
                               trapped to Undefined mode.
                        —      If PMUSERENR.EN==0, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                        —      If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, and PMUSERENR_EL0.ER==0, read accesses to this register from
                               EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                        —      If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, write accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5641
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                           —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                    •      When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                           —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

G7-5642                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.      ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                             ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                 G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

G7.4.20     PMXEVTYPER, Performance Monitors Selected Event Type Register
                  The PMXEVTYPER characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 When PMSELR.SEL selects an event counter, this accesses a PMEVTYPER<n> register. When
                                 PMSELR.SEL selects the cycle counter, this accesses PMCCFILTR.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register PMXEVTYPER is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 PMXEVTYPER_EL0.
                                 When the value of PMSELR.SEL is 31, to select the cycle counter, RW fields in this register have
                                 defined reset values that apply only when the PE resets into an Exception level that is using
                                 AArch32. See PMCCFILTR for the reset values.
                                 Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED values that might be
                                 UNKNOWN. This applies whenever PMSELR.SEL selects an event counter.

                  Attributes
                                 PMXEVTYPER is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The PMXEVTYPER bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                  Event type register or PMCCFILTR

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Event type register or PMCCFILTR.
                                 When PMSELR.SEL == 31, this register accesses PMCCFILTR.
                                 Otherwise, this register accesses PMEVTYPER<n> where n is the value in PMSELR.SEL.

                  Accessing the PMXEVTYPER
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                           <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                           p15, 0, <Rt>, c9, c13, 1    000       001      1001    1111       1101

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5643
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RW    RW        n/a   RW

                                                                                 x        0        1       RW    RW        RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       RW    n/a       RW    RW

                    If PMSELR.SEL is greater than or equal to the number of accessible counters then reads and writes of
                    PMXEVTYPER are CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, and the following behaviors are permitted:

                    •      Accesses to the register are UNDEFINED.

                    •      Accesses to the register behave as RAZ/WI.

                    •      Accesses to the register execute as a NOP.

                    •      Accesses to the register behave as if PMSELR.SEL has an UNKNOWN value less than the number of counters
                           accessible at the current Exception level and Security state.

                    •      Accesses to the register behave as if PMSELR.SEL is 31.

                    •      In Non-secure state, for an access from PL1 or a permitted access from PL0, if PMSELR.SEL, or
                           PMSELR_EL0.SEL if EL1 is using AArch64, is greater than or equal to the number of accessible counters
                           but is less than the number of implemented counters, the register access is trapped to EL2. Accesses from
                           PL0 are permitted when:
                           —     EL1 is using AArch32 and the value of PMUSERENR.EN is 1.
                           —     EL1 is using AArch64 and the value of PMUSERENR_EL0.EN is 1.

                             Note
                    In an implementation that includes EL2, in Non-secure state at EL0 and EL1:

                    •      If EL2 is using AArch32, HDCR.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.

                    •      If EL2 is using AArch64, MDCR_EL2.HPMN identifies the number of accessible counters.
                    Otherwise, the number of accessible counters is the number of implemented counters.

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      In both security states, and not dependent on other bits:
                           —     If PMUSERENR.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.
                           —     If PMUSERENR_EL0.EN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5644                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                              G7.4 Performance Monitors registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If MDCR_EL2.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                      —     If HSTR_EL2.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If HDCR.TPM==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.
                      —     If HSTR.T9==1, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to Hyp mode.

                  •   When EL3 is implemented and is using AArch64:
                      —     If MDCR_EL3.TPM==1, accesses to this register from EL0, EL1, and EL2 are trapped to EL3.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     G7-5645
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5         Generic Timer registers
                    This section lists the Generic Timer registers in AArch32.

G7-5646                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.1      CNTFRQ, Counter-timer Frequency register
                  The CNTFRQ characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 This register is provided so that software can discover the frequency of the system counter. It must
                                 be programmed with this value as part of system initialization. The value of the register is not
                                 interpreted by hardware.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register CNTFRQ is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTFRQ_EL0.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTFRQ is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTFRQ bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                           Clock frequency

                  Bits [31:0]
                                 Clock frequency. Indicates the system counter clock frequency, in Hz.

                  Accessing the CNTFRQ
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                           <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                           p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c0, 0    000       000      1110    1111       0000

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5647
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility
                            Configuration
                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                            EL1 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        x        x       RO    RW        n/a   n/a

                            EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        0        1       RO    RO        RW    n/a

                            EL2 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        1        1       RO    n/a       RW    n/a

                            EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        x        0       RO    RO        RO    RW

                            EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        0        1       RO    RO        RO    RW

                            EL3 is the highest implemented Exception level.      x        1        1       RO    n/a       RO    RW

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PCTEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VCTEN==0, read accesses to this
                                 register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN==0, and CNTKCTL.PL0VCTEN==0, read accesses to this register from
                                 EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PCTEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VCTEN==0, Non-secure read
                                 accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN==0, and CNTKCTL.PL0VCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this
                                 register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PCTEN==0, and CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0VCTEN==0, Non-secure read
                                 accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5648                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.2      CNTHCTL, Counter-timer Hyp Control register
                  The CNTHCTL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Controls the generation of an event stream from the physical counter, and access from Non-secure
                                 EL1 modes to the physical counter and the Non-secure EL1 physical timer.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register CNTHCTL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTHCTL_EL2.
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTHCTL is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTHCTL bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                         8 7           4 3 2 1 0

                                                   RES0                                            EVNTI

                                                                                                                         PL1PCTEN
                                                                                                                          PL1PCEN
                                                                                                                           EVNTEN
                                                                                                                          EVNTDIR

                  Bits [31:8]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  EVNTI, bits [7:4]
                                 Selects which bit (0 to 15) of the counter register CNTPCT is the trigger for the event stream
                                 generated from that counter, when that stream is enabled.

                  EVNTDIR, bit [3]
                                 Controls which transition of the counter register CNTPCT trigger bit, defined by EVNTI, generates
                                 an event when the event stream is enabled:
                                 0           A 0 to 1 transition of the trigger bit triggers an event.
                                 1           A 1 to 0 transition of the trigger bit triggers an event.

                  EVNTEN, bit [2]
                                 Enables the generation of an event stream from the counter register CNTPCT:
                                 0           Disables the event stream.
                                 1           Enables the event stream.

                  PL1PCEN, bit [1]
                                 Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to the physical timer registers to Hyp mode.
                                 0           Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to the CNTP_CTL, CNTP_CVAL, and
                                             CNTP_TVAL are trapped to Hyp mode, unless the it is trapped by
                                             CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5649
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                                    1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    If EL3 is implemented and EL2 is not implemented, behavior is as if this bit is 1 other than for the
                                    purpose of a direct read.

                    PL1PCTEN, bit [0]
                                    Traps Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to the physical counter register to Hyp mode.
                                    0           Non-secure EL0 and EL1 accesses to the CNTPCT are trapped to Hyp mode, unless it
                                                is trapped by CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN.
                                    1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.
                                    If EL3 is implemented and EL2 is not implemented, behavior is as if this bit is 1 other than for the
                                    purpose of a direct read.

                    Accessing the CNTHCTL
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c1, 0    100       000        1110         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -          -            n/a    -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -          -            RW     RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

G7-5650                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.3      CNTHP_CTL, Counter-timer Hyp Physical Timer Control register
                  The CNTHP_CTL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Control register for the Hyp mode physical timer.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register CNTHP_CTL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTHP_CTL_EL2.
                                 If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                 Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                 into EL2 with EL2 using AArch32, or into EL3 with EL3 using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in
                                 this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTHP_CTL is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTHP_CTL bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                       3 2 1 0

                                                            RES0

                                                                                                                           ENABLE
                                                                                                                            IMASK
                                                                                                                          ISTATUS

                  Bits [31:3]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  ISTATUS, bit [2]
                                 The status of the timer. This bit indicates whether the timer condition is met:
                                 0           Timer condition is not met.
                                 1           Timer condition is met.
                                 When the value of the ENABLE bit is 1, ISTATUS indicates whether the timer condition is met.
                                 ISTATUS takes no account of the value of the IMASK bit. If the value of ISTATUS is 1 and the
                                 value of IMASK is 0 then the timer interrupt is asserted.
                                 When the value of the ENABLE bit is 0, the ISTATUS field is UNKNOWN.
                                 For more information see Operation of the CompareValue views of the timers on page D8-2329 and
                                 Operation of the TimerValue views of the timers on page D8-2330.
                                 This bit is read-only.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  IMASK, bit [1]
                                 Timer interrupt mask bit. Permitted values are:
                                 0           Timer interrupt is not masked by the IMASK bit.
                                 1           Timer interrupt is masked by the IMASK bit.
                                 For more information, see the description of the ISTATUS bit.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5651
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    ENABLE, bit [0]
                                     Enables the timer. Permitted values are:
                                     0           Timer disabled.
                                     1           Timer enabled.
                                     Setting this bit to 0 disables the timer output signal, but the timer value accessible from
                                     CNTHP_TVAL continues to count down.

                                              Note
                                     Disabling the output signal might be a power-saving option.

                                     When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Accessing the CNTHP_CTL
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc       CRm

                                                                p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    100       001      1110     1111         0010

                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    000       001      1110     1111         0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                  Control                   Accessibility
                      <syntax>
                                                  E2H      TGE       NS     EL0             EL1              EL2               EL3

                      p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    x        x         0      -               -                n/a               -

                      p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    x        0         1      -               -                RW                RW

                      p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    x        1         1      -               n/a              RW                RW

                      p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    x        x         0      CNTP_CTL        CNTP_CTL         n/a               CNTP_CTL

                      p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    0        0         1      CNTP_CTL        CNTP_CTL         CNTP_CTL          CNTP_CTL

                      p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    0        1         1      CNTP_CTL        n/a              CNTP_CTL          CNTP_CTL

                      p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    1        0         1      CNTP_CTL        CNTP_CTL         n/a               n/a

                      p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1    1        1         1      RW              n/a              n/a               n/a

                    This table applies to all instructions that can access this register.

G7-5652                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                        —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5653
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.4        CNTHP_CVAL, Counter-timer Hyp Physical CompareValue register
                    The CNTHP_CVAL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Holds the compare value for the Hyp mode physical timer.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register CNTHP_CVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    CNTHP_CVAL_EL2.
                                    If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    CNTHP_CVAL is a 64-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CNTHP_CVAL bit assignments are:

              63                                                                                                   0

                                                           CompareValue

                    CompareValue, bits [63:0]
                                    Holds the EL2 physical timer CompareValue.
                                    When CNTHP_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTPCT - CompareValue) is
                                    greater than or equal to zero. This means that CompareValue acts like a 64-bit upcounter timer.
                                    When the timer condition is met:
                                    •     CNTHP_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                    •     If CNTHP_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                    When CNTHP_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTPCT continues to count.

                    Accessing the CNTHP_CVAL
                    This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                    MRRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                    MCRR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                              <syntax>                    opc1   coproc     CRm

                                                                              p15, 6, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14    0110   1111       1110

                                                                              p15, 2, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14    0010   1111       1110

G7-5654                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                        Control                   Accessibility
           <syntax>
                                        E2H      TGE      NS      EL0                EL1             EL2             EL3

           p15, 6, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     x        x        0       -                  -               n/a             -

           p15, 6, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     x        0        1       -                  -               RW              RW

           p15, 6, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     x        1        1       -                  n/a             RW              RW

           p15, 2, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     x        x        0       CNTP_CVAL          CNTP_CVAL       n/a             CNTP_CVAL

           p15, 2, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     0        0        1       CNTP_CVAL          CNTP_CVAL       CNTP_CVAL       CNTP_CVAL

           p15, 2, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     0        1        1       CNTP_CVAL          n/a             CNTP_CVAL       CNTP_CVAL

           p15, 2, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     1        0        1       CNTP_CVAL          CNTP_CVAL       n/a             n/a

           p15, 2, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14     1        1        1       RW                 n/a             n/a             n/a

                  This table applies to all instructions that can access this register.

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                         (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                         —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5655
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.5        CNTHP_TVAL, Counter-timer Hyp Physical Timer TimerValue register
                    The CNTHP_TVAL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Holds the timer value for the Hyp mode physical timer.

                    Configurations
                                   AArch32 System register CNTHP_TVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   CNTHP_TVAL_EL2.
                                   If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3.
                                   RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   CNTHP_TVAL is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CNTHP_TVAL bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                              0

                                                                 TimerValue

                    TimerValue, bits [31:0]
                                   The TimerValue view of the EL2 physical timer.
                                   On a read of this register:
                                   •      If CNTHP_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the value returned is UNKNOWN.
                                   •      If CNTHP_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the value returned is (CNTHP_CVAL - CNTPCT).
                                   On a write of this register, CNTHP_CVAL is set to (CNTPCT + TimerValue), where TimerValue is
                                   treated as a signed 32-bit integer.
                                   When CNTHP_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTPCT - CNTHP_CVAL)
                                   is greater than or equal to zero. This means that TimerValue acts like a 32-bit downcounter timer.
                                   When the timer condition is met:
                                   •      CNTHP_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                   •      If CNTHP_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                   When CNTHP_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTPCT continues to count,
                                   so the TimerValue view appears to continue to count down.

                    Accessing the CNTHP_TVAL
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

G7-5656                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                                  G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                   This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                               <syntax>                     opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                               p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0     100       000      1110    1111       0010

                                                               p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0     000       000      1110    1111       0010

                   Accessibility
                   The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                         Control                   Accessibility
             <syntax>
                                         E2H      TGE      NS      EL0                EL1                EL2              EL3

             p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    x        x        0       -                  -                  n/a              -

             p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    x        0        1       -                  -                  RW               RW

             p15, 4, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    x        1        1       -                  n/a                RW               RW

             p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    x        x        0       CNTP_TVAL          CNTP_TVAL          n/a              CNTP_TVAL

             p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    0        0        1       CNTP_TVAL          CNTP_TVAL          CNTP_TVAL        CNTP_TVAL

             p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    0        1        1       CNTP_TVAL          n/a                CNTP_TVAL        CNTP_TVAL

             p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    1        0        1       CNTP_TVAL          CNTP_TVAL          n/a              n/a

             p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    1        1        1       RW                 n/a                n/a              n/a

                   This table applies to all instructions that can access this register.

                   Traps and Enables
                   For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                   exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                   exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                   Subject to the prioritization rules:

                   •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                          (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                          —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5657
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.6        CNTHV_CTL, Counter-timer Virtual Timer Control register (EL2)
                    The CNTHV_CTL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Provides AArch32 access to the control register for the EL2 virtual timer.

                                            Note
                                   The EL2 virtual timer is implemented by ARMv8.1-VHE. It is only accessible from AArch32 state
                                   when EL0 is using AArch32, EL2 is using AArch64, and the value of HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is
                                   {1, 1}.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register CNTHV_CTL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   CNTHV_CTL_EL2.
                                   This register is introduced in ARMv8.1.

                    Attributes
                                   CNTHV_CTL is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CNTHV_CTL bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                       3 2 1 0

                                                              RES0

                                                                                                                                ENABLE
                                                                                                                                 IMASK
                                                                                                                               ISTATUS

                    Bits [31:3]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ISTATUS, bit [2]
                                   The status of the timer. This bit indicates whether the timer condition is met:
                                   0           Timer condition is not met.
                                   1           Timer condition is met.
                                   When the value of the ENABLE bit is 1, ISTATUS indicates whether the timer condition is met.
                                   ISTATUS takes no account of the value of the IMASK bit. If the value of ISTATUS is 1 and the
                                   value of IMASK is 0 then the timer interrupt is asserted.
                                   When the value of the ENABLE bit is 0, the ISTATUS field is UNKNOWN.
                                   For more information see Operation of the CompareValue views of the timers on page D8-2329 and
                                   Operation of the TimerValue views of the timers on page D8-2330.
                                   This bit is read-only.

                    IMASK, bit [1]
                                   Timer interrupt mask bit. Permitted values are:
                                   0           Timer interrupt is not masked by the IMASK bit.
                                   1           Timer interrupt is masked by the IMASK bit.

G7-5658                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                          G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                                  For more information, see the description of the ISTATUS bit.

                  ENABLE, bit [0]
                                  Enables the timer. Permitted values are:
                                  0           Timer disabled.
                                  1           Timer enabled.
                                  Setting this bit to 0 disables the timer output signal, but the timer value accessible from
                                  CNTHV_TVAL continues to count down.

                                           Note
                                  Disabling the output signal might be a power-saving option.

                  Accessing the CNTHV_CTL
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                            <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn      coproc       CRm

                                                            p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c3, 1    000       001      1110     1111         0011

                  This register is accessed using the encoding for CNTV_CTL.

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                              Control                  Accessibility

                                              E2H      TGE      NS     EL0              EL1              EL2               EL3

                                              x        x        0      CNTV_CTL         CNTV_CTL         n/a               CNTV_CTL

                                              0        0        1      CNTV_CTL         CNTV_CTL         CNTV_CTL          CNTV_CTL

                                              0        1        1      CNTV_CTL         n/a              CNTV_CTL          CNTV_CTL

                                              1        0        1      CNTV_CTL         CNTV_CTL         n/a               n/a

                                              1        1        1      RW               n/a              n/a               n/a

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           G7-5659
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5660                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.7      CNTHV_CVAL, Counter-timer Virtual Timer CompareValue register (EL2)
                  The CNTHV_CVAL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Provides AArch32 access to the compare value for the EL2 virtual timer.

                                          Note
                                  The EL2 virtual timer is implemented by ARMv8.1-VHE. It is only accessible from AArch32 state
                                  when EL0 is using AArch32, EL2 is using AArch64, and the value of HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is
                                  {1, 1}.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register CNTHV_CVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  CNTHV_CVAL_EL2.
                                  This register is introduced in ARMv8.1.

                  Attributes
                                  CNTHV_CVAL is a 64-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTHV_CVAL bit assignments are:

            63                                                                                                        0

                                                         CompareValue

                  CompareValue, bits [63:0]
                                  Holds the EL2 virtual timer CompareValue.
                                  When CNTHV_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTVCT - CompareValue)
                                  is greater than or equal to zero. This means that CompareValue acts like a 64-bit upcounter timer.
                                  When the timer condition is met:
                                  •     CNTHV_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                  •     If CNTHV_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                  When CNTHV_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTVCT continues to
                                  count.

                  Accessing the CNTHV_CVAL
                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                  MCRR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                            <syntax>                      opc1     coproc     CRm

                                                                            p15, 3, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14      0011     1111       1110

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5661
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                       Control                  Accessibility

                                       E2H     TGE      NS     EL0                 EL1                EL2            EL3

                                       x       x        0      CNTV_CVAL           CNTV_CVAL          n/a            CNTV_CVAL

                                       0       0        1      CNTV_CVAL           CNTV_CVAL          CNTV_CVAL      CNTV_CVAL

                                       0       1        1      CNTV_CVAL           n/a                CNTV_CVAL      CNTV_CVAL

                                       1       0        1      CNTV_CVAL           CNTV_CVAL          n/a            n/a

                                       1       1        1      RW                  n/a                n/a            n/a

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5662                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.8      CNTHV_TVAL, Counter-timer Virtual Timer TimerValue register (EL2)
                  The CNTHV_TVAL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Provides AArch32 access to the timer value for the EL2 virtual timer.

                                          Note
                                 The EL2 virtual timer is implemented by ARMv8.1-VHE. It is only accessible from AArch32 state
                                 when EL0 is using AArch32, EL2 is using AArch64, and the value of HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is
                                 {1, 1}.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register CNTHV_TVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTHV_TVAL_EL2.
                                 This register is introduced in ARMv8.1.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTHV_TVAL is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTHV_TVAL bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                               TimerValue

                  TimerValue, bits [31:0]
                                 The TimerValue view of the EL2 virtual timer.
                                 On a read of this register:
                                 •      If CNTHV_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the value returned is UNKNOWN.
                                 •      If CNTHV_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the value returned is (CNTHV_CVAL - CNTVCT).
                                 On a write of this register, CNTHV_CVAL is set to (CNTVCT + TimerValue), where TimerValue
                                 is treated as a signed 32-bit integer.
                                 When CNTHV_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTVCT - CNTHV_CVAL)
                                 is greater than or equal to zero. This means that TimerValue acts like a 32-bit downcounter timer.
                                 When the timer condition is met:
                                 •      CNTV_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                 •      If CNTV_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                 When CNTV_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTVCT continues to count,
                                 so the TimerValue view appears to continue to count down.

                  Accessing the CNTHV_TVAL
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5663
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                    opc1      opc2    CRn    coproc     CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c3, 0    000       000     1110   1111       0011

                    This register is accessed using the encoding for CNTV_TVAL.

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                          Control                Accessibility

                                          E2H    TGE     NS      EL0               EL1                EL2            EL3

                                          x      x       0       CNTV_TVAL         CNTV_TVAL          n/a            CNTV_TVAL

                                          0      0       1       CNTV_TVAL         CNTV_TVAL          CNTV_TVAL      CNTV_TVAL

                                          0      1       1       CNTV_TVAL         n/a                CNTV_TVAL      CNTV_TVAL

                                          1      0       1       CNTV_TVAL         CNTV_TVAL          n/a            n/a

                                          1      1       1       RW                n/a                n/a            n/a

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5664                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.9      CNTKCTL, Counter-timer Kernel Control register
                  The CNTKCTL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Controls the generation of an event stream from the virtual counter, and access from EL0 modes to
                                 the physical counter, virtual counter, EL1 physical timers, and the virtual timer.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register CNTKCTL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTKCTL_EL1.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTKCTL is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTKCTL bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                10 9 8 7             4 3 2 1 0

                                                RES0                                             EVNTI

                                                                                                                         PL0PCTEN
                                                                                                                         PL0VCTEN
                                                                                                                           EVNTEN
                                                                                                                           EVNTDIR
                                                                                                                          PL0VTEN
                                                                                                                          PL0PTEN

                  Bits [31:10]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  PL0PTEN, bit [9]
                                 Traps PL0 accesses to the physical timer registers to Undefined mode.
                                 0           PL0 accesses to the CNTP_CTL, CNTP_CVAL, and CNTP_TVAL registers are trapped
                                             to Undefined mode.
                                 1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.

                  PL0VTEN, bit [8]
                                 Traps PL0 accesses to the virtual timer registers to Undefined mode.
                                 0           PL0 accesses to the CNTV_CTL, CNTV_CVAL, and CNTV_TVAL registers are
                                             trapped to Undefined mode.
                                 1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.

                  EVNTI, bits [7:4]
                                 Selects which bit (0 to 15) of the counter register CNTVCT is the trigger for the event stream
                                 generated from that counter, when that stream is enabled.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5665
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    EVNTDIR, bit [3]
                                    Controls which transition of the counter register CNTVCT trigger bit, defined by EVNTI, generates
                                    an event when the event stream is enabled:
                                    0           A 0 to 1 transition of the trigger bit triggers an event.
                                    1           A 1 to 0 transition of the trigger bit triggers an event.

                    EVNTEN, bit [2]
                                    Enables the generation of an event stream from the counter register CNTVCT:
                                    0           Disables the event stream.
                                    1           Enables the event stream.

                    PL0VCTEN, bit [1]
                                    Traps PL0 accesses to the frequency register and virtual counter register to Undefined mode.
                                    0           PL0 accesses to the CNTVCT are trapped to Undefined mode.
                                                PL0 accesses to the CNTFRQ register are trapped to Undefined mode, if
                                                CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN is also 0.
                                    1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.

                    PL0PCTEN, bit [0]
                                    Traps PL0 accesses to the frequency register and physical counter register to Undefined mode.
                                    0           PL0 accesses to the CNTPCT are trapped to Undefined mode.
                                                PL0 accesses to the CNTFRQ register are trapped to Undefined mode, if
                                                CNTKCTL.PL0VCTEN is also 0.
                                    1           This control does not cause any instructions to be trapped.

                    Accessing the CNTKCTL
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                              <syntax>                     opc1      opc2       CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                              p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c1, 0     000       000        1110         1111         0001

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                  Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE      NS      EL0        EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x        0       -          RW           n/a    RW

                                                                                  x        0        1       -          RW           RW     RW

                                                                                  x        1        1       -          n/a          RW     RW

G7-5666                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.10     CNTP_CTL, Counter-timer Physical Timer Control register
                  The CNTP_CTL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Control register for the EL1 physical timer.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register CNTP_CTL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTP_CTL_EL0.
                                 Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                 into an Exception level that is using AArch32. If the PE resets into EL3 using AArch32 they apply
                                 only to the Secure instance of the register. Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to
                                 architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTP_CTL is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTP_CTL bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                       3 2 1 0

                                                            RES0

                                                                                                                           ENABLE
                                                                                                                            IMASK
                                                                                                                          ISTATUS

                  Bits [31:3]
                                 Reserved, RES0.

                  ISTATUS, bit [2]
                                 The status of the timer. This bit indicates whether the timer condition is met:
                                 0           Timer condition is not met.
                                 1           Timer condition is met.
                                 When the value of the ENABLE bit is 1, ISTATUS indicates whether the timer condition is met.
                                 ISTATUS takes no account of the value of the IMASK bit. If the value of ISTATUS is 1 and the
                                 value of IMASK is 0 then the timer interrupt is asserted.
                                 When the value of the ENABLE bit is 0, the ISTATUS field is UNKNOWN.
                                 For more information see Operation of the CompareValue views of the timers on page D8-2329 and
                                 Operation of the TimerValue views of the timers on page D8-2330.
                                 This bit is read-only.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                  IMASK, bit [1]
                                 Timer interrupt mask bit. Permitted values are:
                                 0           Timer interrupt is not masked by the IMASK bit.
                                 1           Timer interrupt is masked by the IMASK bit.
                                 For more information, see the description of the ISTATUS bit.
                                 This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5667
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    ENABLE, bit [0]
                                    Enables the timer. Permitted values are:
                                    0           Timer disabled.
                                    1           Timer enabled.
                                    Setting this bit to 0 disables the timer output signal, but the timer value accessible from
                                    CNTP_TVAL continues to count down.

                                             Note
                                    Disabling the output signal might be a power-saving option.

                                    When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                    Accessing the CNTP_CTL
                    This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                    MRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                    MCR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                 <syntax>                   opc1        opc2        CRn     coproc   CRm

                                                                 p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 1   000         001         1110    1111     0010

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                    Control                    Accessibility
                       Configuration                                                                                         Instance
                                                    E2H      TGE        NS     EL0                EL1         EL2     EL3

                       EL3 is not implemented.      x        x          0      RW                 RW          n/a     n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is not implemented.      0        0          1      RW                 RW          RW      n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is not implemented.      0        1          1      RW                 n/a         RW      n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is not implemented.      1        0          1      RW                 RW          n/a     n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is not implemented.      1        1          1      CNTHP_CTL          n/a         n/a     n/a    -

                       EL3 is using AArch64.        x        x          0      RW                 RW          n/a     n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is using AArch64.        0        0          1      RW                 RW          RW      n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is using AArch64.        0        1          1      RW                 n/a         RW      n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is using AArch64.        1        0          1      RW                 RW          n/a     n/a    CNTP_CTL

                       EL3 is using AArch64.        1        1          1      CNTHP_CTL          n/a         n/a     n/a    -

G7-5668                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                                                  Control                  Accessibility
                      Configuration                                                                                 Instance
                                                  E2H     TGE      NS     EL0                EL1     EL2    EL3

                      EL3 is using AArch32.       x       x        0      RW                 n/a     n/a    RW      CNTP_CTL_s

                      EL3 is using AArch32.       x       0        1      RW                 RW      RW     RW      CNTP_CTL_ns

                      EL3 is using AArch32.       x       1        1      RW                 n/a     RW     RW      CNTP_CTL_ns

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                         —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                         —     If CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                  •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                         —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                         —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==1, Non-secure accesses to this
                               register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                  •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                         (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                         —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                         —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PTEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==1, Non-secure accesses to this
                               register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                         —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                         —     If CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                               mode.

                  •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                         (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                         —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                  •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                         —     If CNTHCTL.PL1PCEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                               Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5669
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.11       CNTP_CVAL, Counter-timer Physical Timer CompareValue register
                    The CNTP_CVAL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Holds the compare value for the EL1 physical timer.

                    Configurations
                                    AArch32 System register CNTP_CVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    CNTP_CVAL_EL0.
                                    RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                    CNTP_CVAL is a 64-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CNTP_CVAL bit assignments are:

              63                                                                                                   0

                                                           CompareValue

                    CompareValue, bits [63:0]
                                    Holds the EL1 physical timer CompareValue.
                                    When CNTP_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTPCT - CompareValue) is
                                    greater than or equal to zero. This means that CompareValue acts like a 64-bit upcounter timer.
                                    When the timer condition is met:
                                    •     CNTP_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                    •     If CNTP_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                    When CNTP_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTPCT continues to count.

                    Accessing the CNTP_CVAL
                    This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                    MRRC <syntax>

                    This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                    MCRR <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                              <syntax>                    opc1   coproc     CRm

                                                                              p15, 2, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14    0010   1111       1110

G7-5670                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
                                                                                              G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                          G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                   Accessibility
                   The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                              Control                   Accessibility
                  Configuration                                                                                    Instance
                                              E2H      TGE      NS      EL0                EL1      EL2    EL3

                  EL3 is using AArch32.       x        x        0       RW                 n/a      n/a    RW      CNTP_CVAL_s

                  EL3 is using AArch32.       x        0        1       RW                 RW       RW     RW      CNTP_CVAL_ns

                  EL3 is using AArch32.       x        1        1       RW                 n/a      RW     RW      CNTP_CVAL_ns

                  EL3 is not implemented.     x        x        0       RW                 RW       n/a    n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is not implemented.     0        0        1       RW                 RW       RW     n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is not implemented.     0        1        1       RW                 n/a      RW     n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is not implemented.     1        0        1       RW                 RW       n/a    n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is not implemented.     1        1        1       CNTHP_CVAL         n/a      n/a    n/a     -

                  EL3 is using AArch64.       x        x        0       RW                 RW       n/a    n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is using AArch64.       0        0        1       RW                 RW       RW     n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is using AArch64.       0        1        1       RW                 n/a      RW     n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is using AArch64.       1        0        1       RW                 RW       n/a    n/a     CNTP_CVAL

                  EL3 is using AArch64.       1        1        1       CNTHP_CVAL         n/a      n/a    n/a     -

                   Traps and Enables
                   For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                   exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                   exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                   Subject to the prioritization rules:

                   •     When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                         —      If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                         —      If CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                   •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                         —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                         —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==1, Non-secure accesses to this
                                register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                   •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                         (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                         —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                         —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PTEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==1, Non-secure accesses to this
                                register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                         —      If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                         —      If CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5671
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                           —     If CNTHCTL.PL1PCEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                                 Hyp mode.

G7-5672                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                           ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.12     CNTP_TVAL, Counter-timer Physical Timer TimerValue register
                  The CNTP_TVAL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Holds the timer value for the EL1 physical timer.

                  Configurations
                                 AArch32 System register CNTP_TVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTP_TVAL_EL0.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTP_TVAL is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTP_TVAL bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                               TimerValue

                  TimerValue, bits [31:0]
                                 The TimerValue view of the EL1 physical timer.
                                 On a read of this register:
                                 •      If CNTP_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the value returned is UNKNOWN.
                                 •      If CNTP_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the value returned is (CNTP_CVAL - CNTPCT).
                                 On a write of this register, CNTP_CVAL is set to (CNTPCT + TimerValue), where TimerValue is
                                 treated as a signed 32-bit integer.
                                 When CNTP_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTPCT - CNTP_CVAL) is
                                 greater than or equal to zero. This means that TimerValue acts like a 32-bit downcounter timer.
                                 When the timer condition is met:
                                 •      CNTP_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                 •      If CNTP_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                 When CNTP_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTPCT continues to count,
                                 so the TimerValue view appears to continue to count down.

                  Accessing the CNTP_TVAL
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                           <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                           p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c2, 0    000       000      1110    1111       0010

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       G7-5673
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                Control                  Accessibility
                    Configuration                                                                                 Instance
                                                E2H     TGE      NS      EL0                 EL1     EL2   EL3

                    EL3 is not implemented.     x       x        0       RW                  RW      n/a   n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is not implemented.     0       0        1       RW                  RW      RW    n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is not implemented.     0       1        1       RW                  n/a     RW    n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is not implemented.     1       0        1       RW                  RW      n/a   n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is not implemented.     1       1        1       CNTHP_TVAL          n/a     n/a   n/a    -

                    EL3 is using AArch64.       x       x        0       RW                  RW      n/a   n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is using AArch64.       0       0        1       RW                  RW      RW    n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is using AArch64.       0       1        1       RW                  n/a     RW    n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is using AArch64.       1       0        1       RW                  RW      n/a   n/a    CNTP_TVAL

                    EL3 is using AArch64.       1       1        1       CNTHP_TVAL          n/a     n/a   n/a    -

                    EL3 is using AArch32.       x       0        1       RW                  RW      RW    RW     CNTP_TVAL_ns

                    EL3 is using AArch32.       x       1        1       RW                  n/a     RW    RW     CNTP_TVAL_ns

                    EL3 is using AArch32.       x       x        0       RW                  n/a     n/a   RW     CNTP_TVAL_s

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==1, Non-secure accesses to this
                                 register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PTEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==1, Non-secure accesses to this
                                 register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.

G7-5674                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                          G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                      G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                      (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                      —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                  •   When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                      —     If CNTHCTL.PL1PCEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are trapped to
                            Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5675
ID121917                                          Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.13       CNTPCT, Counter-timer Physical Count register
                    The CNTPCT characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                    Holds the 64-bit physical count value.

                    Configurations
                                    There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                    AArch32 System register CNTPCT is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                    CNTPCT_EL0.

                    Attributes
                                    CNTPCT is a 64-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CNTPCT bit assignments are:

              63                                                                                                           0

                                                         Physical count value

                    Bits [63:0]
                                    Physical count value.

                    Accessing the CNTPCT
                    This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                    MRRC <syntax>

                    This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                                <syntax>                    opc1         coproc       CRm

                                                                                p15, 0, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14    0000         1111         1110

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                  Control                  Accessibility

                                                                                  E2H      TGE     NS      EL0     EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                                  x        x       0       RO      RO           n/a    RO

                                                                                  x        0       1       RO      RO           RO     RO

                                                                                  x        1       1       RO      n/a          RO     RO

G7-5676                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                        —      If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PCTEN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                        —      If CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 0):
                        —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped
                               to EL2.
                        —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCTEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PCTEN==1, Non-secure read
                               accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                        —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL1 are trapped
                               to EL2.
                        —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL1PCTEN==0, and CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PCTEN==1, Non-secure read
                               accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.
                        —      If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0PCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped
                               to EL1.
                        —      If CNTKCTL.PL0PCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to
                               Undefined mode.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                        (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                        —      If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped
                               to EL2.

                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch32 and SCR_EL3.NS == 1:
                        —      If CNTHCTL.PL1PCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 and EL1 are
                               trapped to Hyp mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      G7-5677
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.14       CNTV_CTL, Counter-timer Virtual Timer Control register
                    The CNTV_CTL characteristics are:

                    Purpose
                                   Control register for the virtual timer.

                    Configurations
                                   There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                   AArch32 System register CNTV_CTL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                   CNTV_CTL_EL0.
                                   Some or all RW fields of this register have defined reset values. These apply only if the PE resets
                                   into an Exception level that is using AArch32. Otherwise, RW fields in this register reset to
                                   architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                    Attributes
                                   CNTV_CTL is a 32-bit register.

                    Field descriptions
                    The CNTV_CTL bit assignments are:

                    31                                                                                       3 2 1 0

                                                              RES0

                                                                                                                                ENABLE
                                                                                                                                 IMASK
                                                                                                                               ISTATUS

                    Bits [31:3]
                                   Reserved, RES0.

                    ISTATUS, bit [2]
                                   The status of the timer. This bit indicates whether the timer condition is met:
                                   0           Timer condition is not met.
                                   1           Timer condition is met.
                                   When the value of the ENABLE bit is 1, ISTATUS indicates whether the timer condition is met.
                                   ISTATUS takes no account of the value of the IMASK bit. If the value of ISTATUS is 1 and the
                                   value of IMASK is 0 then the timer interrupt is asserted.
                                   When the value of the ENABLE bit is 0, the ISTATUS field is UNKNOWN.
                                   For more information see Operation of the CompareValue views of the timers on page D8-2329 and
                                   Operation of the TimerValue views of the timers on page D8-2330.
                                   This bit is read-only.
                                   This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

                    IMASK, bit [1]
                                   Timer interrupt mask bit. Permitted values are:
                                   0           Timer interrupt is not masked by the IMASK bit.
                                   1           Timer interrupt is masked by the IMASK bit.
                                   For more information, see the description of the ISTATUS bit.
                                   This field resets to a value that is architecturally UNKNOWN.

G7-5678                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                                  G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                              G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                  ENABLE, bit [0]
                                   Enables the timer. Permitted values are:
                                   0           Timer disabled.
                                   1           Timer enabled.
                                   Setting this bit to 0 disables the timer output signal, but the timer value accessible from
                                   CNTV_TVAL continues to count down.

                                            Note
                                   Disabling the output signal might be a power-saving option.

                                   When this register has an architecturally-defined reset value, this field resets to 0.

                  Accessing the CNTV_CTL
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                             <syntax>                       opc1      opc2     CRn          coproc       CRm

                                                             p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c3, 1       000       001      1110         1111         0011

                  Accessibility
                  The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                       Control                     Accessibility

                                                                       E2H     TGE      NS         EL0                EL1          EL2    EL3

                                                                       x       x        0          RW                 RW           n/a    RW

                                                                       0       0        1          RW                 RW           RW     RW

                                                                       0       1        1          RW                 n/a          RW     RW

                                                                       1       0        1          RW                 RW           n/a    n/a

                                                                       1       1        1          CNTHV_CTL          n/a          n/a    n/a

                  Traps and Enables
                  For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                  exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                  exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                  Subject to the prioritization rules:

                  •     When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                        —        If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                        —        If CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                   G7-5679
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5680                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                            ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.15     CNTV_CVAL, Counter-timer Virtual Timer CompareValue register
                  The CNTV_CVAL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Holds the compare value for the virtual timer.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register CNTV_CVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  CNTV_CVAL_EL0.
                                  RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                  CNTV_CVAL is a 64-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTV_CVAL bit assignments are:

            63                                                                                                        0

                                                         CompareValue

                  CompareValue, bits [63:0]
                                  Holds the EL1 virtual timer CompareValue.
                                  When CNTV_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTVCT - CompareValue) is
                                  greater than or equal to zero. This means that CompareValue acts like a 64-bit upcounter timer.
                                  When the timer condition is met:
                                  •     CNTV_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                  •     If CNTV_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                  When CNTV_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTVCT continues to count.

                  Accessing the CNTV_CVAL
                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                  MCRR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                            <syntax>                      opc1     coproc     CRm

                                                                            p15, 3, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14      0011     1111       1110

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5681
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                     Control                  Accessibility

                                                                     E2H      TGE      NS     EL0              EL1      EL2    EL3

                                                                     x        x        0      RW               RW       n/a    RW

                                                                     0        0        1      RW               RW       RW     RW

                                                                     0        1        1      RW               n/a      RW     RW

                                                                     1        0        1      RW               RW       n/a    n/a

                                                                     1        1        1      CNTHV_CVAL       n/a      n/a    n/a

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5682                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.16     CNTV_TVAL, Counter-timer Virtual Timer TimerValue register
                  The CNTV_TVAL characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                 Holds the timer value for the virtual timer.

                  Configurations
                                 There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                 AArch32 System register CNTV_TVAL is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                 CNTV_TVAL_EL0.
                                 RW fields in this register reset to architecturally UNKNOWN values.

                  Attributes
                                 CNTV_TVAL is a 32-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTV_TVAL bit assignments are:

                  31                                                                                                 0

                                                               TimerValue

                  TimerValue, bits [31:0]
                                 The TimerValue view of the virtual timer.
                                 On a read of this register:
                                 •      If CNTV_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the value returned is UNKNOWN.
                                 •      If CNTV_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the value returned is (CNTV_CVAL - CNTVCT).
                                 On a write of this register, CNTV_CVAL is set to (CNTVCT + TimerValue), where TimerValue is
                                 treated as a signed 32-bit integer.
                                 When CNTP_CTL.ENABLE is 1, the timer condition is met when (CNTVCT - CNTP_CVAL) is
                                 greater than or equal to zero. This means that TimerValue acts like a 32-bit downcounter timer.
                                 When the timer condition is met:
                                 •      CNTV_CTL.ISTATUS is set to 1.
                                 •      If CNTV_CTL.IMASK is 0, an interrupt is generated.
                                 When CNTV_CTL.ENABLE is 0, the timer condition is not met, but CNTVCT continues to count,
                                 so the TimerValue view appears to continue to count down.

                  Accessing the CNTV_TVAL
                  This register can be read using MRC with the following syntax:

                  MRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCR with the following syntax:

                  MCR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                           <syntax>                    opc1      opc2     CRn     coproc     CRm

                                                           p15, 0, <Rt>, c14, c3, 0    000       000      1110    1111       0011

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        G7-5683
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                     Control                  Accessibility

                                                                     E2H      TGE      NS     EL0              EL1      EL2    EL3

                                                                     x        x        0      RW               RW       n/a    RW

                                                                     0        0        1      RW               RW       RW     RW

                                                                     0        1        1      RW               n/a      RW     RW

                                                                     1        0        1      RW               RW       n/a    n/a

                                                                     1        1        1      CNTHV_TVAL       n/a      n/a    n/a

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN==0, accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0VTEN==0, Non-secure accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL2.

G7-5684                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                             G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                         G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.17     CNTVCT, Counter-timer Virtual Count register
                  The CNTVCT characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Holds the 64-bit virtual count value. The virtual count value is equal to the physical count value
                                  visible in CNTPCT minus the virtual offset visible in CNTVOFF.

                  Configurations
                                  There is one instance of this register that is used in both Secure and Non-secure states.
                                  AArch32 System register CNTVCT is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  CNTVCT_EL0.
                                  The value of this register is the same as the value of CNTPCT in the following conditions:
                                  •     When EL2 is not implemented.
                                  •     When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64, HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is {1, 1}, and this
                                        register is read from Non-secure EL0.

                  Attributes
                                  CNTVCT is a 64-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTVCT bit assignments are:

            63                                                                                                        0

                                                         Virtual count value

                  Bits [63:0]
                                  Virtual count value.

                  Accessing the CNTVCT
                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                               <syntax>                   opc1     coproc      CRm

                                                                               p15, 1, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14   0001     1111        1110

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         G7-5685
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       RO    RO        n/a   RO

                                                                                 x        0        1       RO    RO        RO    RO

                                                                                 x        1        1       RO    n/a       RO    RO

                    Traps and Enables
                    For a description of the prioritization of any generated exceptions, see Synchronous exception prioritization for
                    exceptions taken to AArch32 state on page G1-4626 for exceptions taken to AArch32 state and Synchronous
                    exception prioritization for exceptions taken to AArch64 on page D1-1895 for exceptions taken to AArch64 state.
                    Subject to the prioritization rules:

                    •      When HCR_EL2.E2H == 0:
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0VCTEN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to Undefined
                                 mode.
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VCTEN==0, read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 0):
                           —     If CNTKCTL.PL0VCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped to
                                 Undefined mode.
                           —     If CNTKCTL_EL1.EL0VCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped
                                 to EL1.

                    •      When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64 and (SCR_EL3.NS == 1) && (HCR_EL2.E2H == 1) &&
                           (HCR_EL2.TGE == 1):
                           —     If CNTHCTL_EL2.EL0PCTEN==0, Non-secure read accesses to this register from EL0 are trapped
                                 to EL2.

G7-5686                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
                                                                                                        G7.5 Generic Timer registers

G7.5.18     CNTVOFF, Counter-timer Virtual Offset register
                  The CNTVOFF characteristics are:

                  Purpose
                                  Holds the 64-bit virtual offset. This is the offset between the physical count value visible in
                                  CNTPCT and the virtual count value visible in CNTVCT.

                  Configurations
                                  AArch32 System register CNTVOFF is architecturally mapped to AArch64 System register
                                  CNTVOFF_EL2.
                                  If EL2 is not implemented, this register is RES0 from EL3 and the virtual counter uses a fixed virtual
                                  offset of zero.

                                           Note
                                  When EL2 is implemented and is using AArch64, if HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is {1, 1}, the virtual
                                  counter uses a fixed virtual offset of zero when CNTVCT is read from Non-secure EL0.

                                  When EL2 is implemented and can use AArch32, on a reset into an Exception level that is using
                                  AArch32 this register resets to an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED value that might be UNKNOWN.

                  Attributes
                                  CNTVOFF is a 64-bit register.

                  Field descriptions
                  The CNTVOFF bit assignments are:

            63                                                                                                         0

                                                           Virtual offset

                  Bits [63:0]
                                  Virtual offset.

                  Accessing the CNTVOFF
                  This register can be read using MRRC with the following syntax:

                  MRRC <syntax>

                  This register can be written using MCRR with the following syntax:

                  MCRR <syntax>

                  This syntax is encoded with the following settings in the instruction encoding:

                                                                             <syntax>                      opc1     coproc      CRm

                                                                             p15, 4, <Rt>, <Rt2>, c14      0100     1111        1110

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          G7-5687
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
G7 AArch32 System Register Descriptions
G7.5 Generic Timer registers

                    Accessibility
                    The register is accessible in software as follows:

                                                                                 Control                   Accessibility

                                                                                 E2H      TGE      NS      EL0   EL1       EL2   EL3

                                                                                 x        x        0       -     -         n/a   -

                                                                                 x        0        1       -     -         RW    RW

                                                                                 x        1        1       -     n/a       RW    RW

G7-5688                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
