Chapter H5
The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface

                  This chapter describes the embedded cross-trigger interface. It contains the following sections:
                  •     About the Embedded Cross-Trigger (ECT) on page H5-5782.
                  •     Basic operation on the ECT on page H5-5784.
                  •     Cross-triggers on a PE in an ARMv8 implementation on page H5-5788.
                  •     Description and allocation of CTI triggers on page H5-5789.
                  •     CTI registers programmers’ model on page H5-5793.
                  •     Examples on page H5-5794.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                H5-5781
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.1 About the Embedded Cross-Trigger (ECT)

H5.1         About the Embedded Cross-Trigger (ECT)
                    The Embedded Cross-Trigger, ECT, allows a debugger to:

                    •     Send trigger events to a PE. For example, this might be done to halt the PE.

                    •     Send a trigger event to one or more PEs, or other system components, when a trigger event occurs on another
                          PE or system component. For example, this might be done to halt all PEs when one individual PE halts.

                    Figure H5-1 shows the logical structure of an ECT.

                                      Embedded Cross-Trigger

                                                                       Cross-Trigger Matrix (CTM)

                                                PE                                                                     System
                                           Cross-Trigger      PE CTI             PE CTI              PE CTI
                                          Interface (CTI)                                                               CTI

                                                                                                                    Other system
                                               PE               PE                 PE                     PE        components

                                                                         Figure H5-1 Structure of an embedded cross-trigger

                    The ECT can deliver many types of trigger events, which are described in the following sections:
                    •    Debug request trigger event on page H5-5790.
                    •    Restart request trigger event on page H5-5790.
                    •    Cross-halt trigger event on page H5-5790.
                    •    Performance Monitors overflow trigger event on page H5-5791.
                    •    Generic trace external input trigger events on page H5-5791.
                    •    Generic trace external output trigger events on page H5-5791.
                    •    Generic CTI interrupt trigger event on page H5-5791.

                    An ARMv8-A implementation must:
                    •    Include a cross-trigger interface, CTI.
                    •    Implement at least the input and output triggers defined in this architecture.

                    In addition, see Cross-triggers on a PE in an ARMv8 implementation on page H5-5788.

                    ARM recommends that this cross-trigger interface includes:
                    •   The ability to route trigger events between Trace macrocells, which typically have advanced event triggering
                        logic.
                    •   An output trigger to the interrupt controller.

                    Also, ARM recommends that the Embedded Cross-Trigger includes the capability to send and receive
                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED system trigger events to and from other system components, including a system counter,
                    using a system CTI. See Halt-on-debug on page I2-5998.

H5-5782                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                           H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                                                                       H5.1 About the Embedded Cross-Trigger (ECT)

                          Note
                  The ECT and CTI must only signal trigger events for external debugging. They must not route software events, such
                  as interrupts. For example, the Performance Monitors overflow input trigger is provided to allow entry to Debug
                  state on a counter overflow, and the output trigger to the interrupt controller is provided to generally allow events
                  from the external debug sub-system to be routed to a software agent. However, the combination of the two must not
                  be used as a mechanism to route Performance Monitors overflows to an interrupt controller.

H5.1.1      Implementation with a CoreSight CTI
                  For details of the recommended connections in an ARMv8-A implementation, see Appendix K2 Recommended
                  External Debug Interface. See also CoreSight™ SoC Technical Reference Manual.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        H5-5783
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.2 Basic operation on the ECT

H5.2         Basic operation on the ECT
                    The ECT comprises a Cross-Trigger Matrix, CTM, and one Cross-Trigger Interface, CTI, for each PE. The ECT
                    might also include other CTIs for other system components. The CTM passes events between the CTI blocks over
                    channels. The CTM can have a maximum of 32 channels.

                    The main interfaces of the cross-trigger interface, CTI, are:
                    •    The input triggers:
                         —       These are trigger event inputs from the PE to the CTI.
                    •    The output triggers:
                         —       These are trigger event outputs from the CTI to the PE.
                    •    The input channels:
                         —       These are channel event inputs from the cross-trigger matrix, CTM, to the CTI.
                    •    The output channels:
                         —       These are channel event outputs from the CTI to the CTM.

                    Each CTI block has:

                    •     Up to 32 input triggers that come from the PE:
                          —      The input triggers are numbered 0-31.

                    •     Up to 32 output triggers that go to the PE:
                          —      The output triggers are numbered 0-31.

                    Figure H5-2 on page H5-5785 shows the logical internal structure of a CTI.

H5-5784                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                              H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                                                                                      H5.2 Basic operation on the ECT

                                                 Cross Trigger Interface

                       Channel
                        pulse

  CTIAPPSET
                      Application
                        trigger                                                       Gate
                      (CTIAPP)                                                                             CTIGATE
  CTIAPPCLEAR                                                                        enable

                                                 GLBEN

                                              Input                                                          Output
                                             trigger                                                         channel
                         Input
                                                to                                                          interface
                        trigger
                                             Output
                      interface
                                            channel
                                            mapping

                                                         CTIINEN[ ]                             CTICHOUTSTATUS
    PE                CTITRIGINSTATUS                                                                                        CTM

                                              Input
                                            channel
                       Output                   to
                        trigger              Output                                                           Input
                      interface              trigger                                                         channel
                                            mapping                                                         interface

                               CTIINTACK             CTIOUTEN[ ]

                        CTITRIGOUTSTATUS                                                           CTICHINSTATUS

                                                                              Figure H5-2 Structure of a cross-trigger interface

                            Note
                  •       The number of triggers in IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Figure H5-2 shows eight input and eight output
                          triggers.

                  •       The number of channels is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Figure H5-2 shows four channels.

                  •       In Figure H5-2 the input channel gate function is a CTIv2 feature.

                  When the CTI receives an input trigger event, this generates channel events on one or more internal channels,
                  according to the mapping function defined by the Input trigger→output channel mapping registers, CTIINEN<n>.

                  The CTI also contains an application trigger and channel pulse to allow a debugger to create channel events directly
                  on internal channels by writing to the CTI control registers.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     H5-5785
ID121917                                               Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.2 Basic operation on the ECT

                    Channel events on each internal channel are passed to a corresponding output channel that is controlled by a channel
                    gate. The channel gate can block propagation of channel events from an internal channel to an output channel.

                    The output channels from a CTI are combined, using a logical OR function, with the output channels from all other
                    CTIs to form the input channels on other CTIs. The input channels of this CTI are the logical OR of the output
                    channels on all other CTIs. This is the cross-trigger matrix, CTM. Therefore, the number of input channels must
                    equal the number of output channels.

                            Note
                    The number of input triggers and output triggers is not required to be the same.

                    The internal channels form an internal cross-trigger matrix within the CTI. This delivers events directly from the
                    input triggers to the output triggers. Therefore the number of internal channels is the same as the number of input
                    and output channels on the external CTM, and there is a direct mapping between the two.

                    Channel events received on each input channel are passed to the corresponding internal channel. It is
                    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the cross-trigger gate also blocks propagation of channel events from input
                    channels to internal channels.

                    When the CTI receives a channel event on an internal channel this generates trigger events on one or more output
                    triggers, according to the mapping function defined by the Input channel → output trigger mapping registers,
                    CTIOUTEN<n>.

                    The CTI contains the input and output trigger interfaces to the PE and the interface of the cross-trigger matrix. The
                    architecture does not define the signal protocol used on the trigger interfaces, and:
                    •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the CTI supports multicycle input trigger events.
                    •      It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the CTM supports multicycle channel events.
                    See Multicycle events.

                    However, an output trigger is asserted until acknowledged. The output trigger can be:
                    •    Self-acknowledging. This means that no further action is required from the debugger.
                    •    Acknowledged by the debugger writing 1 to the corresponding bit of CTIINTACK.

                    The time taken to propagate a trigger event from the first PE, through its CTI, across the CTM to another CTI, and
                    thereby to a second PE is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                            Note
                    ARM recommends that this path is not longer than the shortest software communication path between those PEs.
                    This is because if the first PE halts, the Cross-halt trigger event can propagate through the ECT and halt the second
                    PE without causing software on the second PE to malfunction because the first PE is in Debug state and is not
                    responding.

H5.2.1        Multicycle events
                    A multicycle event is one with a continuous state that might persist over many cycles, as opposed to a discrete event.
                    A typical implementation of a multicycle event is a level-based signal interface, whereas a discrete event might be
                    implemented as a pulse signal or message.

                    CTI support for multicycle trigger events is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Use of multicycle trigger events is
                    deprecated. Of the architecturally defined input trigger events, the Performance Monitors overflow trigger event and
                    Generic trace external output trigger events can be multicycle input triggers.

                    CTM support for multicycle channel events is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. A CTM that does not support multicycle
                    channel events cannot propagate a multicycle trigger event between CTIs.

                            Note
                    A full ECT might comprise a mix of CTIs, some of which can support multicycle trigger events. In bridging these
                    components, multicycle channel events become single channel events at the boundary between the CTIs.

H5-5786                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                              H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                                                                                      H5.2 Basic operation on the ECT

                  An ECT that supports multicycle trigger events
                  When an ECT supports multicycle trigger events, an input trigger event to the CTI continuously asserts channel
                  events on all output channels mapped to it until either:
                  •     The input trigger event is removed.
                  •     The channel mapping function is disabled.

                  This means that an input trigger that is asserted for multiple cycles causes any channels that are mapped to it to
                  become active for multiple cycles. Consequently, any output triggers mapped from that channel are asserted for
                  multiple cycles.

                           Note
                  The output trigger remains asserted for at least as long as the channel remains active. This means that even if the
                  output trigger is acknowledged, it remains asserted until the channel deactivates.

                  The CTI does not guarantee that these events have precisely the same duration, as the triggers and channels can cross
                  between clock domains.

                  CTIAPPSET and CTIAPPCLEAR can set a channel active for multiple cycles. CTIAPPPULSE generates a single
                  channel event. CTICHINSTATUS and CTICHOUTSTATUS can report whether a channel is active.

                  An ECT that does not support multicycle trigger events
                  When an ECT does not support multicycle trigger events, an input trigger event to the CTI generates a single
                  channel event on all output channels mapped to it, regardless of how long the input trigger event is asserted.

                  This means that an input trigger event that is asserted for multiple cycles generates a single channel event on any
                  channels mapped to it. Consequently any self-acknowledging output triggers mapped from those channels are single
                  trigger events.

                           Note
                  A single event is typically a single cycle, but there is no guarantee that this is always the case.

                  CTIAPPSET and CTIAPPCLEAR can only generate a single channel event. CTIAPPPULSE generates a single
                  channel event. If the ECT does not support multicycle channel events, use of CTIAPPSET and CTIAPPCLEAR is
                  deprecated, and the debugger must only use CTIAPPPULSE. CTICHINSTATUS and CTICHOUTSTATUS must
                  be treated as UNKNOWN.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        H5-5787
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.3 Cross-triggers on a PE in an ARMv8 implementation

H5.3         Cross-triggers on a PE in an ARMv8 implementation
                     An ARMv8 PE must include a cross-trigger interface, and the implementation must include at least the input and
                     output triggers defined in this architecture. The number of channels in the cross-trigger matrix is IMPLEMENTATION
                     DEFINED, but there must be a minimum of three. Software can read CTIDEVID.NUMCHAN to discover the number
                     of implemented channels.

                     The CTM must connect to all PEs in the same Inner Shareability domain as the ARMv8-A PE, but can also connect
                     to additional PEs. ARM strongly recommends that the CTM connects all PEs implementing a CTI in the system.
                     This includes ARMv7-A PEs and other PEs that can be connected using a CoreSight CTI module.

                             Note
                     In a uniprocessor system the CTM is OPTIONAL. The CTM might be connected other CTI modules for non-PEs, such
                     as triggers for system visibility components. ARM recommends that the CTM is implemented.

                     Any CTI connected to a PE that is not an ARMv8-A PE must implement at least:
                     •    The Debug request trigger event.
                     •    The Restart trigger event.
                     •    The Cross-halt trigger event.

                     For more information about the CTI, see the CoreSight ™ SoC Technical Reference Manual. ARMv8-A refines the
                     generic CTI by defining roles for each of the implemented input and output triggers.

H5-5788                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                                  H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                                                                               H5.4 Description and allocation of CTI triggers

H5.4         Description and allocation of CTI triggers
                     Table H5-1 shows the output trigger events defined by the architecture and the related trigger numbers.

                                                                                 Table H5-1 Allocation of CTI output trigger events

               Number          Source        Destination           Event description

               0               CTI           PE                    Debug request trigger event on page H5-5790

               1               CTI           PE                    Restart request trigger event on page H5-5790

               2               CTI           IRQ controller        Generic CTI interrupt trigger event on page H5-5791

               3               -             -                     Reserved

               4-7             CTI           Trace macrocell       OPTIONAL Generic trace external input trigger events on page H5-5791

                                Note
                     Output triggers from the CTI are inputs to other blocks.

                     Table H5-2 shows the input trigger events defined by the architecture and the related trigger numbers.

                                                                                   Table H5-2 Allocation of CTI input trigger events

         Number          Source                  Destination     Event description

         0               PE                      CTI             Cross-halt trigger event on page H5-5790

         1               PE                      CTI             Performance Monitors overflow trigger event on page H5-5791

         2-3             -                       -               Reserved

         4-7             Trace macrocell         CTI             OPTIONAL Generic trace external output trigger events on page H5-5791

                                Note
                     Input triggers to the CTI are outputs from other blocks.

                     Table H5-1 and Table H5-2 show the minimum set of trigger events defined by the architecture. However:

                     •        The Generic trace external input and output trigger events are only required if the OPTIONAL Trace macrocell
                              is implemented. If the OPTIONAL Trace macrocell is not implemented, these trigger events are reserved.

                     •        Support for the generic CTI interrupt trigger event is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED because details of interrupt
                              handling in the system, including any interrupt controllers, are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Details regarding
                              how the CTI interrupt is connected to an interrupt controller and its allocated interrupt number lie outside the
                              scope of the architecture. ARM strongly recommends that implementations provide a means to generate
                              interrupts based on external debug events.

                     •        The other trigger events are required by the architecture.

                     An ARMv8-A implementation can extend the CTI with additional triggers. These start with the number eight.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         H5-5789
ID121917                                                   Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.4 Description and allocation of CTI triggers

H5.4.1          Debug request trigger event
                       This is an output trigger event from the CTI, and an input trigger event to the PE, asserted by the CTI to force the
                       PE into Debug state. The trigger event is asserted until acknowledged by the debugger. The debugger acknowledges
                       the trigger event by writing 1 to CTIINTACK[0].

                                Note
                       A debugger must poll CTITRIGOUTSTATUS[0] until it reads as 0, to confirm that the output trigger has been
                       deasserted before generating any event that must be ordered after the write to CTIINTACK, such as a write to
                       CTIAPPPULSE to activate another trigger.

                       If the PE is already in Debug state, the PE ignores the trigger event, but the CTI continues to assert it until it is
                       removed by the debugger. See also External Debug Request debug event on page H3-5752.

H5.4.2          Restart request trigger event
                       This is an output trigger event from the CTI, and an input trigger event to the PE, asserted by the CTI to request the
                       PE to exit Debug state. If the PE is in Non-debug state, the request is ignored by the PE.

                       If a Restart request trigger event is received at or about the same time as the PE enters Debug state, it is
                       CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether:
                       •      The request is ignored by the PE. In this case the PE enters Debug state and remains in Debug state.
                       •      The PE enters Debug state and then immediately restarts.

                       Debuggers must program the CTI to send Restart request trigger events only to PEs that are halted. To enable the
                       PE to disambiguate discrete Restart request trigger events, after sending a Restart request trigger event, the debugger
                       must confirm that the PE has restarted and halted before sending another Restart request trigger event. Debuggers
                       can use EDPRSR.{SDR, HALTED} to determine the Execution state of the PE.

                                Note
                       Before generating a Restart request trigger event for a PE, a debugger must ensure any Debug request trigger event
                       targeting that PE is cleared. Debug request trigger event describes how to do this.

                       The trigger event is self-acknowledging, meaning that the debugger requires no further action to remove the trigger
                       event. The trigger event is acknowledged even if the request is ignored by the PE. See also Exiting Debug state on
                       page H2-5733.

H5.4.3          Cross-halt trigger event
                       This is an input trigger event to the CTI, and an output trigger event from the PE, asserted by a PE when it is entering
                       Debug state.

                                Note
                       To reduce the latency of halting, ARM recommends that an implementation issues the Cross-halt trigger event early
                       in the committed process of entering Debug state. This means that there is no requirement to wait until all aspects
                       of entry to Debug state have completed before issuing the trigger event. Speculative emission of Cross-halt trigger
                       events is not allowed. The Cross-halt trigger event must not be issued early enough for a subsequent Debug request
                       trigger event, that might be derived from the Cross-halt trigger event, to be recorded in the EDSCR.STATUS field.
                       This applies to Debug request trigger events that are acting as inputs to the PE.

H5-5790                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                            H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                                                                         H5.4 Description and allocation of CTI triggers

H5.4.4      Performance Monitors overflow trigger event
                  This is an input trigger event to the CTI, and an output trigger event from the PE, asserted each time the PE asserts
                  a new Performance Monitors counter overflow interrupt request. See Chapter D5 The Performance Monitors
                  Extension.

                  If the CTI supports multicycle trigger events, then the trigger event remains asserted until the overflow is cleared
                  by a write to PMOVSCLR_EL0. Otherwise, the trigger event is asserted when the value of PMOVSCLR_EL0
                  changes from zero to a non-zero value.

                          Note
                  •     This does not replace the recommended connection of Performance Monitors overflow trigger event to an
                        interrupt controller. Software must be able to program an interrupt on Performance Monitors overflow
                        without programming the CTI.

                  •     Events can be counted when ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() ==FALSE, and, in Secure state, when
                        ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() ==FALSE. Secure software must be aware that overflow trigger
                        events are nevertheless visible to the CTI.

H5.4.5      Generic trace external input trigger events
                  These are output trigger events from the CTI, and input trigger events to the OPTIONAL Trace macrocell, that are
                  used in conjunction with the Generic trace external output trigger events to pass trigger events between:
                  •      The PE and the OPTIONAL Trace macrocell.
                  •      The OPTIONAL Trace macrocell and any other component attached to the CTM, including other Trace
                         macrocells.

                  There are four Generic trace external input trigger events.

                  The trigger events are self-acknowledging. This means that the debugger does not have to take any further action to
                  to remove the events.

H5.4.6      Generic trace external output trigger events
                  These are input trigger events to the CTI, and output trigger events from the OPTIONAL Trace macrocell, used in
                  conjunction with the Generic trace external input trigger events to pass trigger events between:
                  •     The PE and the OPTIONAL Trace macrocell.
                  •     The OPTIONAL Trace macrocell and any other component attached to the CTM, including other Trace
                        macrocells.

                  There are four Generic trace external output trigger events.

H5.4.7      Generic CTI interrupt trigger event
                  This is an output trigger event from the CTI, and an input to an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED interrupt controller, and
                  can transfer trigger events from the PE, Trace macrocell, or any other component attached to the CTI and CTM to
                  software as an interrupt. The Generic CTI interrupt trigger event must be connected to the interrupt controller as an
                  interrupt that can target the originating PE.

                          Note
                  •     ARM recommends that the Generic CTI interrupt trigger event is a private peripheral interrupt, but
                        implementations might instead make this trigger event available as a shared peripheral interrupt or a local
                        peripheral interrupt.

                  •     GICv3 reserves a private peripheral interrupt number for this interrupt.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         H5-5791
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.4 Description and allocation of CTI triggers

                       It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether this trigger event is:

                       •      Self-acknowledging. This means that the debugger is not required to take any further action, and that the
                              interrupt controller must treat the trigger event as a pulse or edge-sensitive interrupt.

                       •      Acknowledged by the debugger. The debugger acknowledges the trigger event by writing 1 to
                              CTIINTACK[2]. This means that the interrupt controller must treat the trigger event as a level-sensitive
                              interrupt.

                       ARM recommends that the Generic CTI interrupt trigger event is a self-acknowledging trigger event.

H5-5792                           Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                            H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                                                                               H5.5 CTI registers programmers’ model

H5.5       CTI registers programmers’ model
                  The CTI registers programmers’ model is described in Chapter H8 About the External Debug Registers. The
                  following sections contain information specific to the CTI:
                  •     External debug register resets on page H8-5835.
                  •     External debug interface register access permissions on page H8-5824.
                  •     Cross-trigger interface registers on page H8-5833.
                  •     The individual register descriptions in Cross-Trigger Interface registers on page H9-5942.

                  See also Memory-mapped accesses to the external debug interface on page H8-5822.

H5.5.1      CTI reset
                  An External Debug reset resets the CTI. See External debug register resets on page H8-5835 for details of CTI
                  register resets. All CTI output triggers and output channels are deasserted on an External Debug reset.

                          Note
                  An indirect read of an output trigger might not observe the deasserted state until the processor is Cold reset. For
                  more information, see Synchronization of changes to the external debug registers on page H8-5818.

H5.5.2      CTI authentication
                  The CTI ignores the state of the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface. This means that:

                  •     CTITRIGINSTATUS shows the status of the input triggers and CTICHINSTATUS shows the status of the
                        input channels, regardless of the value of ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled().

                                 Note
                        The PE does not generate the Cross-halt trigger event and the Trace macrocell does not generate Generic trace
                        external output trigger events when ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() ==FALSE. However, the PE can
                        generate Performance Monitors overflow trigger events.

                  •     The CTI can generate external triggers regardless of the value of ExternalInvasiveDebugEnabled().

                                 Note
                        The PE ignores Debug request and Restart request trigger events when
                        ExternalInvasiveDebugEnabled() ==FALSE. The Trace macrocell ignores Generic trace external input trigger
                        events when ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled() ==FALSE. The behavior of Generic CTI interrupt requests
                        is part of the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED handling of these interrupts, but it is permissible for an interrupt
                        controller to receive these requests even when ExternalInvasiveDebugEnabled() ==FALSE.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        H5-5793
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.6 Examples

H5.6         Examples
                    The CTI is fully programmable and allows for flexible cross-triggering of events within a PE and between PEs in a
                    multiprocessor system. For example:

                    •      The Cross-halt trigger event and the Debug request trigger event can be used for cross-triggering in a
                           multiprocessor system.

                    •      The Cross-halt trigger event and the Generic interrupt trigger event can be used for event-driven debugging
                           in a multiprocessor system.

                    •      The Performance Monitors overflow trigger event and the Debug request trigger event can force entry to
                           Debug state on overflow of a Performance Monitors event counter, for event-driven profiling.

                                    Note
                           This does not replace the recommended connection of Performance Monitors overflow trigger events to an
                           interrupt controller. Software must be able to program an interrupt on Performance Monitors overflow
                           without programming the CTI. ARM recommends that the Performance Monitors overflow signal is directly
                           available as a local interrupt source.

                    •      The Generic trace external input and Generic trace external output trigger events can pass trace events into
                           and out of the event logic of the Trace macrocell. They can do this:
                           —      To pass trace events between Trace macrocells.
                           —      In conjunction with the Performance Monitors overflow trigger event, to couple the Performance
                                  Monitors to the Trace macrocell.
                           —      In conjunction with the Debug request trigger event, to trigger entry to Debug state on a trace event.
                           —      In conjunction with other CTIs, to signal a trace trigger event onto a CoreSight trace interconnect.

                    The following sections describe some examples in more detail:
                    •     Halting a single PE.
                    •     Halting all PEs in a group when any one PE halts on page H5-5795.
                    •     Synchronously restarting a group of PEs on page H5-5795.
                    •     Halting a single PE on Performance Monitors overflow on page H5-5796.

                                                                                                 Example H5-1 Halting a single PE

                    To halt a single PE, set:

                    1.     CTIGATE[0] to 0, so that the CTI does not pass channel events on internal channel 0 to the CTM.

                    2.     CTIOUTEN0[0] to 1, so that the CTI generates a Debug request trigger event in response to a channel event
                           on channel 0.

                                    Note
                           The Cross-halt trigger event is input trigger 0, meaning it is controlled by the instance of CTIOUTEN<n> for
                           which <n> is 0.

                    3.     CTIAPPPULSE[0] to 1, to generate a channel event on channel 0.

                    When the PE has entered Debug state, clear the Debug request trigger event by writing 1 to CTIINTACK[0], before
                    restarting the PE.

H5-5794                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                            H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
                                                                                                                   H5.6 Examples

                                                          Example H5-2 Halting all PEs in a group when any one PE halts

                  To program a group of PEs so that when one PE in the group halts, all of the PEs in that group halt, set the following
                  registers for each PE in the group:

                  1.    CTIGATE[2] to 1, so that each CTI passes channel events on internal channel 2 to the CTM.

                  2.    CTIINEN0[2] to 1,so that each CTI generates a channel event on channel 2 in response to a Cross-halt trigger
                        event.

                  3.    CTIOUTEN0[2] to 1, so that each CTI generates a Debug request trigger event in response to an channel
                        event on channel 2.

                                 Note
                        The Cross-halt trigger event is input trigger 0, meaning it is controlled by the instances of CTIINEN<n> and
                        CTIOUTEN<n> for which <n> is 0.

                  When a PE has halted, clear the Debug request trigger event by writing a value of 1to CTIINTACK[0], before
                  restarting the PE.

                                                                    Example H5-3 Synchronously restarting a group of PEs

                  To restart a group of PEs, for each PE in the group:

                  1.    If the PE was halted because of a Debug request trigger event, the debugger must ensure the trigger event is
                        deasserted. It can do this by:
                        a.      Writing 1 to CTIINTACK[0] to clear the Debug request trigger event.
                        b.      Polling CTITRIGOUTSTATUS[0], until it reads as 0, to confirm that the trigger event has been
                                deasserted.

                  2.    Set CTIGATE[1] to 1, so that each CTI passes channel events on internal channel 1 to the CTM.

                  3.    Set CTIOUTEN1[1] to 1, so that each CTI generates a Restart request trigger event in response to a channel
                        event on channel 1.

                                 Note
                        This example must use the instance of CTIOUTEN<n> for which <n> is 1.

                  4.    Set CTIAPPPULSE[1] to 1 on any one PE in the group, to generate a channel event on channel 1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         H5-5795
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H5 The Embedded Cross-Trigger Interface
H5.6 Examples

                                                      Example H5-4 Halting a single PE on Performance Monitors overflow

                      To halt a single PE on a Performance Monitors overflow set:

                      1.    CTIGATE[3] to 0, so that the CTI does not pass channel events on internal channel 3 to the CTM.

                      2.    CTIINEN1[3] to 1, so that the CTI generates a channel event on channel 3 in response to a Performance
                            Monitors overflow trigger event.

                                    Note
                  .         This step of this example must use the instance of CTIINEN<n> for which <n> is 1.

                      3.    CTIOUTEN0[3] to 1, so that the CTI generates a Debug request trigger event in response to a channel event
                            on channel 3.

                                    Note
                  .         This step of this example must use the instance of CTIOUTEN<n> for which <n> is 0.

                      When the PE has entered Debug state, clear the Debug request trigger event by writing 1 to CTIINTACK[0], before
                      restarting the PE. Clear the overflow status by writing to PMOVSCLR_EL0.

H5-5796                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.          ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                 ID121917
