Chapter H6
Debug Reset and Powerdown Support

                  This chapter describes the reset and powerdown support in the Debug architecture. It contains the following
                  sections:
                  •      About Debug over powerdown on page H6-5798.
                  •      Power domains and debug on page H6-5799.
                  •      Core power domain power states on page H6-5800.
                  •      Emulating low-power states on page H6-5803.
                  •      Debug OS Save and Restore sequences on page H6-5805.
                  •      Reset and debug on page H6-5809.

                          Note
                  Where necessary, Table K13-1 on page K13-6592 disambiguates the general register references used in this chapter.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     H6-5797
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
H6.1 About Debug over powerdown

H6.1        About Debug over powerdown
                   Debug over powerdown is a facility for an operating system to save and restore the PE state on behalf of a
                   self-hosted or external debugger or both.

                   For external debug over powerdown, the architecture defines the OS Lock, OS Double Lock, and the logical split
                   of the hardware on which a PE executes into the Core power domain and the Debug power domain. See:
                   •      Power domains and debug on page H6-5799.
                   •      Core power domain power states on page H6-5800.

H6-5798                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.            ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                     Non-Confidential                                                   ID121917
                                                                                             H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
                                                                                                     H6.2 Power domains and debug

H6.2       Power domains and debug
                  The external debug component of ARMv8-A has two logical power domains, each with its own reset:

                  •     The debug power domain contains the interface between the PE and the external debugger, and is powered
                        up whenever an external debugger is connected to the SoC. It remains powered up while the external
                        debugger is connected. Registers in this domain are reset by an external debug reset.

                  •     The core power domain contains the rest of the PE, and is allowed to power up and power down
                        independently of the Debug power domain.

                  The core power domain contains several types of registers:
                  •     Non-debug logic refers to all registers and logic that are not associated with debug.
                  •     Self-hosted debug logic refers to registers and logic associated solely with the self-hosted debug aspects of
                        the architecture.
                  •     Shared debug logic refers to registers and logic associated with both the self-hosted and external debug
                        aspects of the architecture.
                  •     External debug logic refers to registers and logic associated solely with the external debug aspects of the
                        architecture.

                          Note
                  •     The model of two logical power domains has an impact on the reset and access permission requirements of
                        the debug programmers’ model.

                  •     The power domains are described as logical because the architecture defines the requirements but does not
                        require two physical power domains. Any power domain split that meets the requirements of the
                        programmers’ model is a valid implementation.

                  Figure H6-1 shows the recommended power domain split. The signals DBGPWRUPREQ, DBGNOPWRDWN,
                  and DBGPWRDUP shown in Figure H6-1 provide an interface between the power controller and the PE debug
                  logic that is in the debug power domain. They are part of the recommended interface. See Appendix K2
                  Recommended External Debug Interface.

                       PE                                                                                   Core
                                                                                                         power domain
                            Non-debug                                                                                         Power
                              logic                                                                  DBGNOPWRDWN             controller
                                                                                                         Core domain Vdd
                            Self-hosted
                            debug logic                                               External       Debug domain Vdd
                                                                                        debug
                                                                                      interface           DBGPWRDUP
                            Shared debug              Bridge
                                logic                                                                DBGPWRUPREQ

                                                                 Debug power domain                          Debug
                             External                           external debug registers                  power domain
                            debug logic
                                                                                                                Power domain boundary

                            Figure H6-1 Recommended power domain split between core and debug power domains

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        H6-5799
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
H6.3 Core power domain power states

H6.3        Core power domain power states
                   The ARM architecture does not define the power states of the PE as these are not normally visible to software.
                   However, they are visible to the external debugger. The Debug architecture uses a four logical power states model
                   for the core power domain. The four logical power states are as follows:

                   Normal           The core power domain is fully powered up and the debug registers are accessible.

                   Standby          The core power domain is on, but there are measures to reduce energy consumption. In a typical
                                    implementation, the PE enters standby by executing a WFI or WFE instruction, and exits on a wake-up
                                    event. There can be other IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED measures the OS can take to enter standby.
                                    The PE preserves the PE state, including the debug logic state. Changing from standby to normal
                                    operation does not involve a reset of the PE.
                                    Standby is the least invasive OS energy saving state. Standby implies only that the PE is unavailable
                                    and does not clear any debug settings. For standby, the Debug architecture requires only the
                                    following:
                                    •      An External Debug Request debug event is a wake-up event when halting is allowed. This
                                           means that the PE must exit standby to handle the debug event. If the PE executed a WFE or a
                                           WFI instruction to enter standby, then it retires that instruction,
                                    •      If the external debug interface is accessed, the PE must respond to that access. ARM
                                           recommends that, if the PE executed a WFI or WFE instruction to enter standby, then it does not
                                           retire that instruction.
                                    Standby is transparent, meaning that to software and to an external debugger it is indistinguishable
                                    from normal operation.

                   Retention        The OS takes some measures, including IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED code sequences and registers,
                                    to reduce energy consumption. The PE state, including debug settings, is preserved in low-power
                                    structures, allowing the core power domain to be at least partially turned off.
                                    Changing from low-power retention to normal operation does not involve a reset of the PE. The
                                    saved PE state is restored on changing from low-power retention state to normal operation. If
                                    software has to use an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED code sequence before entering, or after leaving,
                                    a retention state, this is referred to as a software-visible retention state. It is IMPLEMENTATION
                                    DEFINED whether the value of DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ is set to the value of
                                    EDPRCR.COREPURQ on leaving the software-visible retention state.
                                    External Debug Request debug events stay pending and debug registers in the core power domain
                                    cannot be accessed.

                                             Note
                                    •      This model of retention does not include implementations where the PE exits the state in
                                           response to a debug register access. From the Debug architecture perspective,
                                           implementations like this are forms of standby.

                   Powerdown        The OS takes some measures to reduce energy consumption by turning the core power domain off.
                                    These measures must include the OS saving any PE state, including the debug settings, that must be
                                    preserved over powerdown. Changing from powerdown to normal operation must include:
                                    •     A Cold reset of the PE after the power level has been restored.
                                    •     The OS restoring the saved PE state.
                                    External Debug Request debug events stay pending and debug registers in the core power domain
                                    cannot be accessed.

                   An implementation might support enabling and disabling threads, either dynamically or once at reset time. Threads
                   that are disabled in this way must appear to the external debugger as either:
                   •      Powered off, meaning they are either:
                          —      In a powerdown state.
                          —      In a retention state.
                   •      Held in reset state.

H6-5800                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                             H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
                                                                                                H6.3 Core power domain power states

                  The Debug architecture uses a simpler two states model for the Debug power domain. The two states are:
                  Off           The debug power domain is turned off.
                  On            The debug power domain is turned on.

                  The available power states, including the cross-product of core power domain and debug power domain power
                  states is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. Implementations are not required to implement all of these states and might
                  include additional states. These additional states must appear to the debugger as one of the logical power states
                  defined by this model. The control of power states is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                           Note
                  As a result, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether it is possible for the debug power domain to be on when the
                  core power domain is off.

H6.3.1        EDPRSR.{DLK, SPD, PU} and the Core power domain
                  Software interprets EDPRSR.{DLK, SPD, PU} to determine whether registers in the Core power domain can be
                  accessed, and whether their state has been lost since the last time the register was read.

                                                             Table H6-1 Interpretation of the EDPRSR.{DLK, SPD, PU} bits

          EDPRSR                                Core power domain
                                                                                              Notes
          DLK          SPD              PU      Power          Accesses        State lost

          0            0                1       On             OK              No             -

          0            1                1       On             OK              Yes            SPD is cleared to 0 following the read.

          1            X                1       On             Error           Not known      OS double-lock is locked. Software
                                                                                              locks the OS double-lock before
                                                                                              removing power.

          X            1                0       Off            Error           Yes            A Cold reset will be asserted on exiting
                                                                                              powerdown state, but not on exiting
          X            0                0       Not known      Error           Not known      low-power retention state.

                  If the Core power domain is powered up and DoubleLockStatus() == TRUE, then:

                  •     When ARMv8.2-Debug is not implemented, EDPRSR.{DLK, SPD, PU} can read either {1, UNKNOWN, 1}
                        or {UNKNOWN, 0, 0}.

                  •     When ARMv8.2-Debug is implemented, EDPRSR.{DLK, SPD, PU} can only read {UNKNOWN, 0, 0}.

H6.3.2        EDPRSR.SPD when the Core domain is in either retention or powerdown state
                  When the Core power domain is in either the retention or powerdown state, EDPRSR.SPD is not cleared following
                  a read of EDPRSR and it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:

                  •     EDPRSR.SPD shows whether the state of the debug registers in the Core power domain has been lost since
                        the last time that EDPRSR was read. This means that:
                        —      When the Core power domain is in the powerdown state, EDPRSR.SPD is RAO, this indicates that
                               the state of the debug registers has been lost.
                        —      When the Core power domain is in the retention state, EDPRSR.SPD indicates whether the state of the
                               debug registers was lost before the Core power domain entered retention state.

                  •     EDPRSR.SPD is RAZ, and:
                        —      On leaving the powerdown state, EDPRSR.SPD is set to 1 which indicates that the state of the debug
                               registers has been lost.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         H6-5801
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
H6.3 Core power domain power states

                         —      On leaving the retention state, EDPRSR.SPD reverts the value it had on entering the retention state.

                            Note
                   ARM recommends that an implementation makes EDPRSR.SPD fixed as RAO when in the power-down state,

                   particularly if it does not support a low-power retention state.

H6.3.3       EDPRSR.{DLK, R} and reset state
                   EDPRSR.R is UNKNOWN when DoubleLockStatus() == TRUE. OSDLR_EL1.DLK is cleared to 0 by a reset. If the
                   Core power domain is powered up and entered reset state with the OS double-lock locked, it is CONSTRAINED
                   UNPREDICTABLE whether a read of EDPRSR while the PE is in reset state returns:

                   •     EDPRSR.{DLK, R, PU} == {1, UNKNOWN, 1} indicating that the OS double-lock is locked. This is not
                         permitted from ARMv8.2.

                   •     EDPRSR.{DLK, R, PU} == {0, 1, 1} indicating that the PE is in reset state.

                   •     EDPRSR.{DLK, R, PU} == {UNKNOWN, UNKNOWN, 0} indicating that the registers in the Core power
                         domain cannot be accessed because the OS double-lock is locked.

                   If the PE was powered up and the OS double-lock was unlocked when the PE was reset, then EDPRSR.{DLK, R,
                   PU} reads as {0, 1, 1} while the PE is in reset state.

                   On leaving reset state, EDPRSR.{DLK, R} reads as {0, 0}.

H6-5802                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
                                                                                             H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
                                                                                                    H6.4 Emulating low-power states

H6.4       Emulating low-power states
                  The control registers DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ and EDPRCR.COREPURQ provide an interface between the
                  power controller and the PE. They typically map directly to signals in the recommended external debug interface.
                  With this interface the external debugger can request the power controller to:

                  •     Emulate states where the core power domain is completely off or in a low-power state where the core power
                        domain registers cannot be accessed. This simplifies the requirements on software by sacrificing entirely
                        realistic behavior.

                  •     Restore full power to the core power domain.

                  EDPRSR.{SPD, PU} indicates the core power domain power state. For more information see:
                  •   The DBGPRCR_EL1 and DBGPRCR System register descriptions.
                  •   The EDPRCR and EDPRSR external debug register descriptions.
                  •   Appendix K2 Recommended External Debug Interface.

                  The measures to emulate powerdown are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. The ability of the debugger to access the state
                  of the PE and the system might be limited as a result of the measures adopted.

                  In an emulated powerdown state, the debugger must be able to access all debug, PMU, CTI, and trace unit registers
                  that are accessible on the external debug interface and are in one of:

                  •     The debug power domain.

                  •     The core power domain.

                  •     When a trace unit with a separate trace unit core power domain is implemented, and the trace unit core power
                        domain is powered on, the trace unit core power domain.

                  That is, the debugger must be able to read and write to such registers without receiving errors. This allows an
                  external debugger to debug the powerup sequence.

                  ARM recommends that any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED registers that are on the external debug interface and in
                  either the core power domain or the debug power domain are also accessible in an emulated powerdown state.

                  To stop the OS Double Lock preventing access to debug registers when powerdown is being emulated,
                  DoubleLockStatus() == FALSE when DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ == 1.

                  Otherwise, the behavior of the PE in emulated powerdown must be similar to that in a real powerdown state. In
                  particular, the PE must not respond to other system stimuli, such as interrupts.

                  Example H6-1 and Example H6-2 are examples of two approaches to emulating powerdown.

                                                                         Example H6-1 An example of emulating powerdown

                  The PE is held in Standby state, isolated from any system stimuli. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether the PE
                  can respond to debug stimuli such as an External Debug Request debug event.

                  If the PE can enter Debug state, then the external debugger is able to use the ITR to execute instructions, such as
                  loads and stores. This causes the external debugger to interact with the system. If the external debugger restarts the
                  PE, the PE leaves Standby state and restarts fetching instructions from memory.

                                                                  Example H6-2 Another example of emulating powerdown

                  The PE is held in Warm reset. This limits the ability of an external debugger to access the resources of the PE. For
                  example, the PE cannot be put into Debug state.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         H6-5803
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
H6.4 Emulating low-power states

                   On exit from emulated powerdown the PE is reset. However, the debug registers that are only reset by a Cold reset
                   must not be reset. Typically this means that a Warm reset is substituted for the Cold reset. As such, the effect of
                   accessing any register that is reset by a Warm reset while the PE is in the emulated powerdown state will have an
                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED effect on that register.

                           Note
                   •     Warm reset and Cold reset have different effects apart from resetting the debug registers. In particular,
                         RMR_ELx is reset by a Cold reset and controls the reset state on a Warm reset. This means that if a Cold reset
                         is substituted by a Warm reset, the behavior of the reset code might be different.

                   •     The timing effects of powering down are typically not factored in the powerdown emulation. Examples of
                         these timing effects are clock and voltage stabilization.

                   •     Emulation does not model the state lost during powerdown, meaning that it might mask errors in the state
                         storage and recovery routines.

H6-5804                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                     Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                            H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
                                                                                         H6.5 Debug OS Save and Restore sequences

H6.5       Debug OS Save and Restore sequences
                  In ARMv8-A, the following registers provide the OS Save and restore mechanism:

                  •     The OS Lock Access Register, OSLAR, locks the OS Lock to restrict access to debug registers before starting
                        an OS Save sequence, and unlocks the OS Lock after an OS Restore sequence.

                  •     The OS Lock Status Register, OSLSR, shows the status of the OS Lock.

                  •     The External Debug Execution Control Register, EDECR, can be configured to generate a debug event when
                        the OS Lock is unlocked.

                  •     The OS Double Lock Register, OSDLR, locks out an external debug interface entirely. This is only used
                        immediately before a powerdown sequence.

                  See also:
                  •      Reset and debug on page H6-5809
                  •      Appendix K8 Example OS Save and Restore Sequences

H6.5.1      Debug registers to save over powerdown
                  Table H6-2 shows the different requirements for self-hosted debug over powerdown and external debug over
                  powerdown:

                  •     The column labeled Self-hosted lists registers that software must preserve over powerdown so that it can
                        support self-hosted debug over powerdown. This does not require use of the OS Save and Restore
                        mechanism.

                  •     The column labeled External lists registers that software must preserve over powerdown so that it can support
                        external debug over powerdown. This requires use of the OS Save and Restore mechanism:
                        —      Some external debug registers are not normally accessible to software executing on the PE. Additional
                               debug registers are provided that give software the required access to save and restore these external
                               debug registers when OSLSR.OSLK is locked. These registers include OSECCR, OSDTRRX, and
                               OSDTRTX.

                  •     Some registers might only present in some implementations, or might not be accessible at all Exception levels
                        or in Non-secure state. DBGVCR32_EL2 and SDER32_EL3 are only required to support AArch32.

                  Table H6-2 does not include registers for the OPTIONAL Trace and Performance Monitor extensions.

                                                                       Table H6-2 Debug registers to save over powerdown

 Register in AArch64 state                          Register in AArch32 state                            Self-hosted     External

 MDSCR_EL1                                          DBGDSCRext                                           Yes             Yesa

 DBGBVR<n>_EL1                                      DBGBVR<n>                                            Yes             Yes

 DBGBCR<n>_EL1                                      DBGBCR<n>                                            Yes             Yes

 DBGWVR<n>_EL1                                      DBGWVR<n>                                            Yes             Yes

 DBGWCR<n>_EL1                                      DBGWCR<n>                                            Yes             Yes

 DBGVCR32_EL2                                       DBGVCR                                               Yes             -

 MDCR_EL2                                           HDCR                                                 Yes             -

 SDER32_EL3                                         SDER                                                 Yes             -

 MDCR_EL3                                           SDCR                                                 Yesb            -

 MDCCINT_EL1                                        DBGDCCINT                                            -               Yesb

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       H6-5805
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
H6.5 Debug OS Save and Restore sequences

                                                                 Table H6-2 Debug registers to save over powerdown (continued)

 Register in AArch64 state                                   Register in AArch32 state                                 Self-hosted        External

 DBGCLAIMSET_EL1                                             DBGCLAIMSET,                                              -                  Yesc
 DBGCLAIMCLR_EL1                                             DBGCLAIMCLR

 OSECCR_EL1                                                  DBGOSECCR                                                 -                  Yesab

 OSDTRRX_EL1                                                 DBGDTRRXext                                               -                  Yes
 OSDTRTX_EL1                                                 DBGDTRTXext
    a. The OS Lock must be locked to save and restore for external debug. When the OS Lock is locked, DSCR is part of the software save and
       restore mechanism for external debug. It provides a mechanism for an operating system to access some fields of EDSCR that are otherwise
       read-only or not visible to software. This allows the operating system to save and restore these settings over a powerdown for the external
       debugger.
    b. This register is new in ARMv8-A. Sequences written for ARMv7 do not preserve the register over powerdown.
    c. Read DBGCLAIMCLR to save, write DBGCLAIMSET to restore.

H6.5.2         OS Save sequence
                       To preserve the debug logic state over a powerdown, the state must be saved to nonvolatile storage. This means the
                       OS Save sequence must:

                       1.      Lock the OS Lock by:
                               •      Writing the key value 0xC5ACCE55 to the DBGOSLAR in AArch32 state.
                               •      Writing 1 to OSLAR_EL1.OSLK in AArch64 state.

                       2.      Execute an ISB instruction.

                       3.      Walk through the debug registers listed in Debug registers to save over powerdown on page H6-5805 and
                               save the values to the nonvolatile storage.

                       Before removing power from the core power domain, software must:
                       1.    Lock the OS Double Lock by writing 1 to OSDLR_EL1.DLK.
                       2.    Execute a Context synchronization event.

H6.5.3         OS Restore sequence
                       After a powerdown, the OS Restore sequence must perform the following steps to restore the debug logic state from
                       the non-volatile storage:

                       1.      Lock the OS Lock, as described in OS Save sequence. The OS Lock is generally locked by the Cold reset,
                               but this step ensures that it is locked.

                       2.      Execute an ISB instruction.

                       3.      To ensure that, if an external debugger clears the OS Lock before the end of this sequence, no debug
                               exceptions are generated:
                               •      Write 0 to MDSCR_EL1 if executing in AArch64 state.
                               •      Write 0 to DBGDSCRext if executing in AArch32 state.

                       4.      Walk through the debug registers listed in Debug registers to save over powerdown on page H6-5805, and
                               restore the values from the nonvolatile storage. The last register to be restored must be:
                               •      MDSCR_EL1 if executing in AArch64 state.
                               •      DBGDSCRext if executing in AArch32 state.

                       5.      Execute an ISB instruction.

H6-5806                            Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                           Non-Confidential                                                              ID121917
                                                                                           H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
                                                                                        H6.5 Debug OS Save and Restore sequences

                  6.    Unlock the OS Lock by:
                        •    Writing any non-key value to DBGOSLAR if executing in AArch32 state.
                        •    Writing 0 to OSLAR_EL1.OSLK if executing in AArch64 state.

                  7.    Execute a Context synchronization event.

                          Note
                  The OS Restore sequence overwrites the debug registers with the values that were saved. If there are valid values
                  in these registers immediately before the restore sequence, then those values are lost.

H6.5.4      Debug behavior when the OS Lock is locked
                  The main purpose of the OS Lock is to prevent updates to debug registers during an OS Save or OS Restore
                  operation. The OS Lock is locked on a Cold reset.

                  When the OS Lock is locked:

                  •     Access to debug registers through the System register interface is mainly unchanged except that:
                        —      Certain registers are read and written without side-effects.
                        —      Fields in DSCR and OSECCR that are normally read-only become read/write.
                        This allows the state to be saved or restored. For more information, see the relevant register description in
                        Chapter H9 External Debug Register Descriptions.

                  •     Access to debug registers by the external debug interface is restricted to prevent an external debugger
                        modifying the registers that are being saved or restored. For more information see External debug interface
                        register access permissions summary on page H8-5826.

                  •     Debug exceptions, other than Breakpoint Instruction exceptions are not generated.

                  •      Breakpoint and Watchpoint debug events are not generated. The OS Lock has no effect on Breakpoint
                        Instruction exceptions and other debug events.

H6.5.5      Debug behavior when the OS Lock is unlocked
                  When the OS Lock is unlocked, the PE sets EDESR.OSUC to 1 if EDESR.OUCE is set to 1 and the PE is in
                  Non-debug state, meaning the OS Unlock Catch debug event becomes pending. See OS Unlock Catch debug event
                  on page H3-5753.

H6.5.6      Debug behavior when the OS Double Lock is locked
                  The OS Double Lock is locked immediately before a powerdown sequence. The OS Double Lock ensures that it is
                  safe to remove core power by forcing the debug interfaces to be quiescent.

                  When DoubleLockStatus() == TRUE:

                  •     The external debug interface only has restricted access to the debug registers, so that it is quiescent before
                        removing power. See External debug interface register access permissions summary on page H8-5826.

                  •     Debug exceptions, other than Breakpoint Instruction exceptions, are not generated.

                  •     Halting is prohibited. See Halting allowed and halting prohibited on page H2-5697.

                                 Note
                        Pending Halting debug events might be lost when core power is removed.

                  •     No asynchronous debug events are WFI or WFE wake-up events.

                  Software must synchronize the update to OSDLR before it indicates to the system that core power can be removed.
                  The interface between the PE and its power controller is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         H6-5807
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
H6.5 Debug OS Save and Restore sequences

                   Typically software indicates that core power can be removed by entering the Wait For Interrupt state. This means
                   that software must explicitly synchronize the OSDLR update before issuing the WFI instruction.

                   OSDLR.DLK is ignored and DoubleLockStatus() == FALSE if either:
                   •   The PE is in Debug state.
                   •   DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ is set to 1.

                           Note
                   It is possible to enter Debug state with OSDLR.DLK set to 1. This is because a Context synchronization event is
                   required to ensure the OS Double Lock is locked, meaning that Debug state might be entered before the OSDLR
                   update is synchronized.

                   Because OSDLR.DLK is ignored when DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ is set to 1, and an external debugger can write
                   to DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ, software must not rely on using the OS Double Lock to disable debug exceptions or
                   to prohibit halting, or both. ARM deprecates use of the OS Double Lock for these purposes, and instead
                   recommends that software:

                   •     Uses the OS Lock to disable debug exceptions during save or restore sequences.

                   •     Uses the debug authentication interface to prohibit halting and external debug access to debug registers at
                         times other than immediately prior to removing power.

                   As the purpose of the OS Double Lock is to ensure that it is safe to remove core power, it is important to avoid race
                   conditions that defeat this purpose. ARM recommends that:

                   •     Once the write to OSDLR.DLK has been synchronized by a Context synchronization event and
                         DoubleLockStatus() == TRUE, a PE must:
                         —      Not allow a debug event generated before the Context synchronization event to cause an entry to
                                Debug state or act as a wake-up event for a WFI or WFE instruction after the Context synchronization
                                event has completed.
                         —      Complete any external debug access started before the Context synchronization event by the time the
                                Context synchronization event completes.
                                         Note
                                A debug register access might be in progress when software sets OSDLR.DLK to 1. An
                                implementation must not permit the synchronization of locking the OS Double Lock to stall
                                indefinitely while waiting for that access to complete. This means that any debug register access that
                                is in progress when software sets OSDLR.DLK to 1 must complete or return an error in finite time.

                   •     If a write to DBGPRCR or EDPRCR made when OSDLR.DLK == 1 changes DBGPRCR.CORENPDRQ or
                         EDPRCR.CORENPDRQ from 1 to 0, meaning DoubleLockStatus() changes from FALSE to TRUE, then
                         before signaling to the system that the CORENPDRQ field has been cleared and emulation of powerdown is
                         no longer requested, meaning the system can remove core power, the PE must ensure that all the requirements
                         for DoubleLockStatus() == TRUE listed in this section are met.
                   In the standard OS Save sequence, the OS Lock is locked before the OS Double Lock is locked. This means that
                   writes to CORENPDRQ are ignored by the time the OS Double Lock is locked. However, if DoubleLockStatus() ==
                   FALSE, an external debugger can clear the OS Lock at any time, and then write to EDPRCR.

H6-5808                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
                                                                                                              H6.6 Reset and debug

H6.6       Reset and debug
                   All registers in the Core power domain are reset either by a Warm reset or a Cold reset, as described in Reset on
                   page D1-1870, including external debug logic registers.

                   All registers in the Debug power domain are reset by an External Debug reset.

                   Figure H6-2 shows this reset scheme. The following three reset signals are an example implementation of the reset
                   scheme:
                   •     CORERESET, which must be asserted for a Warm reset.
                   •     CPUPORESET, which must be asserted for a Cold reset.
                   •     PRESETDBG, which must be asserted for an External Debug reset.

                   As shown in the figure, the external debug logic is split between the Debug power domain and the Core power
                   domain.

            Debug power domain                                                      Core power domain

             External debug reset                                                                         Warm reset
                                                                  Cold reset

                                                             External debug logic
                                                                                                         Non-debug logic
                                                           (part, including external
             External debug logic
                                                               debug registers)
                    (part)                                                                        Self-hosted
                                                                                                     f        debug logic
                                                              Shared debug logic

                                                                                                     CORERESET OR
                  PRESETDBG                                     CPUPORESET
                                                                                                      CPUPORESET

                                                                                         Figure H6-2 Power and reset domains

                   For more information about power domains and power states, see Power domains and debug on page H6-5799.

                   When power is first applied to the Debug power domain, PRESETDBG must be asserted.

                   When power is first applied to the Core power domain, CPUPORESET must be asserted.

                           Note
                   In this scheme, logic in the Warm reset domain is reset by asserting either CORERESET or CPUPORESET. This
                   implies a particular implementation style that permits these approaches.

                   CPUPORESET is not normally asserted on moving from a low-power state, where power has not been removed,
                   to a full-power state. This can occur, for example, on exiting a low-power retention state. See also Emulating
                   low-power states on page H6-5803 and the EDPRSR register description.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       H6-5809
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
H6 Debug Reset and Powerdown Support
H6.6 Reset and debug

H6.6.1       External debug interface accesses to registers in reset
                   If a reset signal is asserted and the external debug interface:

                   •      Writes a register, or indirectly writes a register or register field as a side-effect of an access:
                          —      Then, if the register or register field is reset by that reset signal, it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE
                                 whether the register or register field takes the reset value or the value written. The reset value might
                                 be UNKNOWN.
                          —      Otherwise the register or register field takes the value that is written.

                   •      Reads a register, or indirectly reads a register or register field, as part of an access:
                          —      Then, if the register or register field is reset by that reset signal, the value returned in UNKNOWN.
                          —      Otherwise, the value of the register or register field is returned.

                   It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether any register can be accessed when External Debug reset is being asserted.
                   The result of these accesses is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

H6-5810                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
