Chapter H7
The PC Sample-based Profiling Extension

                  This chapter describes the OPTIONAL PC Sample-based Profiling Extension that provides a non-invasive external
                  debug component.

                  It contains the following section:
                  •      About the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension on page H7-5812.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   H7-5811
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
H7 The PC Sample-based Profiling Extension
H7.1 About the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension

H7.1         About the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension
                     The PC Sample-based Profiling Extension is an OPTIONAL extension that provides coarse-grained, non-invasive
                     profiling by an external debugger. See also Non-invasive behavior on page D5-2228.

                     PC Sample-based Profiling creates samples so that tools can populate a statistical model of the performance of
                     software executing on the PE.

                     Under normal operating conditions, the sample must reference an instruction that was committed for execution,
                     including its context, and must not reference instructions that are fetched but not committed for execution.
                     It must be possible to sample references to branch targets. It is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether references to
                     other instructions can be sampled. The branch target for a conditional branch instruction that fails its condition
                     check is the instruction that follows the conditional branch instruction. The branch target for an exception is the
                     exception vector address.

                     To keep the implementation and validation cost low, a reasonable degree of inaccuracy in the sampled data is
                     acceptable. ARM does not define a reasonable degree of inaccuracy but recommends the following guidelines:

                     •     In exceptional circumstances, such as a change in Security state or other boundary condition, it is acceptable
                           for the sample to represent an instruction that was not committed for execution.

                     •     Under unusual non-repeating pathological cases, the sample can represent an instruction that was not
                           committed for execution. These cases are likely to occur as a result of asynchronous exceptions, such as
                           interrupts, where the chance of a systematic error in sampling is very unlikely.

                             Note
                     In the ARMv7 PC Sample-based Profiling Extension, an offset was applied to the sampled program counter value
                     and this offset and the instruction set state indicated in bits [1:0] of the sampled value. In the ARMv8 PC
                     Sample-based Profiling Extension, the sampled value is the address of an instruction that has executed, with no
                     offset and no indication of the instruction set state.

                     For more information see:
                     •     Controlling the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension.
                     •     Registers implemented by the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension on page H7-5813.
                     •     Permitted behavior that might make the PC Sample-based profiling registers UNKNOWN on page H7-5814.
                     •     Pseudocode description of PC Sample-based Profiling on page H7-5814.

H7.1.1        Controlling the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension
                     PC Sample-based Profiling is controlled by the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface
                     ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled().

                     PC Sample-based Profiling is prohibited unless both:

                     •     It is allowed by the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface ExternalNoninvasiveDebugEnabled().

                     •     At least one of the following applies:
                           —      The PE is executing in Non-secure state.
                           —      EL3 is not implemented.
                           —      EL3 is implemented, the PE is executing in Secure state, and non-invasive debug is allowed by the
                                  IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface ExternalSecureNoninvasiveDebugEnabled().

                           —      EL3 is implemented, EL3 or EL1 is using AArch32, the PE is executing at EL0 in Secure state, and
                                  the value of SDER.SUNIDEN is 1.

                     The state of the IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED authentication interface is visible through DBGAUTHSTATUS_EL1.
                     See Recommended authentication interface on page K2-6435.

H7-5812                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                       H7 The PC Sample-based Profiling Extension
                                                                                H7.1 About the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension

H7.1.2      Registers implemented by the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension
                  The options for implementing the PC Sample-based Profiling extension are:

                  •     The extension is implemented in the external debug register space. EDDEVID.PCSample and identifies the
                        implemented level of profiling, and EDDEVID1.PCSROffset also indicates that this option is implemented.
                        From ARMv8.2 this option is not permitted.

                  •     ARMv8.2-PCSample is implemented, meaning the PC Sample-based Profiling extension is implemented in
                        the Performance Monitors memory-mapped register space. PMDEVID.PCSample identifies the
                        implemented level of profiling.

                  If PC Sample-based Profiling is implemented in the external debug register space:

                  •     The following external debug registers can be implemented:
                        —     EDCIDSR.
                        —     EDPCSR.
                        —     EDVIDSR.
                        See External debug interface register map on page H8-5828.

                  •     If ARMv8.1-VHE is implemented, EDSCR.SC2 controls what PC Sample-based Profiling samples.

                  If ARMv8.2-PCSample is implemented, the following registers can be implemented in the Performance Monitors
                  memory-mapped register space:
                  •    PMCID1SR and PMCID2SR.
                  •    PMPCSR.
                  •    PMVIDSR.

                  See Performance Monitors external register views on page I4-6015.

                  If the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension is implemented with ARMv8.2-PCSample but the Performance
                  Monitors Extension is not implemented, then the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension is implemented in its own
                  memory-mapped register space, within the area that is reserved for the Performance Monitors, see Table H7-1. If
                  CoreSight compliance is required:
                  •       The management registers are defined as in Table K2-3 on page K2-6436.
                  •       The support for PC Sample-based profiling is defined in the following registers:
                          —     PMDEVTYPE.MAJOR has the value 0x0.
                          —     PMDEVARCH.ARCHID has the value 0x0A10.

                  Table H7-1 PC Sample-based Profiling register map without the Performance Monitors Extension

              Offset        Description

              0x200         PMPCSR[31:0]

              0x204         PMPCSR[63:32]

              0x208         PMCID1SR

              0x20C         PMVIDSR

              0x220         PMPCSR[31:0] (alias)

              0x224         PMPCSR[63:32] (alias)

              0x228         PMCID1SR (alias)

              0x22C         PMCID2SR

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    H7-5813
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
H7 The PC Sample-based Profiling Extension
H7.1 About the PC Sample-based Profiling Extension

      Table H7-1 PC Sample-based Profiling register map without the Performance Monitors Extension (continued)

                 Offset         Description

                 0x600-0x6FC    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED

                 0xE80-0xEFC    IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED for CoreSight compliance

                 0xFF0-0xFFc    Management and CoreSight compliance registers

H7.1.3        Permitted behavior that might make the PC Sample-based profiling registers UNKNOWN
                     The architecture permits IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED extensions to external debug to define mechanisms that make
                     the values of the PC Sample-based profiling registers UNKNOWN. However, it requires that any such mechanism is
                     disabled by default. This means that powerup or a hard reset of the PE must leave the PE in a state where the PC
                     Sample-based Profiling Extension, if implemented, exhibits its architecturally-defined behavior.

                               Note
                     A mechanism that, when enabled, makes the PC Sample-based profiling registers UNKNOWN might use other
                     sample-based profiling events that are appropriate for a use that is independent of PC Sample-based Profiling.

H7.1.4        Pseudocode description of PC Sample-based Profiling
                     When PC Sample-based Profiling is implemented but not with ARMv8.2-PCSample, the functionality is described
                     by the pseudocode functions:
                     •      CreatePCSample(), which populates a variable of type PCSample.
                     •      EDPCSRlo[], which writes a PC sample to the EDPCSR and associated registers.

                     When ARMv8.2-PCSample is implemented, the functionality is described by the pseudocode functions:
                     •    CreatePCSample(), which populates a variable of type PCSample.
                     •    PMPCSR[], which writes a PC Sample to the PMPCSR and associated registers.

H7-5814                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.           ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                  ID121917
