Chapter I1
Requirements for Memory-mapped Components

                  This chapter provides some additional information about memory-mapped components. It contains the following
                  sections:
                  •      Supported access sizes on page I1-5988.
                  •      Synchronization of memory-mapped registers on page I1-5990.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  I1-5987
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
I1 Requirements for Memory-mapped Components
I1.1 Supported access sizes

I1.1        Supported access sizes
                   The information in this section applies to all accesses to memory-mapped components of the ARMv8 architecture,
                   unless a register or component description explicitly states otherwise.

                   The memory access sizes that are supported by any peripheral are IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED by the peripheral.

                   An implementation of a memory-mapped component that is compatible with the ARMv8 architecture must support
                   the following:

                   •      Word-aligned 32-bit accesses to access 32-bit registers.

                   •      If any PE in the system implements AArch32, word-aligned 32-bit accesses to either half of a 64-bit register
                          that is mapped to a doubleword-aligned pair of adjacent 32-bit locations.

                                   Note
                          Some memory-mapped components of the ARMv8 architecture require support for word-aligned 32-bit
                          accesses to either half of a 64-bit memory mapped register regardless of whether any PE in the system
                          implements AArch32. These include:
                          —      The memory-mapped interface to the external debug and CTI registers that are described in
                                 Chapter H9 External Debug Register Descriptions.
                          —      The memory-mapped interfaces to the Generic Timer registers that are described in Chapter I2 System
                                 Level Implementation of the Generic Timer.
                          —      The memory-mapped interfaces to the Performance Monitors registers that are described in Chapter I3
                                 Recommended External Interface to the Performance Monitors.

                   •      Doubleword-aligned 64-bit accesses to access 64-bit registers that are mapped to a doubleword-aligned pair
                          of adjacent 32-bit locations.

                   All registers are only single-copy atomic at word granularity. This means that for 64-bit accesses to a 64-bit register,
                   the system might generate a pair of 32-bit accesses. The order in which the two halves are accessed is not specified.

                   The following accesses are not supported:

                   •      Byte accesses.

                   •      Halfword accesses.

                   •      Unaligned word accesses. These accesses are not word single-copy atomic.

                   •      Unaligned doubleword accesses. These accesses are not doubleword single-copy atomic.

                   •      Doubleword accesses to a pair of 32-bit locations that are not a doubleword-aligned pair that forms a 64-bit
                          register.

                   •      Quadword accesses or higher accesses.

                   •      Exclusive accesses.

                   For unsupported accesses, it is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE whether:
                   •     The access generates an External abort or not.
                   •     The defined side-effects of a read occur or not. A read returns UNKNOWN values.
                   •     A write is ignored or sets the accessed register or registers to UNKNOWN.

                   For memory-mapped accesses from a PE that complies with an ARM architecture, the single-copy atomicity rules
                   for the instruction, the type of instruction, and the type of memory that is accessed, determine the size of the access
                   that is made by an instruction. Example I1-1 on page I1-5989 shows this.

I1-5988                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                   I1 Requirements for Memory-mapped Components
                                                                                                         I1.1 Supported access sizes

                                                               Example I1-1 Access sizes for memory-mapped accesses

                  Two Load Doubleword instructions that are made to consecutive doubleword-aligned locations generate a pair of
                  single-copy atomic doubleword reads. However, if the accesses are made to Normal memory or Device-GRE
                  memory they might appear as a single quadword access that is not supported by the peripheral.

                  The ARMv8 architecture does not require the size of each element that is accessed by a multi-register load or store
                  instruction to be identifiable by the memory system beyond the PE. Unless otherwise specified by the component,
                  any access to a memory-mapped component of the ARMv8 architecture is defined to be beyond the PE.

                  Software must use a Device-nGRE or stronger memory type, and only single register load and store instructions, to
                  create memory accesses that are supported by the peripheral. For more information, see Memory types and attributes
                  on page B2-114.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        I1-5989
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
I1 Requirements for Memory-mapped Components
I1.2 Synchronization of memory-mapped registers

I1.2         Synchronization of memory-mapped registers
                     This section describes the synchronization requirements for the external system control registers.

                     This section refers to accesses to external system control registers as external reads and external writes. It refers to
                     accesses to System registers as direct reads, direct writes, indirect reads and indirect writes.

                              Note
                     Synchronization requirements for AArch64 System registers on page D10-2349 and Synchronization of changes to
                     AArch32 System registers on page G7-5016 define direct read, direct write, indirect read, and indirect write, and
                     classifies external reads as indirect reads and external writes as indirect writes.

                     Writes to the same register are serialized, meaning they are observed in the same order by all observers, although
                     some observers might not observe all of the writes. Unless otherwise stated, external writes to different registers are
                     not necessarily observed in the same order by all observers as the order in which they complete.

                     Explicit synchronization is not required for an external read or an external write by an external agent to be
                     observable to a following external read or external write by that agent to the same register using the same address,
                     and so is never required for registers that are accessible as external system control registers.

                     Unless required to be observable to all observers in finite time, without explicit synchronization, explicit
                     synchronization is normally required following an external write to any register for that write to be observable by:

                     •      A direct access.

                     •      An indirect read by an instruction.

                     •      An external read of the register using a different address.

                     This means that an external write by an external agent is guaranteed to have an effect on subsequent instructions
                     executed by the PE only if all of the following are true:

                     •      The write has completed.

                     •      The PE has executed a Context synchronization event.

                     •      The Context synchronization event was executed after the write completed.

                     The order and synchronization of direct reads and direct writes of System registers is defined by:

                     •      Synchronization requirements for AArch64 System registers on page D10-2349

                     •      Synchronization of changes to AArch32 System registers on page G7-5016

                     The external agent must be able to guarantee completion of a write. For example, the agent can:

                     •      Mark the memory as Device-nGnRnE and executing a DSB barrier, if the system supports this property.

                     •      Read back the value written. (If the register is read/write and reads are not destructive).

                     •      Use some guaranteed property of the connection between the PE and the external agent.

                     The external agent and PE can guarantee ordering by, for example, passing messages in an ordered way with respect
                     to the external write and the Context synchronization event, and relying on the memory ordering rules provided by
                     the memory model.

                     External reads and external write complete in the order in which they arrive at the PE. For accesses to different
                     register locations the external agent must create this order. The agent can:

                     •      Mark the memory as Device-nGnRnE or Device-nGnRE.

                     •      Use the appropriate memory barriers.

                     •      Rely on some guaranteed property of the connection between the PE and the external agent.

                     However, the external agent cannot force the synchronization of completed writes.

I1-5990                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                    I1 Requirements for Memory-mapped Components
                                                                                     I1.2 Synchronization of memory-mapped registers

                  In a simple sequential execution, an indirect write that occurs as a side-effect of an access happens atomically with
                  the access, meaning no other accesses are allowed between the register access and its side-effect.

                  Without explicit synchronization to guarantee the order of the accesses, where the same register is accessed by two
                  or more of a System register access instruction, and external agent, and autonomous asynchronous event, or as a
                  result of a memory-mapped access, the behavior must be as if the accesses occurred atomically and in any order.
                  This applies even if the accesses occur simultaneously.

                  For example, some registers have the property that for certain bits a write of 0 is ignored and a write of 1 has an
                  effect. This means the simultaneous writes must be merged.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         I1-5991
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
I1 Requirements for Memory-mapped Components
I1.2 Synchronization of memory-mapped registers

I1-5992                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
