Chapter I2
System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer

                  This chapter defines the system level implementation of the Generic Timer. It contains the following sections:
                  •     About the Generic Timer specification on page I2-5994.
                  •     Memory-mapped counter module on page I2-5996.
                  •     Memory-mapped timer components on page I2-6000.

                          Note
                  •     Generic Timer memory-mapped register descriptions on page I4-6087 describes the System level Generic
                        Timer registers. These registers are memory-mapped.

                  •     Appendix K5 Additional Information for Implementations of the Generic Timer gives additional information,
                        that does not form part of the architectural definition of a system level implementation of the Generic Timer,

                  •     Chapter D8 The Generic Timer in AArch64 state gives a general description of the AArch64 state view of the
                        Generic Timer, and describes the AArch64 System register interface to the Generic Timer.

                  •     Chapter G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state gives a general description of the AArch32 state view of the
                        Generic Timer, and describes the AArch32 System register interface to the Generic Timer.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         I2-5993
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
I2.1 About the Generic Timer specification

I2.1         About the Generic Timer specification
                     Chapter D8 The Generic Timer in AArch64 state describes the ARM Generic Timer and its implementation as seen
                     from AArch64 state. Chapter G5 The Generic Timer in AArch32 state describes the ARM Generic Timer and its
                     implementation as seen from AArch32 state. These chapters include the definition of the low-latency System
                     register interface to the Generic Timer. However, the ARM Generic Timer architecture also defines a
                     memory-mapped component, that comprises:

                     •      A memory-mapped counter module, that controls the generation of the Count value used by the Generic
                            Timer.
                            This memory-mapped counter module is required in any ARM Generic Timer implementation that requires
                            software control of the Count value of the Generic Timer.

                     •      Optional memory-mapped timer modules. These give a standardized way of providing timers for
                            programmable system components other than PEs that implement the ARM architecture.

                     The full set of Generic Timer components on page D8-2323 summarizes these components as seen from AArch64
                     state, and The full set of Generic Timer components on page G5-4981 summarizes them as seen from AArch32 state.
                     The system level components of the Generic Timer on page I2-5995 summarizes the system level components.

I2.1.1         Registers in the system level implementation of the Generic Timer
                     Registers that control components of the system level implementation of the Generic Timer are grouped into frames.
                     This specification defines the registers in each frame, and their offsets within the frame. The system defines the
                     position of each frame in the memory map. This means the base addresses for each frame is IMPLEMENTATION
                     DEFINED.

                              Note
                     The final 12 words of the first or only 4KB block of a register memory frame is an ID block.

                     Each frame must be in its own memory page, or memory protection region, and must be aligned to the size of the
                     translation granule or protection granule.

                              Note
                     When a system level implementation of the Generic Timer is accessed by a PE:

                     •      Using a VMSA, each frame is in its own memory page, aligned to the size of the translation granule.

                     •      Using a PMSA, each frame is in its own memory protection region, aligned to the size of the memory
                            protection granule.

                     The following sections give more information about the requirements for the system level Generic Timer
                     component:
                     •     Endianness and supported access sizes.
                     •     Power and reset domains for the system level implementation of the Generic Timer on page I2-5995.

                     Endianness and supported access sizes
                     All memory-mapped peripherals defined in the ARM architecture must be little-endian. This means the
                     system-level Generic Timer registers, and the register frames, are little-endian.

                     The memory access sizes supported by any peripheral is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED by the peripheral. For accesses
                     to the memory-mapped Generic Timer registers implementations must:

                     •      Comply with the requirements of Supported access sizes on page I1-5988.

                     •      Support word-aligned 32-bit accesses to access 32-bit registers or either half of a 64-bit register mapped to a
                            doubleword-aligned pair of adjacent 32-bit locations, even if no PE in the system implements AArch32.

I2-5994                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                 I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
                                                                                            I2.1 About the Generic Timer specification

                  Power and reset domains for the system level implementation of the Generic Timer
                  The power and reset domains of the system level implementation of the Generic Timer are IMPLEMENTATION
                  DEFINED as part of the system implementation. These domains can be outside the PE power and reset domains
                  defined by the remainder of this manual.

                  The ARM architecture requires that the CNTCR.{FCREQ, EN} and CNTSR.FCACK fields reset to 0. These reset
                  values apply only on powerup of the power domain in which the registers are implemented or a reset of the reset
                  domain in which they are implemented.

                  Every other register, or register field, of a system level implementation of the Generic Timer resets to a value that
                  is architecturally UNKNOWN if it has a meaningful reset value. This applies on powerup of the power domain in
                  which the register is implemented, and on a reset of the reset domain in which it is implemented.

I2.1.2      The system level components of the Generic Timer
                  Each system level component has one or two register frames. The possible system level components are:

                  The memory-mapped counter module, required
                                  This module controls the system counter. It has two frames:
                                  •     A control frame, CNTControlBase.
                                  •     A status frame, CNTReadBase.
                                  Memory-mapped counter module on page I2-5996 describes this component.

                  The memory-mapped timer control module, required
                                  The system level implementation of the Generic Timer can provide up to eight timers, and the
                                  memory-mapped timer control module identifies:
                                  •     Which timers are implemented.
                                  •     The features of each implemented timer.
                                  This module has a single frame, CNTCTLBase.
                                  The CNTCTLBase frame on page I2-6001 describes this frame.

                  Memory-mapped timers, optional
                                  An implemented memory-mapped timer:
                                  •      Must provide a privileged view of the timer, in the CNTBaseN frame.
                                  •      Optionally provides an unprivileged view of the timer in the CNTEL0BaseN frame.
                                  N is the timer number, and the corresponding frame number, in the range 0-7.
                                  The CNTBaseN and CNTEL0BaseN frames on page I2-6002 describes these frames.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          I2-5995
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
I2.2 Memory-mapped counter module

I2.2         Memory-mapped counter module
                     The memory-mapped counter module provides top-level control of the system counter. The CNTControlBase frame
                     holds the registers for the memory-mapped counter, and provides:

                     •      An RW control register CNTCR, that provides:
                            —      An enable bit for the system counter.
                            —      An enable bit for Halt-on-debug. For more information, see Halt-on-debug on page I2-5998.
                            —      A field that can be written to request a change to the update frequency of the system counter, with a
                                   corresponding change to the increment made at each update. This mechanism means that, for example,
                                   if the update frequency is halved, the increment at each update is doubled.
                                   For more information, see Control of counter operating frequency and increment on page I2-5997.
                            Writes to this register are rare. In a system that supports two Security states, this register is writable only by
                            Secure writes.

                     •      A RO status register, CNTSR, that provides:
                            —      A bit that indicates whether the system counter is halted because of an asserted Halt-on-debug signal.
                            —      A field that indicates the current update frequency of the system counter. This field can be polled to
                                   determine when a requested change to the update frequency has been made.

                     •      Two contiguous 32-bit RW registers that hold the current system counter value, CNTCV. If the system
                            supports 64-bit atomic accesses, these two registers must be accessible by such accesses.
                            The system counter must be disabled before writing to these registers, otherwise the effect of the write is
                            UNPREDICTABLE.

                            Writes to these registers are rare. In a system that supports two Security states, these registers are writable
                            only by Secure writes.

                     •      A Frequency modes table of one or more 32-bit entries, where:
                            —      The first entry in the table defines the base frequency of the system counter. This is the maximum
                                   frequency at which the counter updates.
                            —      Each subsequent entry in the table defines an alternative frequency of the system counter, that must be
                                   an exact divisor of the base frequency.
                            A 32-bit zero entry immediately follows the last table entry.
                            This table can be RO or RW. For more information, see The Frequency modes table on page I2-5997.

                     In addition, the CNTReadBase frame includes a read-only copy of the system counter value, CNTCV, as two
                     contiguous 32-bit RO registers. If the system supports 64-bit atomic accesses, these two registers must be accessible
                     by such accesses.

                     Counter module control and status register summary on page I2-5998 describes CNTReadBase and
                     CNTControlBase memory maps, and the registers in each frame.

I2-5996                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                  I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
                                                                                                 I2.2 Memory-mapped counter module

I2.2.1      Control of counter operating frequency and increment
                  The system counter has a fixed base frequency, and must maintain the required counter accuracy, meaning ARM
                  recommends that it does not gain or lose more than ten seconds in a 24-hour period, see The system counter on
                  page D8-2324. However, the counter can increment at a lower frequency than the base frequency, using a
                  correspondingly larger increment. For example, it can increment by four at a quarter of the base frequency. Any
                  lower-frequency operation, and any switching between operating frequencies, must not reduce the accuracy of the
                  counter.

                  Control of the system counter frequency and increment is provided only through the memory-mapped counter
                  module. The following sections describe this control:
                  •     The Frequency modes table.
                  •     Changing the system counter and increment.

                  The Frequency modes table
                  The Frequency modes table starts at offset 0x20 in the CNTControlBase frame.

                  Table entries are 32-bits, and each entry specifies a system counter update frequency, in Hz.

                  The first entry in the table specifies the base frequency of the system counter.

                  When the system timer is operating at a lower frequency than the base frequency, the increment applied at each
                  counter update is given by:

                      increment = (base_frequency) / (selected_frequency)

                  A 32-bit word of zero value marks the end of the table. That is, the word of memory immediately after the last entry
                  in the table must be zero.

                  The only required entry in the table is the entry for the base frequency.

                  Typically, the Frequency modes table is in RO memory. However, a system implementation might use RW memory
                  for the table, and initialize the table entries as part of its startup sequence. Therefore, the CNTControlBase memory
                  map shows the table region as RO or RW.

                  ARM strongly recommends that the Frequency modes table is not updated once the system is running.

                  The architecture can support up to 1004 entries in the Frequency modes table, including the zero-word end marker,
                  and the maximum number of entries is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED, up to this limit.

                            Note
                  •       ARM considers it likely that implementations will require significantly fewer entries than the architectural
                          limit.

                  •       In the CNTControlBase frame, the offset range 0x0C0-0x0FC can be used for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
                          registers. If any registers are defined in this space, then the Frequency modes table cannot extend beyond
                          offset 0x0B8, with a zero word at offset 0x0BC. This means that if any IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED registers are
                          defined the maximum number of entries in the table is 40, including the zero-word end marker.

                  Changing the system counter and increment
                  The value of the CNTCR.FCREQ field specifies which entry in the Frequency modes table specifies the system
                  counter update frequency.

                  Changing the value of CNTCR.FCREQ requests a change to the system counter update frequency. To ensure the
                  frequency change does not affect the overall accuracy of the counter, a change is made as follows:
                  •     When changing from a higher frequency to a lower frequency, the counter:
                        1.    Continues running at the higher frequency until the count reaches an integer multiple of the required
                              lower frequency.
                        2.    Switches to operating at the lower frequency.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        I2-5997
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
I2.2 Memory-mapped counter module

                     •      When changing from a lower frequency to a higher frequency, the counter:
                            1.   Waits until the end of the current lower-frequency cycle.
                            2.   Makes the counter increment required for operation at that lower frequency.
                            3.   Switches to operating at the higher frequency.

                     When the frequency has changed, CNTSR is updated to indicate the new frequency. Therefore, a system component
                     that is waiting for a frequency change can poll CNTSR to detect the change.

I2.2.2         Halt-on-debug
                     The CNTCR register provides an enable bit for an OPTIONAL Halt-on-debug signal.

                     When the CNTCR.HDBG bit is set to 1, and the Halt-on-debug signal is implemented and asserted, the system
                     counter is halted. Otherwise, the system counter ignores the state of this signal.

                     ARM recommends that a system counter implements a Halt-on-debug signal that can be controlled by a debugger
                     using the Embedded Cross-Trigger (ECT) using a system-level cross-trigger interface that includes:

                     •      A debug request output trigger event that asserts the Halt-on-debug signal.

                     •      A restart request output trigger event that deasserts the Halt-on-debug signal.

                     For more information, see About the Embedded Cross-Trigger (ECT) on page H5-5782.

                              Note
                     Software must use the Halt-on-debug enable bit to ensure that the timers cannot be halted maliciously in an attempt
                     to prohibit progress.

                     For more information about Halt-on-debug, contact ARM.

I2.2.3         Counter module control and status register summary
                     The Counter module control and status registers are memory-mapped registers in the following register memory
                     frames:
                     •     A control frame, with base address CNTControlBase.
                     •     A status frame, with base address CNTReadBase.

                     Each of these register memory frames is in its own memory page or memory protection region, and the frame base
                     address points to the start of this region. Each base address must be aligned to the size of the translation granule or
                     protection granule.

                              Note
                     Each frame of a memory-mapped Generic Timer takes the name of its base address.

                     In each register memory frame, the memory at offset 0xFD0-0xFFF is reserved for twelve 32-bit IMPLEMENTATION
                     DEFINED ID registers, see the CounterID<n> register descriptions for more information.

                              Note
                     The ARM architecture requires memory-mapped peripherals to be little-endian, and therefore the counter is
                     little-endian.

                     In an implementation that supports Secure and Non-secure memory maps, CNTControlBase is accessible only by
                     Secure accesses.

                     Table I2-1 on page I2-5999 shows the CNTControlBase control registers, in order of their offsets from the
                     CNTControlBase base address, for an implementation that includes registers in the implementation defined register
                     space 0x0C0-0x0FC, and also has fewer than 39 CNTFID<n> registers. The Frequency modes table on page I2-5997
                     describes how this memory map differs if more CNTFID<n> registers are implemented.

I2-5998                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                  I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
                                                                                                 I2.2 Memory-mapped counter module

                    Generic Timer memory-mapped register descriptions on page I4-6087 describes each of these registers.

                                                                                       Table I2-1 CNTControlBase memory map

 Offset             Name              Type                            Description

 0x000              CNTCR             RW                              Counter Control Register.

 0x004              CNTSR             RO                              Counter Status Register.

 0x008              CNTCV[31:0]       RW                              Counter Count Value register.

 0x00C              CNTCV[63:32]      RW

 0x010-0x01C        -                 RES0                            Reserved.

 0x020              CNTFID0           RO or RW                        Frequency modes table, and end marker.
                                                                      For more information, see The Frequency modes table on
 0x020+4n           CNTFID<n>         RO or RW
                                                                      page I2-5997.
 0x024+4n           -                 RO or RW, RAZ

 (0x028+4n)-0x0BC   -                 RO, RES0                        Reserved.

 0x0C0-0x0FC        -                 IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED          Reserved for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED registers.

 0x100-0xFCC        -                 RO, RES0                        Reserved.

 0xFD0-0xFFC        CounterID<n>      RO                              Counter ID registers 0-11.

                    Table I2-2 shows the CNTReadBase control registers, in order of their offsets from the CNTReadBase base address.
                    Generic Timer memory-mapped register descriptions on page I4-6087 describes each of these registers.

                                                                                           Table I2-2 CNTReadBase memory map

                                              Offset           Name                 Type              Description

                                              0x000            CNTCV[31:0]          RO                Counter Count Value register

                                              0x004            CNTCV[63:32]         RO

                                              0x008-0xFCC      -                    RES0              Reserved

                                              0xFD0-0xFFC      CounterID<n>         RO                Counter ID registers 0-11

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           I2-5999
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
I2.3 Memory-mapped timer components

I2.3         Memory-mapped timer components
                     This part of the ARM Generic Timer specification defines an optional memory-mapped timer component. This can
                     be implemented as part of any programmable system component that does not incorporate a System register mapped
                     ARM Generic Timer, to provide that system component with the timer functionality of an ARM Generic Timer.

                     The memory map consists of up to eight timer frames. The base address of a frame is CNTBaseN, where N numbers
                     from 0 up to a maximum permitted value of 7.

                     Each CNTBaseN timer frame:

                     •      Provides its own set of timers and associated interrupts.

                     •      Is implemented in its own memory page or memory protection region.

                     •      Is implemented at a base address, identified as CNTBaseN, that is aligned to the size of the translation granule
                            or memory protection region.

                     For each implemented CNTBaseN frame the system can optionally provide an unprivileged view of the frame,
                     described as the EL0 view of the frame. The base address of this second view of the CNTBaseN frame is
                     CNTEL0BaseN.

                              Note
                     In the naming of the registers associated with a CNTBaseNor CNTEL0BaseN frame, the value of N is represented
                     as <n>, for example CNTACR<n>.

                     If a CNTEL0BaseN frame is implemented:

                     •      Is implemented in its own memory page or memory protection region and is aligned to the size of the
                            translation granule or memory protection region.

                     •      All registers visible in CNTBaseN, except for CNTVOFF and CNTEL0ACR, can be visible in
                            CNTEL0BaseN.
                            —     Control fields in CNTEL0ACR determine whether each register is visible.

                     •      The offsets of all visible registers are the same as their offsets in the CNTBaseN frame.

                     In addition to the implemented CNTBaseN and CNTEL0BaseN frames, the system must provide a single control
                     frame at base address CNTCTLBase. CNTCTLBase must be implemented in its own memory page or memory
                     protection region and is aligned to the size of the translation granule or memory protection region.

                     The system defines the position of each frame in the memory map. This means the values of each of the CNTBaseN,
                     CNTEL0BaseN, and CNTCTLBase base addresses is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

                              Note
                     The ARM architecture requires memory-mapped peripherals to be little-endian, and therefore the memory-mapped
                     timers are little-endian.

                     The following sections describe the implementation of a memory-mapped view of the counter and timer:
                     •     The CNTCTLBase frame on page I2-6001.
                     •     The CNTBaseN and CNTEL0BaseN frames on page I2-6002.

                              Note
                     Providing a complete set of features in a system level implementation on page K5-6468 gives an implementation
                     example for a system level Generic Timer implementation that provides equivalent features to a System registers
                     Generic Timer implementation in a PE that includes all of the Exception levels.

I2-6000                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                            I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
                                                                                                        I2.3 Memory-mapped timer components

I2.3.1          The CNTCTLBase frame
                       The CNTCTLBase frame contains:
                       •    An identification register for the features of the memory-mapped counter and timer implementation.
                       •    Access controls for each CNTBaseN frame.
                       •    A virtual offset register for frames that implement a virtual timer.

                       Table I2-3 shows the CNTCTLBase registers, in order of their offsets from the CNTCTLBase base address.

                                 Note
                     . CNTFRQ and CNTVOFF registers are also implemented in a System register interface to the Generic Timer.

                       Generic Timer memory-mapped register descriptions on page I4-6087 describes each of these registers.

                                                                                                     Table I2-3 CNTCTLBase memory map

 Offset          Register                        Type             Security a          Description

 0x000           CNTFRQ b                        RW               Secure only         Counter Frequency register.

 0x004           CNTNSAR                         RW               Secure only         Counter Non-Secure Access register.

 0x008           CNTTIDR                         RO               Both                Counter Timer ID register.

 0x00C- 0x03F    -                               RES0             -                   Reserved.

 0x040+4N c      CNTACR<n>                       RW               Configurable d      Counter Access Control register N.

 0x060- 0x07F    -                               RES0             -                   Reserved.

 0x080+8N c      CNTVOFF<n>[31:0] b              RWe              Configurable d      Virtual Offset register N. If the CNTBaseN frame has
                                                                                      virtual timer capability then CNTVOFF is implemented
 0x084+8N c      CNTVOFF<n>[63:32] b             RW e                                 as an RW register, otherwise its location is RAZ/WI.

 0x0C0-0x0FC     -                               RES0             -                   Reserved.

 0x100-0x7FC     -                               -                -                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

 0x800-0xFBC     -                               RES0             -                   Reserved.

 0xFC0-0xFCF     -                               -                -                   IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

 0xFD0- 0xFFC    CounterID<n>                    RO               Both                Counter ID registers 0-11.

    a. Access security requirement in an implementation that supports two Security states. In an implementation that does not support multiple
       Security states all registers are accessible as shown in the Type column.
    b. These registers are also defined in the System register interface to the Generic Timer, and therefore are also described in Generic Timer
       registers on page D10-2917 and Generic Timer registers on page G7-5646. The bit assignments of the registers are identical in the System
       register interface and in the memory-mapped system level interface.
    c. Implemented for each value of N from 0 to 7 for which a CNTBaseN frame is implemented.
    d. The CNTNSAR determines the Non-secure accessibility of the CNTACR<n>s and the CNTVOFF<n>s in the CNTCTLBase frame. For
       more information, see the register descriptions.
    e. Address is reserved, RAZ/WI if register not implemented.

                       All implementations of the Generic Timer include the virtual counter. Therefore, conceptually, all implementations
                       include the CNTVOFF register that defines the virtual offset between the physical count and the virtual count. If a
                       memory-mapped Generic Timer component does not distinguish between real time and virtual time, then it can
                       implement CNTVOFF as RAZ/WI. Otherwise CNTVOFF is an RW register, and ARM strongly recommends that
                       the system only permits access to CNTVOFF from EL2 or higher.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                 I2-6001
ID121917                                                   Non-Confidential
I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
I2.3 Memory-mapped timer components

I2.3.2          The CNTBaseN and CNTEL0BaseN frames
                        Each CNTBaseN frame, or {CNTBaseN, CNTEL0BaseN} pair of frames, provides a memory-mapped counter and
                        timer, see:
                        •      The CNTBaseN frame.
                        •      The CNTEL0BaseN frame on page I2-6003.
                        •      CNTCTLBase status and control fields for the CNTBaseN and CNTEL0BaseN frames on page I2-6003.

                        The CNTBaseN frame
                        Table I2-4 shows the CNTBaseN registers, in order of their offsets from the CNTBaseN base address. Whether a
                        frame includes a virtual timer is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED. If it does not, then memory at offsets 0x030-0x03C is
                        RAZ/WI. Except for CNTEL0ACR and the CounterID<n> registers, equivalent registers are also implemented in a
                        System register interface to the timer component of a Generic Timer.

                        Generic Timer memory-mapped register descriptions on page I4-6087 describes each of these registers.

                                                                                                         Table I2-4 CNTBaseN memory map

 Offset          Register                       Type             Description

 0x000           CNTPCT[31:0] a                 RO               Physical Count register.

 0x004           CNTPCT[63:32] a                RO

 0x008           CNTVCT[31:0] a                 RO               Virtual Count register.

 0x00C           CNTVCT[63:32] a                RO

 0x010           CNTFRQ a                       ROc              Counter Frequency register.

 0x014           CNTEL0ACR                      RW b             Counter EL0 Access Control Register, optional in the CNTBaseN memory
                                                                 map.

 0x018           CNTVOFF[31:0] a                RO c             Virtual Offset register. If CNTVOFF<n> in the CNTCTLBase frame is an
                                                                 RW register, a read of this register returns the value of that register.
 0x01C           CNTVOFF[63:32] a               RO c             Otherwise is RAZ.

 0x020           CNTP_CVAL[31:0] a              RW               Physical Timer CompareValue register.

 0x024           CNTP_CVAL[63:32] a             RW

 0x028           CNTP_TVAL a                    RW               Physical TimerValue register.

 0x02C           CNTP_CTL a                     RW               Physical Timer Control register.

 0x030           CNTV_CVAL[31:0] a              RW b             Virtual Timer CompareValue register, optional in the CNTBaseN memory
                                                                 map.
 0x034           CNTV_CVAL[63:32] a             RW b

 0x038           CNTV_TVAL a                    RW b             Virtual TimerValue register, optional in the CNTBaseN memory map.

 0x03C           CNTV_CTL a                     RW b             Virtual Timer Control register, optional in the CNTBaseN memory map.

 0x040-0xFCF     -                              RES0             Reserved.

 0xFD0-0xFFC     CounterID<n>                   RO               Counter ID registers 0-11.

     a. These registers are also defined in the System register interface to the Generic Timer, and therefore are also described in Generic Timer
        registers on page D10-2917 and Generic Timer registers on page G7-5646. The bit assignments of the registers are identical in the System
        register interface and in the memory-mapped system level interface.
     b. Address is reserved, RAZ/WI if register not implemented.
     c. The CNTCTLBase frame includes an RW view of this register.

I2-6002                             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                            Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
                                                                                            I2.3 Memory-mapped timer components

                  The CNTEL0BaseN frame
                  For any value of N, the layout of the registers in the CNTEL0BaseN frame is identical to the CNTBaseN frame,
                  except that, in the CNTEL0BaseN frame:

                  •     CNTVOFF is never visible, and the memory at 0x018-0x01C is RAZ/WI.

                  •     CNTEL0ACR is never visible, and the memory at 0x014 is RAZ/WI.

                  •     If implemented in the CNTBaseN frame, CNTEL0ACR controls whether CNTPCT, CNTVCT, CNTFRQ,
                        the Physical Timer, and the Virtual Timer registers are visible in the CNTEL0BaseN frame.
                        If CNTEL0ACR is not implemented then these registers are not visible in the CNTEL0BaseN frame, and
                        their addresses in that frame are RAZ/WI.

                  If an implementation supports 64-bit atomic accesses, then CNTPCT, CNTVCT, CNTVOFF, CNTP_CVAL, and
                  CNTV_CVAL must be accessible as atomic 64-bit values.

                  CNTCTLBase status and control fields for the CNTBaseN and CNTEL0BaseN frames
                  In the CNTCTLBase frame:

                  CNTTIDR controls:
                             •      Whether each CNTBaseN frame is implemented.
                             •      If a CNTBaseN frame is implemented, whether:
                                    —      That CNTBaseN frame has virtual timer capability.
                                    —      A corresponding CNTEL0BaseN frame is implemented.

                  CNTNSAR controls:
                                 In an implementation that recognizes two Security states, determines whether each implemented
                                 CNTBaseN frame, and any corresponding CNTEL0BaseN frame, is accessible by Non-secure
                                 accesses.
                                 This control also determines whether, in the CNTCTLBase frame, the CNTACR<n> and
                                 CNTVOFF<n> registers are accessible by Non-secure accesses.

                  The CNTACR<n> registers control:
                                 For each implemented CNTBaseN frame, the accessibility of the following registers in that frame:
                                 •      CNTP_CTL, CNTP_CVAL, and CNTP_TVAL.
                                 •      CNTV_CTL, CNTV_CVAL, and CNTV_TVAL.
                                 •      CNTVOFF.
                                 •      CNTFRQ.
                                 •      CNTPCT.
                                 •      CNTVCT.
                                 For CNTACR<n>, the value of <n> corresponds to the value of N for the controlled CNTBaseN
                                 frame.

                  The CNTVOFF<n> registers provide:
                                 For each implemented CNTBaseN frame that has virtual capability, the RW copy of the CNTVOFF
                                 register for that frame.

                                          Note
                                 In a CNTBaseN frame that has virtual timer capability the CNTVOFF register is RO.

                                 For CNTVOFF<n>, the value of <n> corresponds to the value of N for the controlled CNTBaseN
                                 frame.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      I2-6003
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
I2 System Level Implementation of the Generic Timer
I2.3 Memory-mapped timer components

I2-6004                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                          ID121917
