Appendix K4
Recommendations for reporting memory attributes
on an interconnect

                  This appendix describes the ARM recommendations for reporting the memory attributes that are assigned by the
                  PE. It contains the following section:
                  •      ARM recommendations for reporting memory attributes on an interconnect on page K4-6466.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  K4-6465
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
Appendix K4 Recommendations for reporting memory attributes on an interconnect
K4.1 ARM recommendations for reporting memory attributes on an interconnect

K4.1         ARM recommendations for reporting memory attributes on an interconnect
                     The ARM architecture defines the architectural interface between software and the PE hardware. This means the
                     mechanisms by which different memory type and Cacheability attributes are presented on an interface to an
                     interconnect fabric such as AMBA® AXI are, strictly, outside the scope of the architecture. This appendix describes
                     an approach for the interface between a PE implementation and an interconnect fabric that ARM strongly
                     recommends, but these recommendations do not form part of the ARMv8 architecture.

K4.1.1         Effect of microarchitectural choices on memory attributes
                     Implementations of the ARM architecture permit considerable variability in the presentation of memory attributes
                     on the interconnect fabric, particularly in cases where the PE implementation does not provide optimized support
                     for a memory type. For example, an implementation might treat Write-Through locations as Non-cacheable at some
                     level of cache, because functionally this is consistent with the definition of Write-Through, but for the particular
                     implementation the performance trade-off does not merit the hardware directly providing Write-Through capability.
                     However, in such implementations, the assigned memory attributes are not changed by the microarchitectural
                     choices. The microarchitecture simply implements different ways of handling some memory attributes.

                     Therefore, ARM strongly recommended that where any or all of the following memory attributes are presented on
                     the interface between a PE and an interconnect fabric, the attributes that are presented are completely consistent
                     with the attributes defined by the translation system:
                     •      The memory type, Normal or Device.
                     •      The Early write acknowledgement attribute.
                     •      The ordering requirements.
                     •      The Shareability.
                     •      The Cacheability, including where practicable, the allocation hints.

                     Effect when memory accesses are forced to be Non-cacheable
                     ARM also strongly recommends that the effects of forcing accesses to Normal memory to be Non-cacheable, as
                     described in Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses on page D3-2055 for AArch64 and in
                     Enabling and disabling the caching of memory accesses in AArch32 state on page G3-4813 for AArch32, are
                     reflected on the interconnect by the memory type and attributes used for memory transactions generated while the
                     cache is disabled.

K4-6466                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
