Appendix K12
ARM Pseudocode Definition

                  This appendix provides a definition of the pseudocode that is used in this manual, and defines some helper
                  procedures and functions that are used by pseudocode. It contains the following sections:
                  •     About the ARM pseudocode on page K12-6564.
                  •     Pseudocode for instruction descriptions on page K12-6565.
                  •     Data types on page K12-6567.
                  •     Operators on page K12-6572.
                  •     Statements and control structures on page K12-6578.
                  •     Built-in functions on page K12-6583.
                  •     Miscellaneous helper procedures and functions on page K12-6586.
                  •     ARM pseudocode definition index on page K12-6588.

                          Note
                  This appendix is not a formal language definition for the pseudocode. It is a guide to help understand the use of
                  ARM pseudocode. This appendix is not complete. Changes are planned for future releases.

ARM DDI 0487C.a             Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       K12-6563
ID121917                                            Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.1 About the ARM pseudocode

K12.1       About the ARM pseudocode
                    The ARM pseudocode provides precise descriptions of some areas of the ARM architecture. This includes
                    description of the decoding and operation of all valid instructions. Pseudocode for instruction descriptions on
                    page K12-6565 gives general information about this instruction pseudocode, including its limitations.

                    The following sections describe the ARM pseudocode in detail:
                    •     Data types on page K12-6567.
                    •     Operators on page K12-6572.
                    •     Statements and control structures on page K12-6578.

                    Built-in functions on page K12-6583 and Miscellaneous helper procedures and functions on page K12-6586
                    describe some built-in functions and pseudocode helper functions that are used by the pseudocode functions that are
                    described elsewhere in this manual. ARM pseudocode definition index on page K12-6588 contains the indexes to
                    the pseudocode.

K12.1.1       General limitations of ARM pseudocode
                    The pseudocode statements IMPLEMENTATION_DEFINED, SEE, UNDEFINED, and UNPREDICTABLE indicate behavior that
                    differs from that indicated by the pseudocode being executed. If one of them is encountered:

                    •     Earlier behavior indicated by the pseudocode is only specified as occurring to the extent required to
                          determine that the statement is executed.

                    •     No subsequent behavior indicated by the pseudocode occurs.

                    For more information, see Special statements on page K12-6582.

K12-6564                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                           K12.2 Pseudocode for instruction descriptions

K12.2      Pseudocode for instruction descriptions
                  Each instruction description includes pseudocode that provides a precise description of what the instruction does,
                  subject to the limitations described in General limitations of ARM pseudocode on page K12-6564 and Limitations
                  of the instruction pseudocode on page K12-6566.

                  In the instruction pseudocode, instruction fields are referred to by the names shown in the encoding diagram for the
                  instruction. Instruction encoding diagrams and instruction pseudocode gives more information about the
                  pseudocode provided for each instruction.

K12.2.1     Instruction encoding diagrams and instruction pseudocode
                  Instruction descriptions in this manual contain:

                  •     An Encoding section, containing one or more encoding diagrams, each followed by some encoding-specific
                        pseudocode that translates the fields of the encoding into inputs for the common pseudocode of the
                        instruction, and picks out any encoding-specific special cases.

                  •     An Operation section, containing common pseudocode that applies to all of the encodings being described.
                        The Operation section pseudocode contains a call to the EncodingSpecificOperations() function, either at its
                        start or only after a condition code check performed by if ConditionPassed() then.
                  An encoding diagram specifies each bit of the instruction as one of the following:

                  •     An obligatory 0 or 1, represented in the diagram as 0 or 1. If this bit does not have this value, the encoding
                        corresponds to a different instruction.

                  •     A should be 0 or 1, represented in the diagram as (0) or (1). If this bit does not have this value, the instruction
                        is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE. For more information, see SBZ or SBO fields T32 and A32 in instructions
                        on page K1-6394.

                  •     A named single bit or a bit in a named multi-bit field. The cond field in bits[31:28] of many A32/T32
                        instructions has some special rules associated with it.

                  An encoding diagram matches an instruction if all obligatory bits are identical in the encoding diagram and the
                  instruction, and one of the following is true:

                  •     The encoding diagram is not for an A32/T32 instruction.

                  •     The encoding diagram is for an A32/T32 instruction that does not have a cond field in bits[31:28].

                  •     The encoding diagram is for an A32/T32 instruction that has a cond field in bits[31:28], and bits[31:28] of
                        the instruction are not 0b1111.
                  In the context of the instruction pseudocode, the execution model for an instruction is:

                  1.    Find all encoding diagrams that match the instruction. It is possible that no encoding diagram matches. In
                        that case, abandon this execution model and consult the relevant instruction set chapter instead to find out
                        how the instruction is to be treated. The bit pattern of such an instruction is usually reserved and UNDEFINED,
                        though there are some other possibilities. For example, unallocated hint instructions are documented as being
                        reserved and executed as NOPs.

                  2.    If the operation pseudocode for the matching encoding diagrams starts with a condition code check, perform
                        that check. If the condition code check fails, abandon this execution model and treat the instruction as a NOP.
                        If there are multiple matching encoding diagrams, either all or none of their corresponding pieces of common
                        pseudocode start with a condition code check.

                  3.    Perform the encoding-specific pseudocode for each of the matching encoding diagrams independently and in
                        parallel. Each such piece of encoding-specific pseudocode starts with a bitstring variable for each named bit
                        or multi-bit field in its corresponding encoding diagram, named the same as the bit or multi-bit field and
                        initialized with the values of the corresponding bit or bits from the bit pattern of the instruction.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           K12-6565
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.2 Pseudocode for instruction descriptions

                             In a few cases, the encoding diagram contains more than one bit or field with same name. In these cases, the
                             values of the different instances of those bits or fields must be identical. The encoding-specific pseudocode
                             contains a special case using the Consistent() function to specify what happens if they are not identical.
                             Consistent() returns TRUE if all instruction bits or fields with the same name as its argument have the same
                             value, and FALSE otherwise.
                             If there are multiple matching encoding diagrams, all but one of the corresponding pieces of pseudocode must
                             contain a special case that indicates that it does not apply. Discard the results of all such pieces of pseudocode
                             and their corresponding encoding diagrams.
                             There is now one remaining piece of pseudocode and its corresponding encoding diagram left to consider.
                             This pseudocode might also contain a special case, most commonly one indicating that it is CONSTRAINED
                             UNPREDICTABLE. If so, abandon this execution model and treat the instruction according to the special case.

                      4.     Check the should be bits of the encoding diagram against the corresponding bits of the bit pattern of the
                             instruction. If any of them do not match, abandon this execution model and treat the instruction as
                             CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, see SBZ or SBO fields T32 and A32 in instructions on page K1-6394.

                      5.     Perform the rest of the operation pseudocode for the instruction description that contains the encoding
                             diagram. That pseudocode starts with all variables set to the values they were left with by the
                             encoding-specific pseudocode.

                      The ConditionPassed() call in the common pseudocode, if present, performs step 2, and the
                      EncodingSpecificOperations() call performs steps 3 and 4.

K12.2.2        Limitations of the instruction pseudocode
                      The pseudocode descriptions of instruction functionality have a number of limitations. These are mainly due to the
                      fact that, for clarity and brevity, the pseudocode is a sequential and mostly deterministic language.

                      These limitations include:

                      •      Pseudocode does not describe the ordering requirements when an instruction generates multiple memory
                             accesses. For a description of the ordering requirements on memory accesses see Ordering constraints on
                             page E2-3015.

                      •      Pseudocode does not describe the exact rules when an UNDEFINED instruction fails its condition code check.
                             In such cases, the UNDEFINED pseudocode statement lies inside the if ConditionPassed() then … structure,
                             either directly or in the EncodingSpecificOperations() function call, and so the pseudocode indicates that the
                             instruction executes as a NOP. Conditional execution of undefined instructions on page G1-4663 describes
                             the exact rules.

                      •      Pseudocode does not describe the exact ordering requirements when a single floating-point instruction
                             generates more than one floating-point exception and one or more of those floating-point exceptions is
                             trapped. Combinations of floating-point exceptions on page E1-2995 describes the exact rules.

                                      Note
                             There is no limitation in the case where all the floating-point exceptions are untrapped, because the
                             pseudocode specifies the same behavior as the cross-referenced section.

                      •      An exception can be taken during execution of the pseudocode for an instruction, either explicitly as a result
                             of the execution of a pseudocode function such as Abort(), or implicitly, for example if an interrupt is taken
                             during execution of an LDM instruction. If this happens, the pseudocode does not describe the extent to which
                             the normal behavior of the instruction occurs. To determine that, see the descriptions of the exceptions in
                             Handling exceptions that are taken to an Exception level using AArch32 on page G1-4622.

K12-6566                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                             Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                                  K12.3 Data types

K12.3      Data types
                  This section describes:
                  •      General data type rules.
                  •      Bitstrings.
                  •      Integers on page K12-6568.
                  •      Reals on page K12-6568.
                  •      Booleans on page K12-6568.
                  •      Enumerations on page K12-6569.
                  •      Structures on page K12-6569.
                  •      Tuples on page K12-6570.
                  •      Arrays on page K12-6571.

K12.3.1     General data type rules
                  ARM architecture pseudocode is a strongly typed language. Every literal and variable is of one of the following
                  types:
                  •      Bitstring.
                  •      Integer.
                  •      Boolean.
                  •      Real.
                  •      Enumeration.
                  •      Tuple.
                  •      Struct.
                  •      Array.

                  The type of a literal is determined by its syntax. A variable can be assigned to without an explicit declaration. The
                  variable implicitly has the type of the assigned value. For example, the following assignments implicitly declare the
                  variables x, y and z to have types integer, bitstring of length 1, and Boolean, respectively.

                  x = 1;
                  y = '1';
                  z = TRUE;

                  Variables can also have their types declared explicitly by preceding the variable name with the name of the type.
                  The following example declares explicitly that a variable named count is an integer.

                  integer count;

                  This is most often done in function definitions for the arguments and the result of the function.

                  The remaining subsections describe each data type in more detail.

K12.3.2     Bitstrings
                  This section describes the bitstring data type.

                  Syntax
                  bits(N)          The type name of a bitstring of length N.
                  bit              A synonym of bits(1).

                  Description
                  A bitstring is a finite-length string of 0s and 1s. Each length of bitstring is a different type. The minimum permitted
                  length of a bitstring is 0.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        K12-6567
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.3 Data types

                    Bitstring constants literals are written as a single quotation mark, followed by the string of 0s and 1s, followed by
                    another single quotation mark. For example, the two constants literals of type bit are '0' and '1'. Spaces can be
                    included in bitstrings for clarity.

                    The bits in a bitstring are numbered from left to right N-1 to 0. This numbering is used when accessing the bitstring
                    using bitslices. In conversions to and from integers, bit N-1 is the MSByte and bit 0 is the LSByte. This order
                    matches the order in which bitstrings derived from encoding diagrams are printed.

                    Every bitstring value has a left-to-right order, with the bits being numbered in standard little-endian order. That is,
                    the leftmost bit of a bitstring of length N is bit (N–1) and its right-most bit is bit 0. This order is used as the
                    most-significant-to-least-significant bit order in conversions to and from integers. For bitstring constants and
                    bitstrings that are derived from encoding diagrams, this order matches the way that they are printed.

                    Bitstrings are the only concrete data type in pseudocode, corresponding directly to the contents values that are
                    manipulated in registers, memory locations, and instructions. All other data types are abstract.

K12.3.3       Integers
                    This section describes the data type for integer numbers.

                    Syntax
                    integer         The type name for the integer data type.

                    Description
                    Pseudocode integers are unbounded in size and can be either positive or negative. That is, they are mathematical
                    integers rather than what computer languages and architectures commonly call integers. Computer integers are
                    represented in pseudocode as bitstrings of the appropriate length, and the pseudocode provides functions to interpret
                    those bitstrings as integers.

                    Integer literals are normally written in decimal form, such as 0, 15, -1234. They can also be written in C-style
                    hexadecimal form, such as 0x55 or 0x80000000. Hexadecimal integer literals are treated as positive unless they have
                    a preceding minus sign. For example, 0x80000000 is the integer +231. If -231 needs to be written in hexadecimal, it
                    must be written as -0x80000000.

K12.3.4       Reals
                    This section describes the data type for real numbers.

                    Syntax
                    real            The type name for the real data type.

                    Description
                    Pseudocode reals are unbounded in size and precision. That is, they are mathematical real numbers, not computer
                    floating-point numbers. Computer floating-point numbers are represented in pseudocode as bitstrings of the
                    appropriate length, and the pseudocode provides functions to interpret those bitstrings as reals.

                    Real constant literals are written in decimal form with a decimal point. This means 0 is an integer constant literal,
                    but 0.0 is a real constant literal.

K12.3.5       Booleans
                    This section describes the Boolean data type.

K12-6568                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                             Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                                  K12.3 Data types

                  Syntax
                  boolean          The type name for the Boolean data type.

                  TRUE             The two values a Boolean variable can take.

                  Description
                  A Boolean is a logical TRUE or FALSE value.

                            Note
                  This is not the same type as bit, which is a bitstring of length 1. A Boolean can only take on one of two values: TRUE
                  or FALSE.

K12.3.6     Enumerations
                  This section describes the enumeration data type.

                  Syntax and examples
                  enumeration      Keyword to defined a new enumeration type.

                  enumeration Example {Example_One, Example_Two, Example_Three};
                                   A definition of a new enumeration called Example, which can take on the values Example_One,
                                   Example_Two, Example_Three.

                  Description
                  An enumeration is a defined set of named values.

                  An enumeration must contain at least one named value. A named value must not be shared between enumerations.

                  Enumerations must be defined explicitly, although a variable of an enumeration type can be declared implicitly by
                  assigning one of the named values to it. By convention, each named value starts with the name of the enumeration
                  followed by an underscore. The name of the enumeration is its type name, or type, and the named values are its
                  possible values.

K12.3.7     Structures
                  This section describes the structure data type.

                  Syntax and examples
                  type             The keyword used to declare the structure data type.

                  type ShiftSpec is (bits(2) shift, integer amount)
                                   An example definition for a new structure called ShiftSpec that contains an bitstring member called
                                   shift and a integer member named amount. Structure definitions must not be terminated with a
                                   semicolon.

                  ShiftSpec abc;
                                   A declaration of a variable named abc of type ShiftSpec.

                  abc.shift
                                   Syntax to refer to the individual members within the structure variable.

ARM DDI 0487C.a               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       K12-6569
ID121917                                              Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.3 Data types

                    Description
                    A structure is a compound data type composed of one or more data items. The data items can be of different data
                    types. This can include compound data types. The data items of a structure are called its members and are named.

                    In the syntax section, the example defines a structure called ShiftSpec with two members. The first is a bitstring of
                    length 2 named shift and the second is an integer named amount. After declaring a variable of that type named abc,
                    the members of this structure are referred to as abc.shift and abc.amount.
                    Every definition of a structure creates a different type, even if the number and type of their members are identical.
                    For example:

                    type ShiftSpec1 is (bits(2) shift, integer amount)
                    type ShiftSpec2 is (bits(2) shift, integer amount)

                    ShiftSpec1 and ShiftSpec2 are two different types despite having identical definitions. This means that the value in
                    a variable of type ShiftSpec1 cannot be assigned to variable of type ShiftSpec2.

K12.3.8       Tuples
                    This section describes the tuple data type.

                    Examples
                    (bits(32) shifter_result, bit shifter_carry_out)
                                    An example of the tuple syntax.

                    (shift_t, shift_n) = ('00', 0);
                                    An example of assigning values to a tuple.

                    Description
                    A tuple is an ordered set of data items, separated by commas and enclosed in parentheses. The items can be of
                    different types and a tuple must contain at least one data item.

                    Tuples are often used as the return type for functions that return multiple results. For example, in the syntax section,
                    the example tuple is the return type of the function Shift_C(), which performs a standard A32/T32 shift or rotation.
                    Its return type is a tuple containing two data items, with the first of type bits(32) and the second of type bit.
                    Each tuple is a separate compound data type. The compound data type is represented as a comma-separated list of
                    ordered data types between parentheses. This means that the example tuple at the start of this section is of type
                    (bits(32), bit). The general principle that types can be implied by an assignment extends to implying the type of
                    the elements in the tuple. For example, in the syntax section, the example assignment implicitly declares:
                    •      shift_t to be of type bits(2).
                    •      shift_n to be of type integer.
                    •      (shift_t, shift_n) to be a tuple of type (bits(2), integer).

K12-6570                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                        ID121917
                                                                                            Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                                 K12.3 Data types

K12.3.9     Arrays
                  This section describes the array data type.

                  Syntax
                  array           The type name for the array data type.

                  array data_type array_name[A..B];
                                  Declaration of an array of type data_type, which might be compound data type. It is named
                                  array_name and is indexed with an integer range from A to B.

                  Description
                  An array is an ordered set of fixed size containing items of a single data type. This can include compound data types.
                  Pseudocode arrays are indexed by either enumerations or integer ranges. An integer range is represented by the
                  lower inclusive end of the range, then .., then the upper inclusive end of the range.
                  For example:

                  The following example declares an array of 31 bitstrings of length 64, indexed from 0 to 30.

                  array bits(64) _R[0..30];

                  Arrays are always explicitly declared, and there is no notation for a constant literal array. Arrays always contain at
                  least one element data item, because:
                  •      Enumerations always contain at least one symbolic constant named value.
                  •      Integer ranges always contain at least one integer.

                  An array declared with an enumeration type as the index must be accessed using enumeration values of that
                  enumeration type. An array declared with an integer range type as the index must be accessed using integer values
                  from that inclusive range. Accessing such an array with an integer value outside of the range is a coding error.

                  Arrays do not usually appear directly in pseudocode. The items that syntactically look like arrays in pseudocode are
                  usually array-like functions such as R[i], MemU[address, size] or Elem[vector, i, size]. These functions package
                  up and abstract additional operations normally performed on accesses to the underlying arrays, such as register
                  banking, memory protection, endian-dependent byte ordering, exclusive-access housekeeping and Advanced SIMD
                  element processing. See Function and procedure calls on page K12-6578.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        K12-6571
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.4 Operators

K12.4       Operators
                    This section describes:
                    •      Relational operators.
                    •      Boolean operators.
                    •      Bitstring operators on page K12-6573.
                    •      Arithmetic operators on page K12-6573.
                    •      The assignment operator on page K12-6574.
                    •      Precedence rules on page K12-6576.
                    •      Conditional expressions on page K12-6576.
                    •      Operator polymorphism on page K12-6576.

K12.4.1       Relational operators
                    The following operations yield results of type boolean.

                    Equality and non-equality
                    If two variables x and y are of the same type, their values can be tested for equality by using the expression x == y
                    and for non-equality by using the expression x != y. In both cases, the result is of type boolean.
                    Both x and y must be of type bits(N), real, enumeration, boolean, or integer. Named values from an enumeration
                    can only be compared if they are both from the same enumeration. An exception is that a bitstring can be tested for
                    equality with an integer to allow a d==15 test.
                    A special form of comparison is defined with a bitstring literal that can contain bit values '0', '1', and 'x'. Any bit
                    with value 'x' is ignored in determining the result of the comparison. For example, if opcode is a 4-bit bitstring, the
                    expression opcode == '1x0x' matches the values ‘1000’, ‘1100’, ‘1001’, and ‘1101’. This is known as a bitmask.

                             Note
                    This special form is permitted in the implied equality comparisons in the when parts of case … of … structures.

                    Comparisons
                    If x and y are integers or reals, then x < y, x <= y, x > y, and x >= y are less than, less than or equal, greater than,
                    and greater than or equal comparisons between them, producing Boolean results.

                    Set membership with IN
                    <expression> IN {<set>} produces TRUE if <expression> is a member of <set>. Otherwise, it is FALSE. <set> must be
                    a list of expressions separated by commas.

K12.4.2       Boolean operators
                    If x is a Boolean expression, then !x is its logical inverse.

                    If x and y are Boolean expressions, then x && y is the result of ANDing them together. As in the C language, if x is
                    FALSE, the result is determined to be FALSE without evaluating y.

                             Note
                    This is known as short circuit evaluation.

                    If x and y are booleans, then x || y is the result of ORing them together. As in the C language, if x is TRUE, the result
                    is determined to be TRUE without evaluating y.

K12-6572                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                                   Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                                         K12.4 Operators

                           Note
                  If x and y are booleans or Boolean expressions, then the result of x != y is the same as the result of exclusive-ORing
                  x and y together. The operator EOR only accepts bitstring arguments.

K12.4.3     Bitstring operators
                  The following operations can be applied only to bitstrings.

                  Logical operations on bitstrings
                  If x is a bitstring, NOT(x) is the bitstring of the same length obtained by logically inverting every bit of x.

                  If x and y are bitstrings of the same length, x AND y, x OR y, and x EOR y are the bitstrings of that same length obtained
                  by logically ANDing, logically ORing, and exclusive-ORing corresponding bits of x and y together.

                  Bitstring concatenation and slicing
                  If x and y are bitstrings of lengths N and M respectively, then x:y is the bitstring of length N+M constructed by
                  concatenating x and y in left-to-right order.

                  The bitstring slicing operator addresses specific bits in a bitstring. This can be used to create a new bitstring from
                  extracted bits or to set the value of specific bits. Its syntax is x<integer_list>, where x is the integer or bitstring
                  being sliced, and <integer_list> is a comma-separated list of integers enclosed in angle brackets. The length of the
                  resulting bitstring is equal to the number of integers in <integer_list>. In x<integer_list>, each of the integers in
                  <integer_list> must be:
                  •      >= 0.
                  •      < Len(x) if x is a bitstring.

                  The definition of x<integer_list> depends on whether integer_list contains more than one integer:

                  •      If integer_list contains more than one integer, x<i, j, k,…, n> is defined to be the concatenation:
                         x<i> : x<j> : x<k> : … : x<n>.

                  •      If integer_list consists of just one integer i, x<i> is defined to be:
                         —      If x is a bitstring, '0' if bit i of x is a zero and '1' if bit i of x is a one.
                         —      If x is an integer, and y is the unique integer in the range 0 to 2^(i+1)-1 that is congruent to x modulo
                                2^(i+1). Then x<i> is '0' if y < 2^i and '1' if y >= 2^i.
                                Loosely, this definition treats an integer as equivalent to a sufficiently long two’s complement
                                representation of it as a bitstring.

                  The notation for a range expression is i:j with i >= j is shorthand for the integers in order from i down to j, with
                  both end values included. For example, instr<31:28> represents instr<31, 30, 29, 28>.
                  x<integer_list> is assignable provided x is an assignable bitstring and no integer appears more than once in
                  <integer_list>. In particular, x<i> is assignable if x is an assignable bitstring and 0 <= i < Len(x).

                  Encoding diagrams for registers frequently show named bits or multi-bit fields. For example, the encoding diagram
                  for the APSR shows its bit<31> as N. In such cases, the syntax APSR.N is used as a more readable synonym for
                  APSR<31> as named bits can be referred to with the same syntax as referring to members of a struct. A
                  comma-separated list of named bits enclosed in angle brackets following the register name allows multiple bits to
                  be addressed simultaneously. For example, APSR.<N, C, Q> is synonymous with APSR <31, 29, 27>.

K12.4.4     Arithmetic operators
                  Most pseudocode arithmetic is performed on integer or real values, with operands obtained by conversions from
                  bitstrings and results converted back to bitstrings. As these data types are the unbounded mathematical types, no
                  issues arise about overflow or similar errors.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                              K12-6573
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.4 Operators

                    Unary plus and minus
                    If x is an integer or real, then +x is x unchanged, -x is x with its sign reversed. Both are of the same type as x.

                    Addition and subtraction
                    If x and y are integers or reals, x+y and x-y are their sum and difference. Both are of type integer if x and y are both
                    of type integer, and real otherwise.

                    There are two cases where the types of x and y can be different. A bitstring and an integer can be added together to
                    allow the operation PC + 4. An integer can be subtracted from a bitstring to allow the operation PC - 2.
                    If x and y are bitstrings of the same length N, so that N = Len(x) = Len(y), then x+y and x-y are the least significant
                    N bits of the results of converting x and y to integers and adding or subtracting them. Signed and unsigned
                    conversions produce the same result:

                    x+y = (SInt(x) + SInt(y))<N-1:0>
                        = (UInt(x) + UInt(y))<N-1:0>
                    x-y = (SInt(x) - SInt(y))<N-1:0>
                        = (UInt(x) - UInt(y))<N-1:0>

                    If x is a bitstring of length N and y is an integer, x+y and x-y are the bitstrings of length N defined by x+y = x + y<N-1:0>
                    and x-y = x - y<N-1:0>. Similarly, if x is an integer and y is a bitstring of length M, x+y and x-y are the bitstrings of
                    length M defined by x+y = x<M-1:0> + y and x-y = x<M-1:0> - y.

                    Multiplication
                    If x and y are integers or reals, then x * y is the product of x and y. It is of type integer if x and y are both of type
                    integer, and real otherwise.

                    Division and modulo
                    If x and y are reals, then x/y is the result of dividing x by y, and is always of type real.

                    If x and y are integers, then x DIV y and x MOD y are defined by:

                    x DIV y = RoundDown(x/y)
                    x MOD y = x - y * (x DIV y)

                    It is a pseudocode error to use any of x/y, x MOD y, or x DIV y in any context where y can be zero.

                    Scaling
                    If x and n are of type integer, then:
                    •      x << n = RoundDown(x * 2^n).
                    •      x >> n = RoundDown(x * 2^(-n)).

                    Raising to a power
                    If x is an integer or a real and n is an integer then x^n is the result of raising x to the power of n, and:
                    •       If x is of type integer then x^n is of type integer.
                    •       If x is of type real then x^n is of type real.

K12.4.5       The assignment operator
                    The assignment operator is the = character, which assigns the value of the right-hand side to the left-hand side. An
                    assignment statement takes the form:

                    <assignable_expression> = <expression>;

                    This following subsection defines valid expression syntax.

K12-6574                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                            ID121917
                                                                                              Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                                    K12.4 Operators

                  General expression syntax
                  An expression is one of the following:
                  •     A literal.
                  •     A variable, optionally preceded by a data type name to declare its type.
                  •     The word UNKNOWN preceded by a data type name to declare its type.
                  •     The result of applying a language-defined operator to other expressions.
                  •     The result of applying a function to other expressions.

                  Variable names normally consist of alphanumeric and underscore characters, starting with an alphabetic or
                  underscore character.

                  Each register defined in an ARM architecture specification defines a correspondingly named pseudocode bitstring
                  variable, and that variable has the stated behavior of the register. For example, if a bit of a register is defined as
                  RAZ/WI, then the corresponding bit of its variable reads as '0' and ignore writes.
                  An expression like bits(32) UNKNOWN indicates that the result of the expression is a value of the given type, but the
                  architecture does not specify what value it is and software must not rely on such values. The value produced must
                  not:

                  •     Return information that cannot be accessed at the current or a lower level of privilege using instructions that
                        are not UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE and do not return UNKNOWN values,

                  •     Be promoted as providing any useful information to software.

                           Note
                  UNKNOWN values are similar to the definition of UNPREDICTABLE, but do not indicate that the entire architectural
                  state becomes unspecified.

                  Only the following expressions are assignable. This means that these are the only expressions that can be placed on
                  the left-hand side of an assignment.

                  •     Variables.

                  •     The results of applying some operators to other expressions.
                        The description of each language-defined operator that can generate an assignable expression specifies the
                        circumstances under which it does so. For example, those circumstances might require that one or more of
                        the expressions the operator operates on is an assignable expression.

                  •     The results of applying array-like functions to other expressions. The description of an array-like function
                        specifies the circumstances under which it can generate an assignable expression.

                           Note
                  If the right-hand side in an assignment is a function returning a tuple, an item in the assignment destination can be
                  written as - to indicate that the corresponding item of the assigned tuple value is discarded. For example:

                  (shifted, -) = LSL_C(operand, amount);

                  The expression on the right-hand side itself can be a tuple. For example:

                  (x, y) = (function_1(), function_2());

                  Every expression has a data type.

                  •     For a literal, this data type is determined by the syntax of the literal.

                  •     For a variable, there are the following possible sources for the data type
                        —      An optional preceding data type name.
                        —      A data type the variable was given earlier in the pseudocode by recursive application of this rule.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        K12-6575
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.4 Operators

                          —      A data type the variable is being given by assignment, either by direct assignment to the variable, or
                                 by assignment to a list of which the variable is a member.
                          It is a pseudocode error if none of these data type sources exists for a variable, or if more than one of them
                          exists and they do not agree about the type.

                    •     For a language-defined operator, the definition of the operator determines the data type.

                    •     For a function, the definition of the function determines the data type.

K12.4.6       Precedence rules
                    The precedence rules for expressions are:

                    1.    Literals, variables and function invocations are evaluated with higher priority than any operators using their
                          results, but see Boolean operators on page K12-6572.

                    2.    Operators on integers follow the normal operator precedence rules of exponentiation before multiply/divide
                          before add/subtract, with sequences of multiply/divides or add/subtracts evaluated left-to-right.

                    3.    Other expressions must be parenthesized to indicate operator precedence if ambiguity is possible, but need
                          not be if all permitted precedence orders under the type rules necessarily lead to the same result. For example,
                          if i, j and k are integer variables, i > 0 && j > 0 && k > 0 is acceptable, but i > 0 && j > 0 || k > 0 is not.

K12.4.7       Conditional expressions
                    If x and y are two values of the same type and t is a value of type boolean, then if t then x else y is an expression
                    of the same type as x and y that produces x if t is TRUE and y if t is FALSE.

K12.4.8       Operator polymorphism
                    Operators in pseudocode can be polymorphic, with different functionality when applied to different data types. Each
                    resulting form of an operator has a different prototype definition. For example, the operator + has forms that act on
                    various combinations of integers, reals and bitstrings.

                    Table K12-1 summarizes the operand types valid for each unary operator and the result type. Table K12-2 on
                    page K12-6577 summarizes the operand types valid for each binary operator and the result type.

                                                      Table K12-1 Result and operand types permitted for unary operators

                                                                                      Operator       Operand Type        Result Type

                                                                                                     integer             integer
                                                                                      -
                                                                                                     real                real

                                                                                      NOT            bits(N)             bits(N)

                                                                                      !              boolean             boolean

K12-6576                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                 Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                       K12.4 Operators

                                          Table K12-2 Result and operand types permitted for binary operators

                                     Operator        First operand type        Second operand type       Result type

                                                                               integer
                                                     bits(N)
                                                                               bits(N)

                                                     integer                   integer
                                     ==                                                                  boolean
                                                     real                      real

                                                     enumeration               enumeration

                                                     boolean                   boolean

                                                     bits(N)                   bits(N)

                                     !=              integer                   integer                   boolean

                                                     real                      real

                                     <, >            integer                   integer
                                                                                                         boolean
                                     <= , >=         real                      real

                                                     integer                   integer                   integer

                                                     real                      real                      real
                                     +, -
                                                                               bits(N)
                                                     bits(N)                                             bits(N)
                                                                               integer

                                     <<, >>          integer                   integer                   integer

                                                     integer                   integer                   integer

                                     *               real                      real                      real

                                                     bits(N)                   bits(N)                   bits(N)

                                     /               real                      real                      real

                                     DIV             integer                   integer                   integer

                                                     integer                   integer
                                     MOD                                                                 integer
                                                     bits(N)                   integer

                                     &&, ||          boolean                   boolean                   boolean

                                     AND, OR, EOR    bits(N)                   bits(N)                   bits(N)

                                                     integer                   integer                   integer
                                     ^
                                                     real                      integer                   real

ARM DDI 0487C.a   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     K12-6577
ID121917                                  Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.5 Statements and control structures

K12.5        Statements and control structures
                    This section describes the statements and program structures available in the pseudocode:
                    •      Statements and Indentation.
                    •      Function and procedure calls.
                    •      Conditional control structures on page K12-6580.
                    •      Loop control structures on page K12-6581.
                    •      Special statements on page K12-6582.
                    •      Comments on page K12-6582.

K12.5.1       Statements and Indentation
                    A simple statement is either an assignment, a function call, or a procedure call. Each statement must be terminated
                    with a semicolon.

                    Indentation normally indicates the structure in compound statements. The statements contained in structures such
                    as if … then … else … or procedure and function definitions are indented more deeply than the statement structure
                    itself. The end of a compound statement structure and their end is indicated by returning to the original indentation
                    level or less.

                    Indentation is normally done by four spaces for each level. Standard indentation uses four spaces for each level of
                    indent.

K12.5.2       Function and procedure calls
                    This section describes how functions and procedures are defined and called in the pseudocode.

K12-6578                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                               K12.5 Statements and control structures

                  Procedure and function definitions
                  A procedure definition has the form:

                  <procedure name>(<argument prototypes>)
                      <statement 1>;
                      <statement 2>;
                      …
                      <statement n>;

                  where <argument prototypes> consists of zero or more argument definitions, separated by commas. Each argument
                  definition consists of a type name followed by the name of the argument.

                            Note
                  This first definition line is not terminated by a semicolon. This distinguishes it from a procedure call.

                  A function definition is similar, but also declares the return type of the function:

                  <return type> <function name>(<argument prototypes>)
                      <statement 1>;
                      <statement 2>;
                      …
                      <statement n>;

                            Note
                  A function or procedure name can include a ".". This is a convention used for functions that have similar but
                  different behaviors in AArch32 and AArch64 states.

                  Array-like functions are similar, but are written with square brackets and have two forms. These two forms exist
                  because reading from and writing to an array element require different functions. They are frequently used in
                  memory operations. An array-like function definition with a return type is equivalent to reading from an array. For
                  example:

                  <return type> <function name>[<argument prototypes>]
                      <statement 1>;
                      <statement 2>;
                      …
                      <statement n>;

                  Its related function definition with no return type is equivalent to writing to an array. For example:

                  <function name>[<argument prototypes>] = <value prototype>
                      <statement 1>;
                      <statement 2>;
                      …
                      <statement n>;

                  The value prototype determines what data type can be written to the array. The two related functions must share the
                  same name, but the value prototype and return type can be different.

                  Procedure calls
                  A procedure call has the form:

                  <procedure_name>(<arguments>);

                  Return statements
                  A procedure return has the form:

                  return;

                  A function return has the form:

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        K12-6579
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.5 Statements and control structures

                    return <expression>;

                    where <expression> is of the type declared in the function prototype line.

K12.5.3        Conditional control structures
                    This section describes how conditional control structures are used in the pseudocode.

                    if … then … else …
                    In addition to being a ternary operator, a multi-line if … then … else … structure can act as a control structure and
                    has the form:

                    if <boolean_expression> then
                        <statement 1>;
                        <statement 2>;
                        …
                        <statement n>;

                    elsif <boolean_expression> then
                         <statement a>;
                         <statement b>;
                         …
                         <statement z>;
                    else
                         <statement A>;
                         <statement B>;
                         …
                         <statement Z>;

                    The block of lines consisting of elsif and its indented statements is optional, and multiple elsif blocks can be used.

                    The block of lines consisting of else and its indented statements is optional.

                    Abbreviated one-line forms can be used when the then part, and in the else part if it is present, contain only simple
                    statements such as:

                    if <boolean_expression> then <statement 1>;
                    if <boolean_expression> then <statement 1>; else <statement A>;
                    if <boolean_expression> then <statement 1>; <statement 2>; else <statement A>;

                            Note
                    In these forms, <statement 1>, <statement 2> and <statement A> must be terminated by semicolons. This and the
                    fact that the else part is optional distinguish its use as a control structure from its use as a ternary operator.

                    case … of …
                    A case … of … structure has the form:

                    case <expression> of
                        when <literal values1>
                            <statement 1>;
                            <statement 2>;
                            …
                            <statement n>;

                        when <literal values2>
                            <statement 1>;
                            <statement 2>;
                            …
                            <statement n>;

                        … more "when" groups if required …

K12-6580                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.              ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                     ID121917
                                                                                             Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                               K12.5 Statements and control structures

                      otherwise
                          <statement A>;
                          <statement B>;
                          …
                          <statement Z>;

                  In this structure, <literal values1> and <literal values2> consist of literal values of the same type as <expression>,
                  separated by commas. There can be additional when groups in the structure. Abbreviated one line forms of when and
                  otherwise parts can be used when they contain only simple statements.

                  If <expression> has a bitstring type, the literal values can also include bitstring literals containing 'x' bits, known
                  as bitmasks. For details see Equality and non-equality on page K12-6572.

K12.5.4     Loop control structures
                  This section describes the three loop control structures used in the pseudocode.

                  repeat … until …
                  A repeat … until … structure has the form:

                  repeat
                      <statement 1>;
                      <statement 2>;
                      …
                      <statement n>;
                  until <boolean_expression>;

                  It executes the statement block at least once, and the loop repeats until <boolean expression> evaluates to TRUE.
                  Variables explicitly declared inside the loop body have scope local to that loop and might not be accessed outside
                  the loop body.

                  while … do
                  A while … do structure has the form:

                  while <boolean_expression> do
                      <statement 1>;
                      <statement 2>;
                      …
                      <statement n>;

                  It begins executing the statement block only if the Boolean expression is true. The loop then runs until the
                  expression is false.

                  for …
                  A for … structure has the form:

                  for <assignable_expression> = <integer_expr1> to <integer_expr2>
                      <statement 1>;
                      <statement 2>;
                      …
                      <statement n>;

                  The <assignable_expression> is initialized to <integer_expr1> and compared to <integer_expr2>. If <integer_expr1>
                  is less than <integer_expr2>, the loop body is executed and the <assignable_expression> incremented by one. This
                  repeats until <assignable expression> is more than or equal to <integer_expr2>.

                  There is an alternate form:

                  for <assignable_expression> = <integer_expr1> downto <integer_expr2>

                  where <integer_expr1> is decremented after the loop body executes and continues until <assignable expression> is
                  less than or equal than <integer_expr2>.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          K12-6581
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.5 Statements and control structures

K12.5.5       Special statements
                    This section describes statements with particular architecturally-defined behaviors.

                    UNDEFINED
                    This subsection describes the statement:

                    UNDEFINED;

                    This statement indicates a special case that replaces the behavior defined by the current pseudocode, apart from
                    behavior required to determine that the special case applies. The replacement behavior is that the Undefined
                    Instruction exception is taken.

                    UNPREDICTABLE
                    This subsection describes the statement:

                    UNPREDICTABLE;

                    This statement indicates a special case that replaces the behavior defined by the current pseudocode, apart from
                    behavior required to determine that the special case applies. The replacement behavior is UNPREDICTABLE.

                    SEE…
                    This subsection describes the statement:

                    SEE <reference>;

                    This statement indicates a special case that replaces the behavior defined by the current pseudocode, apart from
                    behavior required to determine that the special case applies. The replacement behavior is that nothing occurs as a
                    result of the current pseudocode because some other piece of pseudocode defines the required behavior. The
                    <reference> indicates where that other pseudocode can be found.

                    It usually refers to another instruction, but can also refer to another encoding or note of the same instruction.

                    IMPLEMENTATION_DEFINED
                    This subsection describes the statement:

                    IMPLEMENTATION_DEFINED {"<text>"};

                    This statement indicates a special case that replaces the behavior defined by the current pseudocode, apart from
                    behavior required to determine that the special case applies. The replacement behavior is IMPLEMENTATION
                    DEFINED. An optional <text> field can give more information.

K12.5.6       Comments
                    The pseudocode supports two styles of comments:
                    •     // starts a comment that is terminated by the end of the line.
                    •     /* starts a comment that is terminated by */.

                     /**/ statements might not be nested, and the first */ ends the comment.

                             Note
                    Comment lines do not require a terminating semicolon.

K12-6582                         Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.             ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                    ID121917
                                                                                              Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                               K12.6 Built-in functions

K12.6      Built-in functions
                  This section describes:
                  •      Bitstring manipulation functions.
                  •      Arithmetic functions on page K12-6584.

K12.6.1     Bitstring manipulation functions
                  The following bitstring manipulation functions are defined:

                  Bitstring length and most significant bit
                  If x is a bitstring:
                  •       The bitstring length function Len(x) returns the length of x as an integer.

                  Bitstring concatenation and replication

                  If x is a bitstring and n is an integer with n >= 0:
                  •       Replicate(x, n) is the bitstring of length n*Len(x) consisting of n copies of x concatenated together.
                  •       Zeros(n) = Replicate('0', n).
                  •       Ones(n) = Replicate('1', n).

                  Bitstring count
                  If x is a bitstring, BitCount(x) is an integer result equal to the number of bits of x that are ones.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        K12-6583
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.6 Built-in functions

                    Testing a bitstring for being all zero or all ones
                    If x is a bitstring:
                    •       IsZero(x) produces TRUE if all of the bits of x are zeros and FALSE if any of them are ones
                    •       IsZeroBit(x) produces '1' if all of the bits of x are zeros and '0' if any of them are ones.

                    IsOnes(x) and IsOnesBit(x) work in the corresponding ways. This means:

                    IsZero(x)    = (BitCount(x) == 0)
                    IsOnes(x)    = (BitCount(x) == Len(x))
                    IsZeroBit(x) = if IsZero(x) then '1' else '0'
                    IsOnesBit(x) = if IsOnes(x) then '1' else '0'

                    Lowest and highest set bits of a bitstring
                    If x is a bitstring, and N = Len(x):

                    •      LowestSetBit(x) is the minimum bit number of any of the bits of x that are ones. If all of its bits are zeros,
                           LowestSetBit(x) = N.

                    •      HighestSetBit(x) is the maximum bit number of any of the bits of x that are ones. If all of its bits are zeros,
                           HighestSetBit(x) = -1.

                    •      CountLeadingZeroBits(x) is the number of zero bits at the left end of x, in the range 0 to N. This means:
                           CountLeadingZeroBits(x) = N - 1 - HighestSetBit(x).

                    •      CountLeadingSignBits(x) is the number of copies of the sign bit of x at the left end of x, excluding the sign
                           bit itself, and is in the range 0 to N-1. This means:
                           CountLeadingSignBits(x) = CountLeadingZeroBits(x<N-1:1> EOR x<N-2:0>).

                    Zero-extension and sign-extension of bitstrings
                    If x is a bitstring and i is an integer, then ZeroExtend(x, i) is x extended to a length of i bits, by adding sufficient
                    zero bits to its left. That is, if i == Len(x), then ZeroExtend(x, i) = x, and if i > Len(x), then:

                    ZeroExtend(x, i) = Replicate('0', i-Len(x)) : x

                    If x is a bitstring and i is an integer, then SignExtend(x, i) is x extended to a length of i bits, by adding sufficient
                    copies of its leftmost bit to its left. That is, if i == Len(x), then SignExtend(x, i) = x, and if i > Len(x), then:

                    SignExtend(x, i) = Replicate(TopBit(x), i-Len(x)) : x

                    It is a pseudocode error to use either ZeroExtend(x, i) or SignExtend(x, i) in a context where it is possible that
                    i < Len(x).

                    Converting bitstrings to integers
                    If x is a bitstring, SInt() is the integer whose two’s complement representation is x.

                    UInt() is the integer whose unsigned representation is x.

                    Int(x, unsigned) returns either SInt(x) or UInt(x) depending on the value of its second argument.

K12.6.2       Arithmetic functions
                    This section defines built-in arithmetic functions.

                    Absolute value
                    If x is either of type real or integer, Abs(x) returns the absolute value of x. The result is the same type as x.

K12-6584                       Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                       Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                            Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                                             K12.6 Built-in functions

                  Rounding and aligning
                  If x is a real:
                  •       RoundDown(x) produces the largest integer n such that n <= x.
                  •       RoundUp(x) produces the smallest integer n such that n >= x.
                  •       RoundTowardsZero(x) produces:
                          —       RoundDown(x) if x > 0.0.
                          —       0 if x == 0.0.
                          —       RoundUp(x) if x < 0.0.

                  If x and y are both of type integer, Align(x, y) = y * (x DIV y), and is of type integer.

                  If x is of type bitstring and y is of type integer, Align(x, y) = (Align(UInt(x), y))<Len(x)-1:0>, and is a bitstring
                  of the same length as x.
                  It is a pseudocode error to use either form of Align(x, y) in any context where y can be 0. In practice, Align(x, y)
                  is only used with y a constant power of two, and the bitstring form used with y = 2^n has the effect of producing its
                  argument with its n low-order bits forced to zero.

                  Maximum and minimum
                  If x and y are integers or reals, then Max(x, y) and Min(x, y) are their maximum and minimum respectively. x and
                  y must both be of type integer or of type real. The function returns a value of the same type as its operands.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       K12-6585
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.7 Miscellaneous helper procedures and functions

K12.7        Miscellaneous helper procedures and functions
                     This section lists the prototypes of miscellaneous helper procedures and functions used by the pseudocode, together
                     with a brief description of the effect of the procedure or function. The pseudocode does not define the operation of
                     these helper procedures and functions.

                              Note
                     Chapter J1 ARMv8 Pseudocode also has an entry for each of these functions, but currently these entries do not say
                     anything about the effect of the function. When this information is added in Chapter J1 this section will be removed
                     from the manual.

K12.7.1        EndOfInstruction()
                     This procedure terminates processing of the current instruction.

                     EndOfInstruction();

K12.7.2        Hint_Debug()
                     This procedure supplies a hint to the debug system.

                     Hint_Debug(bits(4) option);

K12.7.3        Hint_PreloadData()
                     This procedure performs a preload data hint.

                     Hint_PreloadData(bits(32) address);

K12.7.4        Hint_PreloadDataForWrite()
                     This procedure performs a preload data hint with a probability that the use will be for a write.

                     Hint_PreloadDataForWrite(bits(32) address);

K12.7.5        Hint_PreloadInstr()
                     This procedure performs a preload instructions hint.

                     Hint_PreloadInstr(bits(32) address);

K12.7.6        Hint_Yield()
                     This procedure performs a Yield hint.

                     Hint_Yield();

K12.7.7        IsExternalAbort()
                     This function returns TRUE if the abort currently being processed is an External abort and FALSE otherwise. It is used
                     only in exception entry pseudocode.

                     boolean IsExternalAbort(Fault type)
                         assert type != Fault_None;

                     boolean IsExternalAbort(FaultRecord fault);

K12-6586                        Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                            Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                  K12.7 Miscellaneous helper procedures and functions

K12.7.8     IsAsyncAbort()
                  This function returns TRUE if the abort currently being processed is an asynchronous abort, and FALSE otherwise. It
                  is used only in exception entry pseudocode.

                  boolean IsAsyncAbort(Fault type)
                      assert type != Fault_None;

                  boolean IsAsyncAbort(FaultRecord fault);

K12.7.9     LSInstructionSyndrome()
                  This function returns the extended syndrome information for a fault reported in the HSR.

                  bits(11) LSInstructionSyndrome();

K12.7.10    ProcessorID()
                  This function returns an integer that uniquely identifies the executing PE in the system.

                  integer ProcessorID();

K12.7.11    RemapRegsHaveResetValues()
                  This function returns TRUE if the remap registers PRRR and NMRR have their IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED reset
                  values, and FALSE otherwise.

                  boolean RemapRegsHaveResetValues();

K12.7.12    ResetControlRegisters()
                  This function resets the System registers and memory-mapped control registers that have architecturally-defined
                  reset values to those values. For more information about the affected registers see:
                  •      PE state on reset to AArch64 state on page D1-1871.
                  •      PE state on reset into AArch32 state on page G1-4685.

                  AArch64.ResetControlRegisters(boolean ResetIsCold)
                  AArch32.ResetControlRegisters(boolean ResetIsCold)

K12.7.13    ThisInstr()
                  This function returns the bitstring encoding of the currently-executing instruction.

                  bits(32) ThisInstr();

                           Note
                  Currently, this function is used only on 32-bit instruction encodings.

K12.7.14    ThisInstrLength()
                  This function returns the length, in bits, of the current instruction. This means it returns 32 or 16:

                  integer ThisInstrLength();

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      K12-6587
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.8 ARM pseudocode definition index

K12.8       ARM pseudocode definition index
                    This section contains the following tables:
                    •      Table K12-3 which contains the pseudocode data types.
                    •      Table K12-4 which contains the pseudocode operators.
                    •      Table K12-5 on page K12-6589 which contains the pseudocode keywords and control structures.
                    •      Table K12-6 on page K12-6590 which contains the statements with special behaviors.

                                                                                   Table K12-3 Index of pseudocode data types

                                         Keyword                     Meaning

                                         array                       Type name for the array type

                                         bit                         Keyword equivalent to bits(1)

                                         bits(N)                     Type name for the bitstring of length N data type

                                         boolean                     Type name for the Boolean data type

                                         enumeration                 Keyword to define a new enumeration type

                                         integer                     Type name for the integer data type

                                         real                        Type name for the real data type

                                         type                        Keyword to define a new structure

                                                                                   Table K12-4 Index of pseudocode operators

                                         Operator                    Meaning

                                         -                           Unary minus on integers or reals

                                                                     Subtraction of integers, reals and bitstrings

                                                                     Used in the left-hand side of an assignment or a tuple to discard
                                                                     the result

                                         +                           Unary plus on integers or reals

                                                                     Addition of integers, reals and bitstrings

                                         .                           Extract named member from a list

                                                                     Extract named bit or field from a register

                                         :                           Bitstring concatenation

                                                                     Integer range in bitstring extraction operator

                                         !                           Boolean NOT

                                         !=                          Comparison for inequality

                                         (…)                         Around arguments of procedure or function

                                         […]                         Around array index

                                                                     Around arguments of array-like function

                                         *                           Multiplication of integers, reals, and bitstrings

                                         /                           Division of reals

K12-6588                      Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                      Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                 Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
                                                                                   K12.8 ARM pseudocode definition index

                                                        Table K12-4 Index of pseudocode operators (continued)

                            Operator                     Meaning

                            &&                           Boolean AND

                            <                            Less than comparison of integers and reals

                            <…>                          Slicing of specified bits of bitstring or integer

                            <<                           Multiply integer by power of 2

                            <=                           Less than or equal comparison of integers and reals

                            =                            Assignment operator

                            ==                           Comparison for equality

                            >                            Greater than comparison of integers and reals

                            >=                           Greater than or equal comparison of integers and reals

                            >>                           Divide integer by power of 2

                            ||                           Boolean OR

                            ^                            Exponential operator

                            AND                          Bitwise AND of bitstrings

                            DIV                          Quotient from integer division

                            EOR                          Bitwise EOR of bitstrings

                            IN                           Tests membership of a certain expression in a set of values

                            MOD                          Remainder from integer division

                            NOT                          Bitwise inversion of bitstrings

                            OR                           Bitwise OR of bitstrings

                                           Table K12-5 Index of pseudocode keywords and control structures

                            Operator                     Meaning

                            /*…*/                        Comment delimiters

                            //                           Introduces comment terminated by end of line

                            case … of …                  Control structure for the

                            FALSE                        One of two values a Boolean can take (other than TRUE)

                            for … = …to …                Loop control structure, counting up from the initial value to the
                                                         upper limit

                            for … = … downto …           Loop control structure, counting down from the initial value to
                                                         the lower limit

                            if … then … else …           Condition expression selecting between two values

                            if … then … else …           Conditional control structure

                            otherwise                    Introduces default case in case … of … control structure

ARM DDI 0487C.a   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         K12-6589
ID121917                                  Non-Confidential
Appendix K12 ARM Pseudocode Definition
K12.8 ARM pseudocode definition index

                                         Table K12-5 Index of pseudocode keywords and control structures (continued)

                                         Operator                   Meaning

                                         repeat … until …           Loop control structure that runs at least once until the
                                                                    termination condition is satisfied

                                         return                     Procedure or function return

                                         TRUE                       One of two values a Boolean can take (other than FALSE)

                                         when                       Introduces specific case in case … of … control structure

                                         while … do …               Loop control structure that runs until the termination condition
                                                                    is satisfied

                                                                                        Table K12-6 Index of special statements

                                         Keyword                    Meaning

                                         IMPLEMENTATION_DEFINED     Describes IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED behavior

                                         SEE                        Points to other pseudocode to use instead

                                         UNDEFINED                  Cause Undefined Instruction exception

                                         UNKNOWN                    Unspecified value

                                         UNPREDICTABLE              Unspecified behavior

K12-6590                     Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                     Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
