Glossary

A32 instruction   A word that specifies an operation to be performed by a PE that is executing in an Exception level that is using
                  AArch32 and is in A32 state. A32 instructions must be word-aligned.

                  A32 instructions were previously called ARM instructions.

                  See also A32 state, A64 instruction, T32 instruction.

A32 state         The AArch32 Instruction set state in which the PE executes A32 instructions.

                  A32 state was previously called ARM state.

                  See also T32 instruction, T32 state.

A64 instruction   A word that specifies an operation to be performed by a PE that is executing in an Exception level that is using
                  AArch64. A64 instructions must be word-aligned.

                  See also A32 instruction, T32 instruction.

AArch32           The 32-bit Execution state. In AArch32 state, addresses are held in 32-bit registers, and instructions in the base
                  instruction sets use 32-bit registers for their processing. AArch32 state supports the T32 and A32 instruction sets

                  See also AArch64, A32 instruction, T32 instruction.

AArch64           The 64-bit Execution state. In AArch64 state, addresses are held in 64-bit registers, and instructions in the base
                  instruction set can use 64-bit registers for their processing. AArch64 state supports the A64 instruction set.

                  See also AArch32, A64 instruction.

Abort             An exception caused by an illegal memory access. Aborts can be caused by the external memory system or the
                  MMU.

Addressing mode
                  Means a method for generating the memory address used by a load/store instruction.

Advanced SIMD     A feature of the ARM architecture that provides SIMD operations on a register file of SIMD and floating-point
                  registers. Where an implementation supports both Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions, these
                  instructions operate on the same register file.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  Glossary-6647
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Glossary

Aligned               A data item stored at an address that is exactly divisible by the highest power of 2 that divides exactly into its size
                      in bytes. Aligned halfwords, words and doublewords therefore have addresses that are divisible by 2, 4 and 8
                      respectively.

                      An aligned access is one where the address of the access is aligned to the size of each element of the access.

Architecturally executed
                   An instruction is architecturally executed only if it would be executed in a simple sequential execution of the
                   program. When such an instruction has been executed and retired it has been architecturally executed. Any
                   instruction that, in a simple sequential execution of a program, is treated as a NOP because it fails its condition code
                   check, is an architecturally executed instruction.

                      In a PE that performs speculative execution, an instruction is not architecturally executed if the PE discards the
                      results of a speculative execution.

                      See also Condition code check, Simple sequential execution.

Architecturally mapped
                  Where this manual describes a register as being architecturally mapped to another register, this indicates that, in an
                  implementation that supports both of the registers, the two registers access the same state.
Architecturally UNKNOWN
                  An architecturally UNKNOWN value is a value that is not defined by the architecture but must meet the requirements
                  of the definition of UNKNOWN. Implementations can define the value of the field, but are not required to do so.

                      See also IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.

ARM core registers
                  Some older documentation uses ARM core registers to refer to the following set of registers for execution in
                  AArch32 state:
                  •    The 13 general-purpose registers, R0-R12, that software can use for processing.
                  •    SP, the stack pointer, that can also be referred to as R13.
                  •    LR, the link register, that can also be referred to as R14.
                  •    PC, the program counter, that can also be referred to as R15.

                      See also General-purpose registers.

ARM instruction
                      See A32 instruction.

Associativity         See Cache associativity.

Atomicity             Describes either single-copy atomicity or multi-copy atomicity. Atomicity in the ARM architecture on page B2-88
                      defines these forms of atomicity for the ARM architecture.
                      See also Multi-copy atomicity, Single-copy atomicity.

Banked register       A register that has multiple instances, with the instance that is in use depending on the PE mode, Security state, or
                      other PE state.

Base register         A register specified by a load/store instruction that is used as the base value for the address calculation for the
                      instruction. Depending on the instruction and its addressing mode, an offset can be added to or subtracted from the
                      base register value to form the virtual address that is sent to memory.

Base register writeback
                   Describes writing back a modified value to the base register used in an address calculation.

Behaves as if         Where this manual indicates that a PE behaves as if a certain condition applies, all descriptions of the operation of
                      the PE must be re-evaluated taking account of that condition, together with any other conditions that affect
                      operation.

Glossary-6648                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                                                   Glossary

Big-endian memory
                Means that, for example:

                      •     A byte or halfword at a word-aligned address is the most significant byte or halfword in the word at that
                            address.

                      •     A byte at a halfword-aligned address is the most significant byte in the halfword at that address.

                      See also Endianness, Little-endian memory.

Blocking              Describes an operation that does not permit following instructions to be executed before the operation completes.

                      A non-blocking operation can permit following instructions to be executed before the operation completes, and in
                      the event of encountering an exception does not signal an exception to the PE. This enables implementations to retire
                      following instructions while the non-blocking operation is executing, without the need to retain precise PE state.

Branch prediction
                      Is where a PE selects a future execution path to fetch along. For example, after a branch instruction, the PE can
                      choose to speculatively fetch either the instruction following the branch or the instruction at the branch target.

                      See also Prefetching.

Breakpoint            A debug event triggered by the execution of a particular instruction, specified by one or both of the address of the
                      instruction and the state of the PE when the instruction is executed.

Byte                  An 8-bit data item.

Cache associativity
                  The number of locations in a cache set to which an address can be assigned. Each location is identified by its way
                  value.

Cache level           The position of a cache in the cache hierarchy. In the ARM architecture, the lower numbered levels are those closest
                      to the PE. For more information, see Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2058.

Cache line            The basic unit of storage in a cache. Its size in words is always a power of two, usually 4 or 8 words. A cache line
                      must be aligned to a suitable memory boundary. A memory cache line is a block of memory locations with the same
                      size and alignment as a cache line. Memory cache lines are sometimes loosely called cache lines.

Cache lockdown
                      Enables critical software and data to be loaded into the cache so that the cache lines containing them are not
                      subsequently reallocated. It alleviates the delays caused by accessing a cache in a worst-case situation. This ensures
                      that all subsequent accesses to the software and data concerned are cache hits and so complete quickly.

Cache miss            A memory access that cannot be processed at high speed because the data it addresses is not in the cache.

Cache sets            Areas of a cache, divided up to simplify and speed up the process of determining whether a cache hit occurs. The
                      number of cache sets is always a power of two.

Cache way             A cache way consists of one cache line from each cache set. The cache ways are indexed from 0 to (Associativity-1).
                      Each cache line in a cache way is chosen to have the same index as the cache way. For example, cache way n consists
                      of the cache line with index n from each cache set.

Coherence order
                      See Coherent.

Coherent              Data accesses from a set of observers to a byte in memory are coherent if accesses to that byte in memory by the
                      members of that set of observers are consistent with there being a single total order of all writes to that byte in
                      memory by all members of the set of observers. This single total order of all to writes to that memory location is the
                      coherence order for that byte in memory.

Condition code check
                 The process of determining whether a conditional instruction executes normally or is treated as a NOP. For an
                 instruction that includes a condition code field, that field is compared with the condition flags to determine whether
                 the instruction is executed normally. For a T32 instruction in an IT block, the value of PSTATE.IT determines
                 whether the instruction is executed normally.

                      See also Condition code field, Condition flags, Conditional execution.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   Glossary-6649
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
Glossary

Condition code field
                   A 4-bit field in an instruction that specifies the condition under which the instruction executes.

                      See also Condition code check.

Condition flags       The N, Z, C, and V bits of PSTATE, an SPSR, or FPSCR. See the register descriptions for more information.

                      See also Condition code check, PSTATE.

Conditional execution
                  When a conditional instruction starts executing, if the condition code check returns TRUE, the instruction executes
                  normally. Otherwise, it is treated as a NOP.
                      See also Condition code check.

CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE
              Where an instruction can result in UNPREDICTABLE behavior, the ARMv8 architecture specifies a narrow range of
              permitted behaviors. This range is the range of CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior. All implementations that
              are compliant with the architecture must follow the CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior.
                      Execution at Non-secure EL1 or EL0 of an instruction that is CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE can be implemented
                      as generating a trap exception that is taken to EL2, provided that at least one instruction that is not UNPREDICTABLE
                      and is not CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE causes a trap exception that is taken to EL2.
                      In body text, the term CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.

                      See also UNPREDICTABLE.

Context switch        The saving and restoring of computational state when switching between different threads or processes. In this
                      manual, the term context switch describes any situation where the context is switched by an operating system and
                      might or might not include changes to the address space.

Context synchronization event
                 One of:
                 •     Performing an ISB operation. An ISB operation is performed when an ISB instruction is executed and does
                       not fail its condition code check.
                 •     Taking an exception.
                 •     Returning from an exception.
                 •     Exit from Debug state.
                 •     Executing a DCPS instruction.
                 •     Executing a DRPS instruction.
                      The effects of a Context synchronization event are:

                      •      All unmasked interrupts that are pending at the time of the Context synchronization event are taken before
                             the first instruction after the Context synchronization event.

                      •      If halting is allowed, all Halting debug events that are pending at the time of the Context synchronization
                             event are taken before the first instruction after the Context synchronization event.

                      •      No instructions appearing in program order after an instruction that causes a Context synchronization event
                             will have performed any part of their functionality until the Context synchronization event has occurred.

                      •      All direct and indirect writes to System registers that are made before the Context synchronization event
                             affect any instruction, including a direct read, that appears in program order after the instruction causing the
                             Context synchronization event.

                      •      All completed changes to the translation tables for entries that, before the change, were not permitted to be
                             cached in a TLB, affect all instruction fetches that appear in program order after the instruction causing the
                             Context synchronization event.

                      •      All invalidations of TLBs, instruction caches, and, in AArch32 state, branch predictors, that are completed
                             before the Context synchronization event affect all instructions that appear in program order after an
                             instruction causing a Context synchronization event.

Glossary-6650                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                                                Glossary

                     •      In AArch32 state, all Non-cacheable writes that are completed before the Context synchronization event
                            affect all instructions that appear in program order after an instruction causing a Context synchronization
                            event.

                     •      Changes to the Debug external authentication interfaces that are made before the Context synchronization
                            event affect any instruction that appears in program order after the instruction causing the Context
                            synchronization event.

                              Note
                     •      The architecture requires that instructions that generate Context synchronization events do not appear to be
                            executed speculatively, except that the performance monitor counters are permitted to reveal such
                            speculation.

                     •      Context synchronization events were previously described as context synchronization operations.

Debugger             In most of this manual, debugger refers to any agent that is performing debug. However, some chapters or parts of
                     this manual require a more rigorous definition, and define debugger locally. See:
                     •     Definition of a debugger in the context of self-hosted debug on page D2-1980.
                     •     Definition of a debugger in the context of self-hosted debug on page G2-4738.
                     •     Definition of a debugger in the context of external debug on page H1-5692.

Deprecated           Something that is present in the ARM architecture for backwards compatibility. Whenever possible software must
                     avoid using deprecated features. Features that are deprecated but are not optional are present in current
                     implementations of the ARM architecture, but might not be present, or might be deprecated and OPTIONAL, in future
                     versions of the ARM architecture.

                     See also OPTIONAL.

Digital signal processing (DSP)
                    Algorithms for processing signals that have been sampled and converted to digital form. DSP algorithms often use
                    saturated arithmetic.

Direct Memory Access (DMA)
                 An operation that accesses main memory directly, without the PE performing any accesses to the data concerned.

Direct read          A direct read of a System register is a read performed by a System register access instruction.

                     For more information, see Direct read on page D10-2351.

                     See also Direct write, Indirect read, Indirect write.

Direct write         A direct write of a System register is a write performed by a System register access instruction.

                     For more information, see Direct write on page D10-2351.

                     See also Direct read, Indirect read, Indirect write.

DMA                  See Direct Memory Access (DMA).

DNM                  See Do-Not-Modify (DNM).

Domain               In the ARM architecture, domain is used in the following contexts.

                     Shareability domain Defines a set of observers for which the shareability attributes make the data or unified
                                         caches transparent for data accesses.

                     Power domain            Defines a block of logic with a single, common, power supply.

                     Memory regions domain
                                             When using the Short-descriptor translation table format, defines a collection of Sections,
                                             Large pages and Small pages of memory, that can have their access permissions switched
                                             rapidly by writing to the Domain Access Control Register (DACR). ARM deprecates any
                                             use of memory regions domains.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  Glossary-6651
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
Glossary

Do-Not-Modify (DNM)
                 Means the value must not be altered by software. DNM fields read as UNKNOWN values, and must only be written
                 with the value read from the same field on the same PE.

Double-precision value
                  Consists of two consecutive 32-bit words that are interpreted as a basic double-precision floating-point number
                  according to the IEEE Standard for Floating-point Arithmetic.

Doubleword            A 64-bit data item. Doublewords are normally at least word-aligned in ARM systems.
Doubleword-aligned
                 Means that the address is divisible by 8.

DSP                   See Digital signal processing (DSP).

Effective value       A register control field, meaning a field in a register that controls some aspect of the behavior, can be described as
                      having an Effective value:

                      •      In some cases, the description of a control a specifies that when control a is active it causes a register control
                             field b to be treated as having a fixed value for all purposes other than direct reads, or direct reads and direct
                             writes, of the register containing control field b. When control a is active that fixed value is described as the
                             Effective value of register control field b. For example, when the value of HCR.DC is 1, the Effective value
                             of HCR.VM is 1, regardless of its actual value.
                             In other cases, in some contexts a register control field b is not implemented or is not accessible, but behavior
                             of the PE is as if control field b was implemented and accessible, and had a particular value. In this case, that
                             value is the Effective value of register control field b.

                                      Note
                             Where a register control field is introduced in a particular version of the architecture, and is not implemented
                             in an earlier version of the architecture, typically it will have an Effective value in that earlier version of the
                             architecture.

                      •      Otherwise, the Effective value of a register control field is the value of that field.

Endianness            An aspect of the system memory mapping.

                      See also Big-endian memory and Little-endian memory.

Exception             Handles an event. For example, an exception could handle an external interrupt or an undefined instruction.

Exception vector
                      A fixed address that contains the address of the first instruction of the corresponding exception handler.

Execution stream
                      The stream of instructions that would have been executed by sequential execution of the program.

Explicit access       A read from memory, or a write to memory, generated by a load or store instruction executed by the PE. Reads and
                      writes generated by hardware translation table accesses are not explicit accesses.

External abort        An abort that is generated by the external memory system.

Fast Context Switch Extension (FCSE)
                  Modifies the behavior of an ARM memory system to enable multiple programs running on the ARM PE to use
                  identical address ranges, while ensuring that the addresses they present to the rest of the memory system differ. From
                  ARMv6, ARM deprecates any use of the FCSE. The FCSE is:
                  •      Optional in an ARMv7 implementation that does not include the Multiprocessing Extensions.
                  •      Obsolete from the introduction of the Multiprocessing Extensions.

FCSE                  See Fast Context Switch Extension (FCSE).
Flat address mapping
                  Is where the physical address for every access is equal to its virtual address.

Glossary-6652                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
                                                                                                                                    Glossary

Flush-to-zero mode
                 A processing mode that optimizes the performance of some floating-point algorithms by replacing the denormalized
                 operands and intermediate results with zeros, without significantly affecting the accuracy of their final results.

General-purpose registers
                  The registers that the base instructions use for processing:

                     •      In AArch32 state the general-purpose registers are R0-R14, that can also be described as R0-R12, SP, LR.

                                     Note
                            Older documentation defines the AArch32 general-purpose registers as R0-R12, and the ARM core registers
                            as R0-R12, SP, LR, and PC.

                     •      In AArch64 state the general-purpose registers are:
                            —    W0-W30 when accessed as 32-bit registers.
                            —    X0-X30 when accessed as 64-bit registers.
                     See also High registers, Low registers.

Halfword             A 16-bit data item. Halfwords are normally halfword-aligned in ARM systems.

Halfword-aligned
                     Means that the address is divisible by 2.

High registers       In AArch32 state, the general-purpose registers R8-R14. Most 16-bit T32 instructions cannot access the high
                     registers.

                              Note
                     In some contexts, high registers refers to R8-R15, meaning R8-R14 and the PC.

                     See also General-purpose registers, Low registers.

High vectors         An alternative location for the exception vectors. The high vector address range is near the top of the address space,
                     rather than at the bottom.

IGNORED              Indicates that the architecture guarantees that the bit or field is not interpreted or modified by hardware.

                     In body text, the term IGNORED is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.
Immediate and offset fields
                  Are unsigned unless otherwise stated.
Immediate value
                     A value that is encoded directly in the instruction and used as numeric data when the instruction is executed. Many
                     A64, A32, and T32 instructions can be used with an immediate argument.

IMP                  An abbreviation used in diagrams to indicate that one or more bits have IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED behavior.
IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
               Means that the behavior is not architecturally defined, but must be defined and documented by individual
               implementations.

                     In body text, the term IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.
Index register       A register specified in some load and store instructions. The value of this register is used as an offset to be added to
                     or subtracted from the base register value to form the virtual address that is sent to memory. Some instruction forms
                     permit the index register value to be shifted before the addition or subtraction.

Indirect read        When an instruction uses a System register value to establish operating conditions, that use of the System register
                     is an indirect read of the System register.

                     For more information, including additional examples of indirect reads, see Indirect read on page D10-2352.

                     See also Direct read, Direct write, Indirect write.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     Glossary-6653
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
Glossary

Indirect write        An indirect write of a System register occurs when the contents of a register are updated by some mechanism other
                      than a Direct write to that register. For example, an indirect write to a register might occur as a side-effect of
                      executing an instruction that does not perform a direct write to the register, or because of some operation performed
                      by an external agent.

                      For more information, see Indirect write on page D10-2352.

                      See also Direct read, Direct write, Indirect read.
Inline literals       These are constant addresses and other data items held in the same area as the software itself. They are automatically
                      generated by compilers, and can also appear in assembler code.

Intermediate physical address (IPA)
                  An implementation of virtualization, the address to which a Guest OS maps a VA. A hypervisor might then map the
                  IPA to a PA. Typically, the Guest OS is unaware of the translation from IPA to PA.

                      See also Physical address (PA), Virtual address (VA).

Interworking          A method of working that permits branches between software using the A32 and T32 instruction sets.

IPA                   See Intermediate physical address (IPA).

Level                 See Cache level.

Level of Coherence (LoC)
                  The last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the point of coherency.
                  For more information, see Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2058.

                      See also Cache level, Point of coherency (PoC).

Level of Unification, Inner Shareable (LoUIS)
                    The last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the point of unification
                    for the Inner Shareable shareability domain. For more information, see Terms used in describing the cache
                    maintenance instructions on page D3-2058.

                      See also Cache level, Point of unification (PoU).

Level of Unification, uniprocessor (LoUU)
                    For a PE, the last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the point of
                    unification for that PE. For more information, see Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on
                    page D3-2058.

                      See also Cache level, Point of unification (PoU).

Line                  See Cache line.
Little-endian memory
                  Means that, for example:

                      •      A byte or halfword at a word-aligned address is the least significant byte or halfword in the word at that
                             address.

                      •      A byte at a halfword-aligned address is the least significant byte in the halfword at that address.

                      See also Big-endian memory, Endianness.

Load/Store architecture
                  An architecture where data-processing operations only operate on register contents, not directly on memory
                  contents.

LoC                   See Level of Coherence (LoC).

LoUIS                 See Level of Unification, Inner Shareable (LoUIS).

LoUU                  See Level of Unification, uniprocessor (LoUU).

Lockdown              See Cache lockdown.

Glossary-6654                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                                                   Glossary

Low registers         In AArch32 state, general-purpose registers R0-R7. Unlike the high registers, all T32 instructions can access the
                      Low registers.

                      See also General-purpose registers, High registers.

Memory barrier        See Memory barriers on page B2-98.

Memory coherency
                The problem of ensuring that when a memory location is read, either by a data read or an instruction fetch, the value
                actually obtained is always the value that was most recently written to the location. This can be difficult when there
                are multiple possible physical locations, such as main memory and at least one of a write buffer and one or more
                levels of cache.

Memory Management Unit (MMU)
              Provides detailed control of the part of a memory system that provides a single stage of address translation. Most of
              the control is provided using translation tables that are held in memory, and define the attributes of different regions
              of the physical memory map.

Memory Protection Unit (MPU)
                 A hardware unit whose registers provide simple control of a limited number of protection regions in memory.

Miss                  See Cache miss.

MMU                   See Memory Management Unit (MMU).

MPU                   See Memory Protection Unit (MPU).

Multi-copy atomicity
                   The form of atomicity described in Requirements for multi-copy atomicity on page B2-90.

                      See also Atomicity, Single-copy atomicity.

NaN                   Not a Number. A floating-point value that can be used when neither a numeric value nor an infinity is appropriate.
                      A NaN can be a quiet NaN, that propagate through most floating-point operations, or a signaling NaN, that causes
                      an Invalid Operation floating-point exception when used. For more information, see the IEEE Standard for
                      Floating-point Arithmetic.

                      See also Quiet NaN, Signaling NaN.

Natural eviction      A natural eviction is an eviction that occurs in the course of the normal operation of the memory system, rather than
                      because of an operation that explicitly causes an eviction from the cache, such as the execution of a cache
                      maintenance instruction. Typically, a natural eviction occurs when the caching algorithm requires data to be cached
                      but the cache does not have room for that data.

Observer              A PE or mechanism in the system, such as a peripheral device, that can generate reads from or writes to memory.

Obsolete              Obsolete indicates something that is no longer supported by ARM. When an architectural feature is described as
                      obsolete, this indicates that the architecture has no support for that feature, although an earlier version of the
                      architecture did support it.

Offset addressing
                      Means that the memory address is formed by adding or subtracting an offset to or from the base register value.

OPTIONAL              When applied to a feature of the architecture, OPTIONAL indicates a feature that is not required in an implementation
                      of the ARM architecture:

                      •     If a feature is OPTIONAL and deprecated, this indicates that the feature is being phased out of the architecture.
                            ARM expects such a features to be included in a new implementation only if there is a known
                            backwards-compatibility reason for the inclusion of the feature.
                            A feature that is OPTIONAL and deprecated might not be present in future versions of the architecture.

                      •     A feature that is OPTIONAL but not deprecated is, typically, a feature added to a version of the ARM
                            architecture after the initial release of that version of the architecture. ARM recommends that such features
                            are included in all new implementations of the architecture.

                      In body text, these meanings of the term OPTIONAL are shown in SMALL CAPITALS.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    Glossary-6655
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
Glossary

                               Note
                      Do not confuse these ARM-specific uses of OPTIONAL with other uses of optional, where it has its usual meaning.
                      These include:

                      •      Optional arguments in the syntax of many instructions.

                      •      Behavior determined by an implementation choice, for example the optional byte order reversal in an
                             ARMv7-R implementation, where the SCTLR.IE bit indicates the implemented option.

                      See also Deprecated.

PA                    See Physical address (PA).

PE                    See Processing element (PE).

Physical address (PA)
                  An address that identifies a location in the physical memory map.

                      See also Intermediate physical address (IPA), Virtual address (VA).

PoC                   See Point of coherency (PoC).

PoU                   See Point of unification (PoU).

Point of coherency (PoC)
                  For a particular VA, the point at which all agents that can access memory are guaranteed to see the same copy of a
                  memory location. For more information, see Terms used in describing the cache maintenance instructions on
                  page D3-2058.

Point of unification (PoU)
                    For a particular PE, the point by which the instruction and data caches and the translation table walks of that PE are
                    guaranteed to see the same copy of a memory location. For more information, see Terms used in describing the
                    cache maintenance instructions on page D3-2058.

Post-indexed addressing
                 Means that the memory address is the base register value, but an offset is added to or subtracted from the base
                 register value and the result is written back to the base register.

Prefetching           Prefetching refers to speculatively fetching instructions or data from the memory system. In particular, instruction
                      prefetching is the process of fetching instructions from memory before the instructions that precede them, in simple
                      sequential execution of the program, have finished executing. Prefetching an instruction does not mean that the
                      instruction has to be executed.

                      In this manual, references to instruction or data fetching apply also to prefetching, unless the context explicitly
                      indicates otherwise.

                               Note
                      The Prefetch Abort exception can be generated on any instruction fetch, and is not limited to speculative instruction
                      fetches.

                      See also Simple sequential execution.

Pre-indexed addressing
                 Means that the memory address is formed in the same way as for offset addressing, but the memory address is also
                 written back to the base register.

Processing element (PE)
                 The abstract machine defined in the ARM architecture, as documented in an ARM Architecture Reference Manual.
                 A PE implementation compliant with the ARM architecture must conform with the behaviors described in the
                 corresponding ARM Architecture Reference Manual.

Protection region
                      A memory region whose position, size, and other properties are defined by Memory Protection Unit registers.

Glossary-6656                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                      ID121917
                                                                                                                                  Glossary

Protection Unit      See Memory Protection Unit (MPU).

Pseudo-instruction
                  UAL assembler syntax that assembles to an instruction encoding that is expected to disassemble to a different
                  assembler syntax, and is described in this manual under that other syntax. For example, MOV <Rd>, <Rm>, LSL #<n>
                  is a pseudo-instruction that is expected to disassemble as LSL <Rd>, <Rm>, #<n>.
PSTATE               An abstraction of process state information. All of the instruction sets provide instructions that operate on elements
                     of PSTATE.

                     See also Condition flags.

Quadword             A 128-bit data item. Quadwords are normally at least word-aligned in ARM systems.

Quadword-aligned
                     Means that the address is divisible by 16.

Quiet NaN            A NaN that propagates unchanged through most floating-point operations.

                     See also NaN, Signaling NaN.

RAO                  See Read-As-One (RAO).
RAZ                  See Read-As-Zero (RAZ).

RAO/SBOP             In versions of the ARM architecture before ARMv8, Read-As-One, Should-Be-One-or-Preserved on writes.

                     In ARMv8, RES1 replaces this description.

                     See also UNK/SBOP, Read-As-One (RAO), RES1, Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP).

RAO/WI               Read-As-One, Writes Ignored.

                     Hardware must implement the field as Read-as-One, and must ignore writes to the field.

                     Software can rely on the field reading as all 1s, and on writes being ignored.

                     This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 1, or to a field that reads as all 1s.

                     See also Read-As-One (RAO).

RAZ/SBZP             In versions of the ARM architecture before ARMv8, Read-As-Zero, Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved on writes.

                     In ARMv8, RES0 replaces this description.

                     See also UNK/SBZP, Read-As-Zero (RAZ), RES0, Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP).

RAZ/WI               Read-As-Zero, Writes Ignored.

                     Hardware must implement the field as Read-as-Zero, and must ignore writes to the field.

                     Software can rely on the field reading as all 0s, and on writes being ignored.

                     This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 0, or to a field that reads as all 0s.

                     See also Read-As-Zero (RAZ).

Read-allocate cache
                  A cache in which a cache miss on reading data causes a cache line to be allocated into the cache.

Read-As-One (RAO)
                Hardware must implement the field as reading as all 1s.

                     Software:
                     •     Can rely on the field reading as all 1s.
                     •     Must use a SBOP policy to write to the field.

                     This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 1, or to a field that reads as all 1s.

                     See also RAO/SBOP, RAO/WI, RES1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   Glossary-6657
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
Glossary

Read-As-Zero (RAZ)
                 Hardware must implement the field as reading as all 0s.

                       Software:
                       •     Can rely on the field reading as all 0s
                       •     Must use a SBZP policy to write to the field.

                       This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 0, or to a field that reads as all 0s.

                       See also RAZ/SBZP, RAZ/WI, RES0.

Read, modify, write
                   In a read, modify, write instruction sequence, a value is read to a general-purpose register, the relevant fields updated
                   in that register, and the new value written back.

RES0                   A reserved bit. Used for fields in register descriptions, and for fields in architecturally-defined data structures that
                       are held in memory, for example in translation table descriptors.

                       Within the architecture, there are some cases where a register bit or field:
                       •     Is RES0 in some defined architectural context.
                       •     Has different defined behavior in a different architectural context.

                                Note
                       •      RES0 is not used in descriptions of instruction encodings.

                       •      Where an AArch32 System register is Architecturally mapped to an AArch64 System register, and a bit or
                              field in that register is RES0 in one Execution state and has defined behavior in the other Execution state, this
                              is an example of a bit or field with behavior that depends on the architectural context.

                       This means the definition of RES0 for fields in read/write registers is:

                       If a bit is RES0 in all contexts
                                        For a bit in a read/write register, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                        1.     The bit is hardwired to 0. In this case:
                                               •     Reads of the bit always return 0.
                                               •     Writes to the bit are ignored.
                                        2.     The bit can be written. In this case:
                                               •      An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 0.
                                               •      A read of the bit returns the last value successfully written, by either a direct or an
                                                      indirect write, to the bit.
                                                      If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns
                                                      the reset value if there is one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.
                                               •      A direct write to the bit must update a storage location associated with the bit.
                                               •      The value of the bit must have no effect on the operation of the PE, other than
                                                      determining the value read back from the bit, unless this Manual explicitly defines
                                                      additional properties for the bit.
                                        Whether RES0 bits or fields follow behavior 1 or behavior 2 is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED on a
                                        field-by-field basis.

                       If a bit is RES0 only in some contexts
                                        For a bit in a read/write register, when the bit is described as RES0:
                                        •      An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 0.
                                        •      A read of the bit must return the value last successfully written to the bit, by either a direct or
                                               an indirect write, regardless of the use of the register when the bit was written.
                                               If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns the reset
                                               value if there is one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.

Glossary-6658                     Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                          Non-Confidential                                                           ID121917
                                                                                                                                 Glossary

                                  •      A direct write to the bit must update a storage location associated with the bit.
                                  •      While the use of the register is such that the bit is described as RES0, the value of the bit must
                                         have no effect on the operation of the PE, other than determining the value read back from
                                         that bit, unless this Manual explicitly defines additional properties for the bit.
                                  Considering only contexts that apply to a particular implementation, if there is a context in which a
                                  bit is defined as RES0, another context in which the same bit is defined as RES1, and no context in
                                  which the bit is defined as a functional bit, then it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                  •       Writes to the bit are ignored, and reads of the bit return an UNKNOWN value.
                                  •       The value of the bit can be written, and a read returns the last value written to the bit.

                  The RES0 description can apply to bits or fields that are read-only, or are write-only:
                  •     For a read-only bit, RES0 indicates that the bit reads as 0, but software must treat the bit as UNKNOWN.
                  •     For a write-only bit, RES0 indicates that software must treat the bit as SBZ.
                  A bit that is RES0 in a context is reserved for possible future use in that context. To preserve forward compatibility,
                  software:
                  •      Must not rely on the bit reading as 0.
                  •      Must use an SBZP policy to write to the bit.

                  This RES0 description can apply to a single bit, or to a field for which each bit of the field must be treated as RES0.
                  In body text, the term RES0 is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.

                  See also Read-As-Zero (RAZ), RES1, Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP), UNKNOWN.

RES1              A reserved bit. Used for fields in register descriptions, and for fields in architecturally-defined data structures that
                  are held in memory, for example in translation table descriptors.

                  Within the architecture, there are some cases where a register bit or field:
                  •     Is RES1 in some defined architectural context.
                  •     Has different defined behavior in a different architectural context.

                           Note
                  •      RES1 is not used in descriptions of instruction encodings.

                  •      Where an AArch32 System register is Architecturally mapped to an AArch64 System register, and a bit or
                         field in that register is RES1 in one Execution state and has defined behavior in the other Execution state, this
                         is an example of a bit or field with behavior that depends on the architectural context.

                  This means the definition of RES1 for fields in read/write registers is:

                  If a bit is RES1 in all contexts
                                  For a bit in a read/write register, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                  1.     The bit is hardwired to 1. In this case:
                                         •     Reads of the bit always return 1.
                                         •     Writes to the bit are ignored.
                                  2.     The bit can be written. In this case:
                                         •      An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 1.
                                         •      A read of the bit returns the last value successfully written, by either a direct or an
                                                indirect write, to the bit.
                                                If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns
                                                the reset value if there is one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.
                                         •      A direct write to the bit must update a storage location associated with the bit.
                                         •      The value of the bit must have no effect on the operation of the PE, other than
                                                determining the value read back from the bit, unless this Manual explicitly defines
                                                additional properties for the bit.

ARM DDI 0487C.a              Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      Glossary-6659
ID121917                                             Non-Confidential
Glossary

                                 Whether RES1 bits or fields follow behavior 1 or behavior 2 is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED on a
                                 field-by-field basis.

                 If a bit is RES1 only in some contexts
                                 For a bit in a read/write register, when the bit is described as RES1:
                                 •      An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 1.
                                 •      A read of the bit must return the value last successfully written to the bit, regardless of the
                                        use of the register when the bit was written.
                                                 Note
                                        As indicated in this list, this value might be written by an indirect write to the register.

                                        If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns the reset
                                        value if there is one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.
                                 •      A direct write to the bit must update a storage location associated with the bit.
                                 •      While the use of the register is such that the bit is described as RES1, the value of the bit must
                                        have no effect on the operation of the PE, other than determining the value read back from
                                        that bit, unless this Manual explicitly defines additional properties for the bit.
                                 Considering only contexts that apply to a particular implementation, if there is a context in which a
                                 bit is defined as RES0, another context in which the same bit is defined as RES1, and no context in
                                 which the bit is defined as a functional bit, then it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
                                 •       Writes to the bit are ignored, and reads of the bit return an UNKNOWN value.
                                 •       The value of the bit can be written, and a read returns the last value written to the bit.

                 The RES1 description can apply to bits or fields that are read-only, or are write-only:
                 •     For a read-only bit, RES1 indicates that the bit reads as 1, but software must treat the bit as UNKNOWN.
                 •     For a write-only bit, RES1 indicates that software must treat the bit as SBO.
                 A bit that is RES1 in a context is reserved for possible future use in that context. To preserve forward compatibility,
                 software:
                 •      Must not rely on the bit reading as 1.
                 •      Must use an SBOP policy to write to the bit.

                 This RES1 description can apply to a single bit, or to a field for which each bit of the field must be treated as RES1.
                 In body text, the term RES1 is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.

                 See also Read-As-One (RAO), RES0, Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP), UNKNOWN.

Reserved         Unless otherwise stated:
                 •     Instructions that are reserved or that access reserved registers have UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED
                       UNPREDICTABLE behavior.
                 •     Bit positions described as reserved are:
                       —      In an RW or WO register, RES0.
                       —      In an RO register, UNK.

                 See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, RES0, RES1, UNDEFINED, UNK, UNPREDICTABLE.

RISC             Reduced Instruction Set Computer.

Rounding error   The value of the rounded result of an arithmetic operation minus the exact result of the operation.

Rounding mode    Specifies how the exact result of a floating-point operation is rounded to a value that is representable in the
                 destination format. The rounding modes are defined by the IEEE Standard for Floating-point Arithmetic, see
                 Floating-point standards, and terminology on page A1-52.

Glossary-6660               Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                    Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                                                                       Glossary

Saturated arithmetic
                   Integer arithmetic in which a result that would be greater than the largest representable number is set to the largest
                   representable number, and a result that would be less than the smallest representable number is set to the smallest
                   representable number. Signed saturated arithmetic is often used in DSP algorithms. It contrasts with the normal
                   signed integer arithmetic used in ARM processors, in which overflowing results wrap around from +231–1 to –231
                   or vice versa.

SBO                   See Should-Be-One (SBO).

SBOP                  See Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP).

SBZ                   See Should-Be-Zero (SBZ).

SBZP                  See Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP).

Security hole         A mechanism by which execution at the current level of privilege can achieve an outcome that cannot be achieved
                      at the current or a lower level of privilege using instructions that are not UNPREDICTABLE and are not CONSTRAINED
                      UNPREDICTABLE. The ARM architecture forbids security holes.

                      See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.

Self-modifying code
                  Code that writes one or more instructions to memory and then executes them. When using self-modifying code, you
                  must use cache maintenance and barrier instructions to ensure synchronization. For more information, see Caches
                  and memory hierarchy on page B2-104.

Set                   See Cache sets.

Should-Be-One (SBO)
                 Hardware must ignore writes to the field.

                      ARM strongly recommends that software writes the field as all 1s. If software writes a value that is not all 1s, it must
                      expect an UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE result.
                      This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as 1, or to a field that should be written as all 1s.

                      See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.

Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP)
                 From the introduction of the ARMv8 architecture, the description Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP) is
                 superseded by RES1.

                               Note
                      The ARMv7 Large Physical Address Extension modified the definition of SBOP for register bits that are SBOP in
                      some but not all contexts. The behavior of these bits is covered by the RES1 definition, but not by the generic
                      definition of SBOP given here.

                      Hardware must ignore writes to the field.

                      When writing this field, software must either write all 1s to this field or, if the register is being restored from a
                      previously read state, write the previously read value to this field. If this is not done, then the result is
                      UNPREDICTABLE.

                      This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 1, or to a field that should
                      be written as its preserved value or as all 1s.

                      See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       Glossary-6661
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
Glossary

Should-Be-Zero (SBZ)
                 Hardware must ignore writes to the field.

                     ARM strongly recommends that software writes the field as all 0s. If software writes a value that is not all 0s, it must
                     expect an UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE result.

                     This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as 0, or to a field that should be written as all 0s.

                     See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.

Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP)
                 From the introduction of the ARMv8 architecture, the description Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP) is
                 superseded by RES0.

                              Note
                     The ARMv7 Large Physical Address Extension modified the definition of SBZP for register bits that are SBZP in
                     some but not all contexts. The behavior of these bits is covered by the RES0 definition, but not by the generic
                     definition of SBZP given here.

                     Hardware must ignore writes to the field.

                     When writing this field, software must either write all 0s to this field or, if the register is being restored from a
                     previously read state, write the previously read value to this field. If this is not done, then the result is
                     UNPREDICTABLE.

                     This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 0, or to a field that should
                     be written as its preserved value or as all 0s.

                     See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.

Signaling NaN        An Invalid Operation floating-point exception occurs whenever any floating-point operation receives a signaling
                     NaN as an operand. Signaling NaNs can be used in debugging, to track down some uses of uninitialized variables.

                     See also NaN, Quiet NaN.

Signed immediate and offset fields
                 Are encoded in two’s complement notation unless otherwise stated.

SIMD                 Single-Instruction, Multiple-Data.

                     The SIMD instructions in AArch32 state are:

                     •      The instructions summarized in Parallel addition and subtraction instructions on page F1-3068.

                     •      The Advanced SIMD instructions summarized in Advanced SIMD and floating-point instructions on
                            page E1-2990, when operating on vectors.

                                     Note
                            In ARMv7, some VFP instructions can operate on vectors. However, ARM deprecates those instruction uses,
                            and strongly recommends that Advanced SIMD instructions are always used for vector operations.

Simple sequential execution
                  The behavior of an implementation that fetches, decodes and completely executes each instruction before
                  proceeding to the next instruction. Such an implementation performs no speculative accesses to memory, including
                  to instruction memory. The implementation does not pipeline any phase of execution. In practice, this is the
                  theoretical execution model that the architecture is based on, and ARM does not expect this model to correspond to
                  a realistic implementation of the architecture.

Single-copy atomicity
                  The form of atomicity described in Properties of single-copy atomic accesses on page B2-89.

                     See also Atomicity, Multi-copy atomicity.

Glossary-6662                   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                          ID121917
                                                                                                                                   Glossary

Single-precision value
                   A 32-bit word that is interpreted as a basic single-precision floating-point number according to the IEEE Standard
                   for Floating-point Arithmetic.

Spatial locality      The observed effect that after a program has accessed a memory location, it is likely to also access nearby memory
                      locations in the near future. Caches with multi-word cache lines exploit this effect to improve performance.

Speculative
                      Speculative operations are:

                      •      Operations that are generated by instructions that appear in the Execution stream after a branch that is not
                             architecturally resolved.

                      •      Operations that are generated by instructions that appear in the Execution stream after an instruction where
                             a synchronous exception condition has not been architecturally resolved.

                      •      Operations that are generated by conditional instructions for which the conditions for the instruction have not
                             been architecturally resolved.

                      •      Operations that are generated by instructions that appear in the Execution stream after the point at which a
                             precise asynchronous exception will be taken.

                      •      Reads or writes generated by load or store instructions for which the data being written or the address being
                             accessed comes from a register that has not been architecturally resolved.

                      •      Operations generated by the hardware that are not directly generated by any instructions appearing in the
                             Execution stream.

                      See also Execution stream.

Special-purpose register
                  One of a specified set of registers for which all direct and indirect reads and writes to the register appear to occur in
                  program order relative to other instructions, without the need for any explicit synchronization:
                  •     Special-purpose registers on page C5-339 specifies the AArch64 Special-purpose registers.
                  •     AArch32 Special-purpose registers on page G1-4610 lists the AArch32 Special-purpose registers.

T32 instruction       One or two halfwords that specify an operation to be performed by a PE that is executing in an Exception level that
                      is using AArch32 and is in T32 state. T32 instructions must be halfword-aligned.

                      T32 instructions were previously called Thumb instructions.

                      See also A32 instruction, A64 instruction, T32 state.

T32 state             The AArch32 Instruction set state in which the PE executes T32 instructions.

                      T32 state was previously called Thumb state.

                      See also A32 state, T32 instruction.

Taken locally         Taken locally is a qualifier that determines which instances of an exception are counted by particular PMU events.
                      See, in particular, ARM recommendations for IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED event numbers on page K3-6448.

                      In this context, an exception that is Taken locally means an exception that is one of:
                      •       Taken to the current Exception level.
                                      Note
                             This is not possible when the current Exception level is EL0.

                      •      Taken from EL0 to EL1.
                      •      Taken from EL0 to EL2 because the Effective value of HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is {1, 1}.
                                      Note
                             An exception taken from EL0 to EL2 because the Effective value of HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} is {0, 1} is not
                             Taken locally. This includes exceptions taken to EL2 using AArch32 when HCR.TGE is 1.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                  Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   Glossary-6663
ID121917                                                 Non-Confidential
Glossary

Temporal locality
                     The observed effect that after a program has accesses a memory location, it is likely to access the same memory
                     location again in the near future. Caches exploit this effect to improve performance.

Thumb instruction
                     See T32 instruction.

TLB                  See Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB).
TLB lockdown         A way to prevent specific translation table walk results being accessed. This ensures that accesses to the associated
                     memory areas never cause a translation table walk.

Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB)
                  A memory structure containing the results of translation table walks. They help to reduce the average cost of a
                  memory access. Usually, there is a TLB for each memory interface of the ARM implementation.

Translation table
                     A table held in memory that defines the properties of memory areas of various sizes from 1KB to 1MB.

Translation table walk
                   The process of doing a full translation table lookup. It is performed automatically by hardware.

Trap enable bits     In VFPv2, VFPv3U, and VFPv4U, determine whether trapped or untrapped exception handling is selected. If
                     trapped exception handling is selected, the way it is carried out is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
Unaligned            An unaligned access is an access where the address of the access is not aligned to the size of an element of the access.

Unaligned memory accesses
                Are memory accesses that are not, or might not be, appropriately halfword-aligned, word-aligned, or
                doubleword-aligned.

Unallocated          Except where otherwise stated in this manual, an instruction encoding is unallocated if the architecture does not
                     assign a specific function to the entire bit pattern of the instruction, but instead describes it as CONSTRAINED
                     UNPREDICTABLE, UNDEFINED, UNPREDICTABLE, or as an unallocated hint instruction.

                     A bit in a register is unallocated if the architecture does not assign a function to that bit.

                     See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNDEFINED, UNPREDICTABLE.

UNDEFINED            Indicates cases where an attempt to execute a particular encoding bit pattern generates an exception, that is taken to
                     the current Exception level, or to the default Exception level for taking exceptions if the UNDEFINED encoding was
                     executed at EL0. This applies to:

                     •      Any encoding that is not allocated to any instruction.

                     •      Any encoding that is defined as never accessible at the current Exception level.

                     •      Some cases where an enable, disable, or trap control means an encoding is not accessible at the current
                            Exception level.

                     If the generated exception is taken to an Exception level that is using AArch32 then it is taken as an Undefined
                     Instruction exception.

                              Note
                     On reset, the default Exception level for taking exceptions from EL0 is EL1. However, an implementation might
                     include controls that can change this, effectively making EL1 inactive. See the description of the Exception model
                     for more information

                     In body text, the term UNDEFINED is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.

                     See also Undefined Instruction exception on page G1-4661.

Unified cache        Is a cache used for both processing instruction fetches and processing data loads and stores.

Glossary-6664                   Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                        Non-Confidential                                                       ID121917
                                                                                                                                      Glossary

Unindexed addressing
                 Means addressing in which the base register value is used directly as the virtual address to send to memory, without
                 adding or subtracting an offset. In most types of load/store instruction, unindexed addressing is performed by using
                 offset addressing with an immediate offset of 0.

                     In ARMv7 and earlier versions of the ARM architecture, and in the M-profile, the LDC, LDC2, STC, and STC2
                     instructions have an explicit unindexed addressing mode that permits the offset field in the instruction to specify
                     additional coprocessor options.

UNK                  An abbreviation indicating that software must treat a field as containing an UNKNOWN value.

                     Hardware must implement the bit as read as 0, or all 0s for a multi-bit field. Software must not rely on the field
                     reading as zero.

                     See also UNKNOWN.

UNK/SBOP             Hardware must implement the field as Read-As-One, and must ignore writes to the field.

                     Software must not rely on the field reading as all 1s, and except for writing back to the register it must treat the value
                     as if it is UNKNOWN. Software must use an SBOP policy to write to the field.
                     This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 1, or to a field that should
                     be written as its preserved value or as all 1s.

                     See also Read-As-One (RAO), Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP), UNKNOWN.

UNK/SBZP             Hardware must implement the bit as Read-As-Zero, and must ignore writes to the field.

                     Software must not rely on the field reading as all 0s, and except for writing back to the register must treat the value
                     as if it is UNKNOWN. Software must use an SBZP policy to write to the field.
                     This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 0, or to a field that should
                     be written as its preserved value or as all 0s.

                     See also Read-As-Zero (RAZ), Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP), UNKNOWN.

UNKNOWN              An UNKNOWN value does not contain valid data, and can vary from moment to moment, instruction to instruction,
                     and implementation to implementation. An UNKNOWN value must not return information that cannot be accessed at
                     the current or a lower level of privilege using instructions that are not UNPREDICTABLE, are not CONSTRAINED
                     UNPREDICTABLE, and do not return UNKNOWN values.

                     An UNKNOWN value must not be documented or promoted as having a defined value or effect.

                     In body text, the term UNKNOWN is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.

                     See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNDEFINED, UNK, UNPREDICTABLE.
UNPREDICTABLE
                     Means the behavior cannot be relied upon. UNPREDICTABLE behavior must not perform any function that cannot be
                     performed at the current or a lower level of privilege using instructions that are not UNPREDICTABLE.
                     UNPREDICTABLE behavior must not be documented or promoted as having a defined effect.

                     An instruction that is UNPREDICTABLE can be implemented as UNDEFINED.

                     Execution at Non-secure EL1 or EL0 of an instruction that is UNPREDICTABLE can be implemented as generating a
                     trap exception that is taken to EL2, provided that at least one instruction that is not UNPREDICTABLE and is not
                     CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE causes a trap exception that is taken to EL2.

                     In body text, the term UNPREDICTABLE is shown in SMALL CAPITALS.

                     See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNDEFINED.

VA                   See Virtual address (VA).

VFP                  In ARMv7, an extension to the ARM architecture, that provides single-precision and double-precision
                     floating-point arithmetic.

ARM DDI 0487C.a                 Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                       Glossary-6665
ID121917                                                Non-Confidential
Glossary

Virtual address (VA)
                   An address generated by an ARM PE. This means it is an address that might be held in the program counter of the
                   PE. For a PMSA implementation, the virtual address is identical to the physical address.

                      See also Intermediate physical address (IPA), Physical address (PA).

Watchpoint            A debug event triggered by an access to memory, specified in terms of the address of the location in memory being
                      accessed.
Way                   See Cache way.

WI                    Writes Ignored. In a register that software can write to, a WI attribute applied to a bit or field indicates that the bit
                      or field ignores the value written by software and retains the value it had before that write.

                      See also RAO/WI, RAZ/WI, RES0, RES1.

Word                  A 32-bit data item. Words are normally word-aligned in ARM systems.

Word-aligned          Means that the address is divisible by 4.

Write-allocate cache
                   A cache in which a cache miss on storing data causes a cache line to be allocated into the cache.

Write-back cache
                      A cache in which when a cache hit occurs on a store access, the data is only written to the cache. Data in the cache
                      can therefore be more up-to-date than data in main memory. Any such data is written back to main memory when
                      the cache line is cleaned or reallocated. Another common term for a write-back cache is a copy-back cache.

Write-through cache
                  A cache in which when a cache hit occurs on a store access, the data is written both to the cache and to main memory.
                  This is normally done via a write buffer, to avoid slowing down the PE.

Write buffer          A block of high-speed memory that optimizes stores to main memory.

Glossary-6666                    Copyright © 2013-2017 ARM Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  ARM DDI 0487C.a
                                                         Non-Confidential                                                         ID121917
