                                                                                          Preface

I love embedded systems. The first time a motor turned because I told it to, I was
hooked. I quickly moved away from pure software and into a field where I can touch
the world. Just as I was leaving software, the seminal work was done on design pat‐
terns.1 My team went through the book, discussing the patterns and where we’d con‐
sider using them.
As I got more into embedded systems, I found compilers that couldn’t handle C++
inheritance, processors with absurdly small amounts of memory in which to imple‐
ment the patterns, and a whole new set of problems where design patterns didn’t
seem applicable. But I never forgot the idea that there are patterns to the way we do
engineering. By learning to recognize the patterns, we can use the robust solutions
over and over. Much of this book looks at standard patterns and offers some new
ones for embedded system development. I’ve also filled in a number of chapters with
other useful information not found in most books.

About This Book
After seeing embedded systems in medical devices, race cars, airplanes, and children’s
toys, I’ve found a lot of commonalities. There are things I wish I knew then on how to
go about designing and implementing software for an embedded system. This book
contains some of what I’ve learned. It is a book about successful software design in
resource-constrained environments.
It is also a book about understanding what interviewers look for when you apply for
an embedded systems job. Each section ends with an interview question. These are
generally not language-specific; instead, they attempt to infer how you think. The
most useful interview questions don’t have a single correct answer. Instead of trying
to document all the paths, the notes after each question provide hints about what an

1 Erich Gamma, et al., Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software (Addison-Wesley).

                                                                                                          xi
interviewer might look for in your response. You’ll have to get the job (and the
answers) on your own merits.
One note, though: my embedded systems don’t have operating systems (OS). The
software runs on the bare metal. When the software says “turn that light on,” it says it
to the processor without an intermediary. This isn’t a book about working with an
embedded OS. But the concepts translate to processors running OSs, so if you stick
around, you may learn about the undersides of OSs too. Working without one helps
you really appreciate what an OS does.
This book describes the archetypes and principles that are commonly used in creating
embedded system software. I don’t cover any particular platform, processor, compiler,
or language, because if you get a good foundation from this book, specifics can come
later.

Who This Book Is For
I wrote this for some folks I’ve worked with in the past.
Sarah was a junior software engineer who joined my embedded systems team. She
was bright and interested but didn’t know how to handle hardware.
Josh was an experienced electromechanical engineer who needed to write software.
He could power through some code but got stuck on designing the system, debugging
memory issues, and reusing code.
Usually we only learn software or hardware in school; we don’t learn how to make
them work together. My goal is to cantilever off the knowledge you have to fill the
gaps.

About the Author
In the field of embedded systems, I have worked on DNA scanners, inertial measure‐
ment units for airplanes and race cars, toys for preschoolers, a gunshot location sys‐
tem for catching criminals, and assorted medical, scientific, and consumer devices.
I have specialized in signal processing, hardware integration, complex system design,
and performance. Having been through FAA and FDA certification processes, I
understand the importance of producing high-quality designs and how they lead to
high-quality implementations.
I’ve spent several years in management roles, but I enjoy hands-on engineering and
the thrill of delivering excellent products. I’m happy to say that leaving management
has not decreased my opportunities to provide leadership and mentoring.

xii   |   Preface
After the first edition of this book, I started the Embedded.fm podcast to talk about
embedded systems with other people. Through hundreds of episodes, I’ve learned
how other engineers solve problems, about new technologies being developed, and
other career paths.

Organization of This Book
I read nonfiction for amusement. I read a lot more fiction than nonfiction, but still, I
like any good book. I wrote this book to be read almost as a story, from cover to
cover. The information is technical (extremely so in spots), but the presentation is
casual. You don’t need to program along with it to get the material (though trying out
the examples and applying the recommendations to your code will give you a deeper
understanding).
This isn’t intended to be a technical manual where you can skip into the middle and
read only what you want. I mean, you can do that, but you’ll miss a lot of information
with the search-and-destroy method. You’ll also miss the jokes, which is what I really
would feel bad about. I hope that you go through the book in order. Then, when you
are hip-deep in alligators and need to implement a function fast, pick up the book,
flip to the right chapter, and, like a wizard, whip up a command table or fixed-point
implementation of variance.
Or you can skip around, reading about solutions to your crisis of the week. I under‐
stand. Sometimes you just have to solve the problem. If that is the case, I hope you
find the chapter interesting enough to come back when you are done fighting that
fire.
The order of chapters is:
Chapter 1, “Introduction”
   This chapter describes what an embedded system is and how development is dif‐
   ferent from traditional software.
Chapter 2, “Creating a System Architecture”
   Whether you are trying to understand a system or creating one from scratch,
   there are tools to help.
Chapter 3, “Getting Your Hands on the Hardware”
   Hardware/software integration during board bring-up can be scary, but there are
   some ways to make it smoother.
Chapter 4, “Inputs, Outputs, and Timers”
   The embedded systems version of “Hello World” is making an LED blink. It can
   be more complex than you might expect.

                                                                           Preface   |   xiii
Chapter 5, “Interrupts”
   Interrupts are one of the most confusing topics in embedded systems: code that
   gets called asynchronously on events that happen inside the processor. A chicken
   is used to make this easier.
Chapter 6, “Managing the Flow of Activity”
   This chapter describes methods for setting up the main loop of your system,
   where to use interrupts (and how not to), and how to make a state machine.
Chapter 7, “Communicating with Peripherals”
   Different serial communication methods rule embedded systems: UART, SPI,
   I2C, USB, and so on. While you can look up the details for each, this chapter
   looks at what makes them different from each other and how to make them work
   more efficiently.
Chapter 8, “Putting Together a System”
   Common peripherals such as LCDs, ADCs, flash memory, and digital sensors
   have common implementation needs such as buffer handling, bandwidth
   requirements, and pipelines.
Chapter 9, “Getting into Trouble”
   Debugging is a skill every developer needs. Figuring out how to cause problems
   will teach you how to solve bugs, stack problems, hard faults, and cleverness.
Chapter 10, “Building Connected Devices”
   Whether you have consumer IoT devices or industrial networked systems, man‐
   aging many devices means dealing with firmware updates, security, and monitor‐
   ing health.
Chapter 11, “Doing More with Less”
   Optimization is not for the faint of heart. This chapter shows methods for reduc‐
   ing consumption of RAM, code space, and processor cycles.
Chapter 12, “Math”
   Most embedded systems need to do some form of analysis. Understanding how
   mathematical operations and floating points work (and don’t work) will make
   your system faster and more robust.
Chapter 13, “Reducing Power Consumption”
   From reducing processor cycles to system architecture suggestions, this chapter
   will help you if your system runs on batteries.
Chapter 14, “Motors and Movement”
   This chapter is a basic introduction to motors and movement. (Or possibly the
   introduction to an entirely new book.)

xiv   |   Preface
The information is presented in the order that I want my engineers to start thinking
about these things. It may seem odd that architecture is first, considering that most
people don’t get to it until later in their career. But I want folks to think about how
their code fits in the system long before I want them to worry about optimization.

Terminology
A microcontroller is a processor with onboard goodies like RAM, code space (usually
flash), and various peripheral interfaces (such as I/O lines). Your code runs on a pro‐
cessor, or central processing unit (CPU). A microprocessor is a small processor, but the
definition of “small” varies.
A DSP (digital signal processor) is a specialized form of microcontroller that focuses
on signal processing, usually sampling analog signals and doing something interest‐
ing with the result. Usually a DSP is also a microcontroller, but it has special tweaks to
make it perform math operations faster (in particular, multiplication and addition).
As I wrote this book, I wanted to use the correct terminology so you’d get used to it.
However, with so many names for the piece of the system that is running your code, I
didn’t want to add confusion by changing the name. So, I stick with the term processor
to represent whatever it is you’re using to implement your system. Most of the mate‐
rial is applicable to whatever you actually have.

Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
     Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width
    Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program ele‐
    ments such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment
    variables, statements, and keywords.

                This element signifies a tip or suggestion.

                This element signifies a general note.

                                                                             Preface   |   xv
                  This element indicates a warning or caution.

Using Code Examples
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may use the code in
this book in your programs and documentation. You do not need to contact us for
permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code. For example,
writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this book does not require
permission. Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does
require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting example
code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant amount of example
code from this book into your product’s documentation does require permission.
This book has a GitHub repository for code, tools, and pointers to more information.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually includes the
title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Making Embedded Systems by Elecia
White (O’Reilly). Copyright 2024 Elecia White, 978-1-098-15154-6.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given
above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.

O’Reilly Online Learning
                          For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technol‐
                          ogy and business training, knowledge, and insight to help
                          companies succeed.

Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and expertise
through books, articles, and our online learning platform. O’Reilly’s online learning
platform gives you on-demand access to live training courses, in-depth learning
paths, interactive coding environments, and a vast collection of text and video from
O’Reilly and 200+ other publishers. For more information, visit https://oreilly.com.

xvi   | Preface
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:

    O’Reilly Media, Inc.
    1005 Gravenstein Highway North
    Sebastopol, CA 95472
    800-889-8969 (in the United States or Canada)
    707-827-7019 (international or local)
    707-829-0104 (fax)
    support@oreilly.com
    https://www.oreilly.com/about/contact.html

We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at https://oreil.ly/making-embedded-systems-2.
For news and information about our books and courses, visit https://oreilly.com.
Find us on LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/company/oreilly-media.
Watch us on YouTube: https://youtube.com/oreillymedia.

Acknowledgments
This book didn’t happen in a vacuum. It started with a colleague who said, “Hey, do
you know a book I can give to one of my junior engineers?” From that planted seed
came months of writing; I learned to really appreciate understanding (and encourag‐
ing) friends. Then there were the engineers who gave their time to look at the techni‐
cal material (any remaining issues are my fault, not theirs, of course). Finally, O’Reilly
provided tremendous support through the whole process.
Thanking each person as they properly deserve would take pages and pages, so I will
just go through them all in one breath, in no particular order: Phillip King, Ken
Brown, Jerry Ryle, Matthew Hughes, Eric Angell, Scott Fitzgerald, John Catsoulis,
Robert P. J. Day, Rebecca Demarest, Jen Costillo, Phillip Johnston, Rene Xoese Kwasi
Novor, and Chris Svec. These folks made a difference in the flavor of this book. There
are additional thank-yous spread throughout the book, where I got help from a
particular person in a particular area, so you may see these names again (or a few dif‐
ferent ones).
Finally, authors always give gushing thanks to their spouses; it is a cliché. However,
having written a book, I see why. Christopher White, my favorite drummer, physicist,
and embedded systems engineer, thank you most of all. For everything.

                                                                            Preface   |   xvii
