                                                                               CHAPTER 1
                                                                   Introduction

Embedded systems are different things to different people. To someone who has been
working on servers, an application developed for a phone is an embedded system. To
someone who has written code for tiny 8-bit microprocessors, anything with an oper‐
ating system doesn’t seem very embedded. I tend to tell nontechnical people that
embedded systems are things like microwaves and automobiles that run software but
aren’t computers. (Most people recognize a computer as a general-purpose device.)
Perhaps an easy way to define the term without haggling over technology is:
    An embedded system is a computerized system that is purpose-built for its application.

Because its mission is narrower than a general-purpose computer, an embedded sys‐
tem has less support for things that are unrelated to accomplishing the job at hand.
The hardware often has constraints. For instance, consider a CPU that runs more
slowly to save battery power, a system that uses less memory so it can be manufac‐
tured more cheaply, and processors that come only in certain speeds or support a
subset of peripherals.
The hardware isn’t the only part of the system with constraints. In some systems, the
software must act deterministically (exactly the same each time) or in real time
(always reacting to an event fast enough). Some systems require that the software be
fault-tolerant, with graceful degradation in the face of errors. For example, consider a
system in which servicing faulty software or broken hardware may be infeasible (such
as a satellite or a tracking tag on a whale). Other systems require that the software
cease operation at the first sign of trouble, often providing clear error messages (for
example, a heart monitor should not fail quietly).
This short chapter goes over the high-level view of embedded systems. Realistically,
you could read the Wikipedia article, but this is a way for us to get to know one
another. Sadly, this chapter mostly talks about how difficult embedded systems are to

develop. Between different compilers, debuggers, and resource constraints, the way
we design and implement code is different from other varieties of software. Some
might call the field a bit backward but that isn’t true; we’re focused on solving differ‐
ent problems, for the most part. And yet, there are some software engineering tech‐
niques that are useful but overlooked (but that’s for the rest of the book).
One of the best things about embedded systems has been the maker movement.
Everyone loves glowing lights, so people get interested in making a career of the
lower-level software. If that is you, welcome. But I admit I’m expecting folks who
have experience with hardware or software and need to know how to get the piece
between them done well and efficiently.
At the end of every chapter, I have an interview question loosely related to the mate‐
rial. One of the leveling-up activities in my career was learning to interview other
people for jobs on my team. Sorely disappointed that there wasn’t a resource on how
to do that, I’m putting in my favorite interview questions and what I look for as the
interviewer. They are a bit odd, but I hope you enjoy them as much as I do.
Admittedly, I hope you enjoy all of embedded systems development as much as I do.
There are challenges, but that’s the fun part.

Embedded Systems Development
Embedded systems are special, offering unique challenges to developers. Most
embedded software engineers develop a toolkit for dealing with the constraints.
Before we can start building yours, let’s look at the difficulties associated with devel‐
oping an embedded system. Once you become familiar with how your embedded sys‐
tem might be limited, we’ll start on some principles to guide us to better solutions.

Compilers and Languages
Embedded systems use cross-compilers. Although a cross-compiler runs on your
desktop or laptop computer, it creates code that does not. The cross-compiled image
runs on your target embedded system. Because the code needs to run on your embed‐
ded processor, the vendor for the target system usually sells a cross-compiler or pro‐
vides a list of available cross-compilers to choose from. Many larger processors use
the cross-compilers from the GNU family of tools such as GCC.
Embedded software compilers often support only C, or C and C++. In addition, some
embedded C++ compilers implement only a subset of the language (multiple inheri‐
tance, exceptions, and templates are commonly missing). There is a growing popular‐
ity for other languages, but C and C++ remain the most prevalent.

Regardless of the language you need to use in your software, you can practice object-
oriented design. The design principles of encapsulation, modularity, and data abstrac‐
tion can be applied to any application in nearly any language. The goal is to make the
design robust, maintainable, and flexible. We should use all the help we can get from
the object-oriented camp.
Taken as a whole, an embedded system can be considered equivalent to an object,
particularly one that works in a larger system (such as a remote control talking to a
smart television, a distributed control system in a factory, or an airbag deployment
sensor in a car). At a higher level, everything is inherently object-oriented, and it is
logical to extend this down into embedded software.
On the other hand, I don’t recommend a strict adherence to all object-oriented design
principles. Embedded systems get pulled in too many directions to be able to lay
down such a commandment. Once you recognize the trade-offs, you can balance the
software design goals and the system design goals.
Most of the examples in this book are in C or C++. I expect that the language is less
important than the concepts, so even if you aren’t familiar with the syntax, look at the
code. This book won’t teach you any programming language (except for some assem‐
bly language), but good design principles transcend language.

Debugging
If you were to debug software running on a computer, you could compile and debug
on that computer. The system would have enough resources to run the program and
support debugging it at the same time. In fact, the hardware wouldn’t know you were
debugging an application, as it is all done in software.
Embedded systems aren’t like that. In addition to a cross-compiler, you’ll need a
cross-debugger. The debugger sits on your computer and communicates with the tar‐
get processor through a special processor interface (see Figure 1-1). The interface is
dedicated to letting someone else eavesdrop on the processor as it works. This inter‐
face is often called JTAG (pronounced “jay-tag”), regardless of whether it actually
implements that widespread standard.
The processor must expend some of its resources to support the debug interface,
allowing the debugger to halt it as it runs and providing the normal sorts of debug
information. Supporting debugging operations adds cost to the processor. To keep
costs down, some processors support a limited subset of features. For example,
adding a breakpoint causes the processor to modify the memory-loaded code to say
“stop here.” However, if your code is executing out of flash (or any other sort of read-
only memory), instead of modifying the code, the processor has to set an internal
register (hardware breakpoint) and compare it at each execution cycle to the code
address being run, stopping when they match. This can change the timing of the

                                                          Embedded Systems Development   |   3
code, leading to annoying bugs that occur only when you are (or maybe aren’t)
debugging. Internal registers take up resources, too, so often there are only a limited
number of hardware breakpoints available (frequently there are only two).

Figure 1-1. Computer and target processor

To sum up, processors support debugging, but not always as much debugging as you
are accustomed to if you’re coming from the non-embedded software world.
The device that communicates between your PC and the embedded processor is gen‐
erally called a hardware debugger, programmer, debug probe, in-circuit emulator
(ICE), or JTAG adapter. These may refer (somewhat incorrectly) to the same thing, or
they may be multiple devices. The debugger is specific to the processor (or processor
family), so you can’t take the debugger you got for one project and assume it will
work on another. The debugger costs add up, particularly if you collect enough of
them or if you have a large team working on your system.
To avoid buying a debugger or dealing with the processor limitations, many embed‐
ded systems are designed to have their debugging done primarily via printf, or some
sort of lighter-weight logging, to an otherwise unused communication port. Although
incredibly useful, this can also change the timing of the system, possibly leaving some
bugs to be revealed only after debugging output is turned off.
Writing software for an embedded system can be tricky, as you have to balance the
needs of the system and the constraints of the hardware. Now you’ll need to add
another item to your to-do list: making the software debuggable in a somewhat hos‐
tile environment, something we’ll talk more about in Chapter 2.

Resource Constraints
An embedded system is designed to perform a specific task, cutting out the resources
it doesn’t need to accomplish its mission. The resources under consideration include
the following:

  • Memory (RAM)
  • Code space (ROM or flash)
  • Processor cycles or speed
  • Power consumption (which translates into battery life)
  • Processor peripherals

To some extent, these are exchangeable. For example, you can trade code space for
processor cycles, writing parts of your code to take up more space but run more
quickly. Or you might reduce the processor speed in order to decrease power con‐
sumption. If you don’t have a particular peripheral interface, you might be able to cre‐
ate it in software with I/O lines and processor cycles. However, even with trading off,
you have only a limited supply of each resource. The challenge of resource con‐
straints is one of the most pressing for embedded systems.
Another set of challenges comes from working with the hardware. The added burden
of cross-debugging can be frustrating. During board bring-up, the uncertainty of
whether a bug is in the hardware or software can make issues difficult to solve. Unlike
your computer, the software you write may be able to do actual damage to the hard‐
ware. Most of all, you have to know about the hardware and what it is capable of.
That knowledge might not be applicable to the next system you work on. You will
need to learn quickly.
Once development and testing are finished, the system is manufactured, which is
something most pure software engineers never need to consider. However, creating a
system that can be manufactured for a reasonable cost is a goal that both embedded
software engineers and hardware engineers have to keep in mind. Supporting manu‐
facturing is one way you can make sure that the system that you created gets repro‐
duced with high fidelity.
After manufacture, the units go into the field. With consumer products, that means
they go into millions of homes where any bugs you created are enjoyed by many.
With medical, aviation, or other critical products, your bugs may be catastrophic
(which is why you get to do so much paperwork). With scientific or monitoring
equipment, the field could be a place where the unit cannot ever be retrieved (or
retrieved only at great risk and expense; consider the devices in volcano calderas), so
it had better work. The life your system is going to lead after it leaves you is some‐
thing you must consider as you design the software.

                                                          Embedded Systems Development   |   5
After you’ve figured out all of these issues and determined how to deal with them for
your system, there is still the largest challenge, one common to all branches of engi‐
neering: change. Not only do the product goals change, but the needs of the project
also change throughout its life-span. In the beginning, maybe you want to hack
something together just to try it out. As you get more serious and better understand
(and define) the goals of the product and the hardware you are using, you start to
build more infrastructure to make the software debuggable, robust, and flexible. In
the resource-constrained environment, you’ll need to determine how much infra‐
structure you can afford in terms of development time, RAM, code space, and pro‐
cessor cycles. What you started building initially is not what you will end up with
when development is complete. And development is rarely ever complete.
Creating a system that is purpose-built for an application has an unfortunate side
effect: the system might not support change as the application morphs. Engineering
embedded systems is not just about strict constraints and the eventual life of the sys‐
tem. The goal is figuring out which of those constraints will be a problem later in
product development. You will need to predict the likely course of changes and try to
design software flexible enough to accommodate whichever path the application
takes. Get out your crystal ball.

Principles to Confront Those Challenges
Embedded systems can seem like a jigsaw puzzle, with pieces that interlock (and only
go together one way). Sometimes you can force pieces together, but the resulting pic‐
ture might not be what is on the box. However, we should jettison the idea of the final
result as a single version of code shipped at the end of the project.
Instead, imagine the puzzle has a time dimension that varies over its whole life: con‐
ception, prototyping, board bring-up, debugging, testing, release, maintenance, and
repeat. Flexibility is not just about what the code can do right now, but also about
how the code can handle its life-span. Our goal is to be flexible enough to meet the
product goals while dealing with the resource constraints and other problems inher‐
ent in embedded systems.
There are some excellent principles we can take from software design to make the
system more flexible. Using modularity, we separate the functionality into subsystems
and hide the data each subsystem uses. With encapsulation, we create interfaces
between the subsystems so they don’t know much about each other. Once we have
loosely coupled subsystems (or objects, if you prefer), we can change one area of soft‐
ware with confidence that it won’t impact another area. This lets us take apart our
system and put it back together a little differently when we need to.

Recognizing where to break up a system into parts takes practice. A good rule of
thumb is to consider which parts can change independently. In embedded systems,
this is helped by the presence of physical objects that you can consider. If a sensor X
talks over a communication channel Y, those are separate things and good candidates
for being separate subsystems (and code modules).
If we break things into objects, we can do some testing on them. I’ve had the good
fortune of having excellent QA teams for some projects. In others, I’ve had no one
standing between my code and the people who were going to use the system. I’ve
found that bugs caught before software releases are like gifts. The earlier in the pro‐
cess errors are caught, the cheaper they are to fix, and the better it is for everyone.
You don’t have to wait for someone else to give you presents. Testing and quality go
hand in hand. As you are thinking about how to write a piece of code, spend some
time considering how you will test it. Writing test code for your system will make it
better, provide some documentation for your code, and make other people think you
write great software.
Documenting your code is another way to reduce bugs. It can be tough to know the
level of detail when commenting your code:
    i++; // increment the index
No, not like that. Lines like that rarely need comments at all. The goal is to write the
comment for someone just like you, looking at the code a year from when you wrote
it. By that time, future-you will probably be working on something different and have
forgotten exactly what creative solution past-you came up with. Future-you probably
doesn’t even remember writing this code, so help yourself out with a bit of orienta‐
tion. In general, though, assume the reader will have your brains and your general
background, so document what the code does, not how it does it.
Finally, with resource-constrained systems, there is the temptation to optimize your
code early and often. Fight the urge. Implement the features, make them work, test
them out, and then make them smaller or faster as needed.
You have only a limited amount of time: focus on where you can get better results by
looking for the bigger resource consumers after you have a working subsystem. It
doesn’t do you any good to optimize a function for speed if it runs rarely and is dwar‐
fed by the time spent in another function that runs frequently. To be sure, dealing
with the constraints of the system will require some optimization. Just make sure you
understand where your resources are being used before you start tuning.
    We should forget about small efficiencies, say about 97% of the time: premature opti‐
    mization is the root of all evil.
       —Donald Knuth

                                                             Embedded Systems Development   |   7
Prototypes and Maker Boards
“But wait,” you say, “I already have a working system built with an Arduino or Rasp‐
berry Pi Pico. I just need to figure out how to ship it.”
I get it. The system does nearly everything you want it to do. The project seems
almost done. Off-the-shelf development boards are amazing, especially the maker-
friendly ones. They make prototyping easier. However, the prototype is not the
product.
There are many tasks often forgotten at this stage. How will the firmware update?
Does the system need to sleep to lower power consumption? Do we need a watchdog
in case of a catastrophic error? How much space and how many processing cycles do
we need to save for future bug fixes and improvements? How do we manufacture
many devices instead of one hand-built unit? How will we test for safety? Inexplicable
user commands? Corner cases? Broken hardware?
Software aside, when the existing off-the-shelf boards don’t meet your needs, custom
boards are often necessary. The development boards may be too delicate, connected
by fragile wires. They may be too expensive for your target market or take too much
power. They may be the wrong size or shape. They may not hold up under the
intended environmental conditions (like temperature fluctuations in a car, getting
wet, or going to space).
Whatever the reason for getting a custom board, it usually means removing the pro‐
gramming (and debugging) hardware that are part of processor development boards.
Custom hardware will also push you out of some of the simplified development envi‐
ronments and software frameworks. Using the microprocessor vendor’s hardware
abstraction layers with a traditional compiler, you can get to smaller code sizes (often
faster as well). The lack of anything between you and the processor allows you to cre‐
ate deterministic and real-time handling. You may also be able to use and configure
an RTOS (real-time operating system). You can more easily understand the licensing
of the code you are using in the libraries.
Adding in an external programmer/debugger gives you debugging beyond printf,
allowing you to see inside your code. This feels pretty magical after doing it the hard
way for so long.
Still, there is a chasm between prototype and shipping device, between supporting
one unit on your desk and a thousand or a million in the field. Don’t be lulled into
believing the project is complete because all of the features finally worked (one time,
in perfect conditions).

Development boards and simplified development environments are great for proto‐
types and to help select a processor. But there will be a time when the device needs to
be smaller, faster, and/or cheaper. At that point, the resource constraints kick in, and
you’ll need a book like this one to help you.

Further Reading
There are many excellent references about design patterns. These are my favorites:

  • First is Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software by Erich
    Gamma, et al. (Addison-Wesley). Originally published in 1995, this book sparked
    the software design pattern revolution. Due to its four collaborators, it is often
    known as the “Gang of Four” book (or a standard design pattern may be noted as
    a GoF pattern).
  • Second is Head First Design Patterns by Eric T. Freeman, et al. (O’Reilly). This
    book is far more readable than the original GoF book. The concrete examples
    were much easier for me to remember.

For more information about getting from prototype to shipping units, I recommend
Alan Cohen’s Prototype to Product: A Practical Guide for Getting to Market (O’Reilly).

                          Interview Question: Hello World
  Here is a computer with a compiler and an editor. Please implement “hello world.” Once
  you have the basic version working, add in the functionality to get a name from the com‐
  mand line. Finally, tell me what happens before your code executes—in other words,
  before the main() function. (Thanks to Phillip King for this question.)
  In many embedded system projects, you have to develop a system from scratch. With
  the first part of this task, I look for a candidate who can take a blank slate and fill in
  the basic functionality, even in an unfamiliar environment. I want them to have
  enough facility with programming that this question is straightforward.
  This is a solid programming question, so you’d better know the languages on your
  resume. Any of them are fair game for this question. When I ask for a “hello world”
  implementation, I look for the specifics of a language (that means knowing which
  header file to include and using command arguments in C and C++). I want the
  interviewee to have the ability to find and fix syntax errors based on compiler errors
  (though I am unduly impressed when they can type the whole program without any
  mistakes, even typos).

                                                                           Further Reading   |   9
                          I am a decent typist on my own, but if someone watches over
                          my shoulder, I end up with every other letter wrong. That’s
                          OK, lots of people are like that. So don’t let it throw you off.
                          Just focus on the keyboard and the code, not on your typing
                          skills.

     The second half of the question is where we start moving into embedded systems. A
     pure computer scientist tends to consider the computer as an imaginary ideal box for
     executing their beautiful algorithms. When asked what happens before the main
     function, they will tend to answer along the lines of “you know, the program runs,”
     but with no understanding of what that implies.
     However, if they mention “start” or “cstart,” they are well on their way in the inter‐
     view. In general, I want them to know that the program requires initialization beyond
     what we see in the source, no matter what the platform is. I like to hear mention of
     setting the exception vectors to handle interrupts, initializing critical peripherals, ini‐
     tializing the stack, initializing variables, and if there are any C++ objects, calling con‐
     structors for those. It is great if they can describe what happens implicitly (by the
     compiler) and what happens explicitly (in initialization code).
     The best answers are step-by-step descriptions of everything that might happen, with
     an explanation of why these steps are important and how they happen in an embed‐
     ded system. An experienced embedded engineer often starts at the vector table, with
     the reset vector, and moves from there to the power-on behavior of the system. This
     material is covered later in the book, so if these terms are new to you, don’t worry.
     An electrical engineer (EE) who asks this question gives bonus points when a candi‐
     date can, during further discussion of power-on behavior, explain why an embedded
     system can’t be up and running 1 microsecond after the switch is flipped. The EE
     looks for an understanding of power sequencing, power ramp-up time, clock stabili‐
     zation time, and processor reset/initialization delay.

