                                                                           CHAPTER 2
                          Creating a System Architecture

Even small embedded systems have so many details that it can be difficult to recog‐
nize where patterns can be applied. You’ll need a good view of the whole system to
understand which pieces have straightforward solutions and which have hidden
dependencies. A good design is created by starting with an OK design and then
improving on it, ideally before you start implementing it. And a system architecture
diagram is a good way to view the system and start designing the software (or under‐
standing the pile of code handed to you).
A product definition is seldom fixed at the start, so you may go round and round to
hammer out ideas. Once the product functions have been sketched out on a white‐
board, you can start to think about the software architecture. The hardware folks are
doing the same thing (hopefully in conjunction with you as the software designer,
though their focus may be a little different). In short order, you’ll have a software
architecture and a draft schematic. Depending on your experience level, the first few
projects you design will likely be based on other projects, so the hardware will be
based on an existing platform with some changes.
In this chapter, we’ll look at different ways of viewing the system in an effort to design
better embedded software. We’ll create a few diagrams to describe what our system
looks like and to identify how we should architect our software. In addition to better
understanding the system, the goal of the diagrams is to identify ways to architect the
software to changing requirements and hardware: encapsulation, information hiding,
having good interfaces between modules, and so on.
Embedded systems depend heavily on their hardware. Unstable hardware leaves the
software looking buggy and unreliable. This is the place to start, making sure we can
separate any changes in the hardware from bugs in the software.

It is possible (and usually preferable) to go the other way, looking at the system func‐
tions and determining what hardware is necessary to support them. However, I’m
mostly going to focus on starting at the low-level, hardware-interfacing software to
reinforce the idea that your product depends on the hardware features being stable
and accessible.
When you do a bottom-up design as described here, recognize that the hardware you
are specifying is archetypal. Although you will eventually need to know the specifics
of the hardware, initially accept that there will be some hardware that meets your
requirements (i.e., some processor that does everything you need). Use that to work
out the system, software, and hardware architectures before diving into details.

Getting Started
There are two ways to go about architecting systems. One is to start with a blank
slate, with an idea or end goal but nothing in place. This is composition. Creating
these system diagrams from scratch can be daunting. The blank page can seem vast.
The other way is to go from an existing product to the architecture, taking what
someone else put together to understand the internals. Reverse engineering like this
is decomposition, breaking things into smaller parts. When you join a team, some‐
times you start with a close deadline, a bunch of code, and very little documentation
with no time to write more.
Diagrams will help you understand the system. Your ability to see the overall struc‐
ture will help you write your piece of the system in a way that keeps you on track to
provide good-quality code and meet your deadline.
You may need to consider formulating two architecture diagrams: one local to the
code you are working on and a more global one that describes the whole product so
you can see how your piece fits in.
As your understanding deepens, your diagrams will get larger, particularly for a
mature design. If the drawing is too complex, bundle up some boxes into one box and
then expand on them in another drawing.
Some systems will make more sense with one drawing or another; it depends on how
the original architects thought about what they were doing.
In the next few sections, I’m going to ask you to make some drawings of a system
from the ground up, not looking at an existing system for simplicity’s sake (all good
systems will be more complicated than I can show here).

I’m showing them as sketches because that is what I want you to do. The different
diagrams are ways of looking at the system and how it can be (should be? is?) built.
We are not creating system documentation; instead, these sketches are a way of think‐
ing about the system from different perspectives.
Keep your sketches messy enough that if you have to do it all over again, it doesn’t
make you want to give up. Use a drawing tool if you’d like, but pencil and paper is my
personal favorite method. It lets me focus on the information, not the drawing
method.

Creating System Diagrams
Just as hardware designers create schematics, you should make a series of diagrams
that show the relationships between the various parts of the software. Such diagrams
will give you a view of the whole system, help you identify dependencies, and provide
insight into the design of new features.
I recommend four types of diagrams: context diagrams, block diagrams, organi‐
grams, and layering diagrams.

The Context Diagram
The first drawing is an overview of how your system fits into the world at large. If it is
a children’s toy, the diagram may be easy: a stick figure and some buttons on the toy.
If it is a device providing information to a network of seismic sensors with an addi‐
tional output to local scientists, the system is more complicated, going beyond the
piece you are working on. See Figure 2-1.

Figure 2-1. Two context diagrams with different levels of complexity

The goal here is a high-level context of how the system will be used by the customer.
Don’t worry about what is inside the boxes (including the one you are designing).
The diagram should focus on the relationships between your device, users, servers,
other devices, and other entities.
What problem is it solving? What are the inputs and outputs to your system? What
are the inputs and outputs to the users? What are the inputs and outputs to the
system-at-large? Focus on the use cases and world-facing interactions.
Ideally this type of diagram will help define the system requirements and envision
likely changes. More realistically, it is a good way to remember the goals of the device
as you get deeper into designing the software.

The Block Diagram
Design is straightforward at the start because you are considering the physical ele‐
ments of the system, and you can think in an object-oriented fashion—no matter
whether you are using an object-oriented language—to model your software around
the physical elements. Each chip attached to the processor is an object. You can think
of the wires that connect the chip to the processor (the communication methods) as
another set of objects.
Start your design by drawing these as boxes where the processor is in the center, the
communication objects are in the processor, and each external component is attached
to a communication object.
For this example, I’m going to introduce a type of memory called flash memory.
While the details aren’t important here, it is a relatively inexpensive type of memory
used in many devices. Many flash memory chips communicate over the SPI (Serial
Peripheral Interface, usually pronounced “spy”) bus, a type of serial communication
(discussed in more detail in Chapter 7). Most processors cannot execute code over
SPI, so the flash is used for off-processor storage. Our schematic, shown at the top of
Figure 2-2, shows that we have some flash memory attached to our processor via SPI.
Don’t be intimidated by the schematic! We’ll cover them in more detail in Chapter 3.
Ideally, the hardware block diagram is provided by an electrical engineer along with
the schematics to give you a simplified view of the hardware. If not, you may need to
sketch your own on the way to a software block diagram.
In our software block diagram, we’ll add the flash as a device (a box outside the pro‐
cessor) and a SPI box inside the processor to show that we’ll need to write some SPI
code. Our software diagram looks very similar to the hardware schematic at this
stage, but as we identify additional software components, it will diverge.

Figure 2-2. Comparison of schematic and initial hardware and software block diagrams

The next step is to add a flash box inside the processor to indicate that we’ll need to
write some flash-specific code. It’s valuable to separate the communication method
from the external component; if there are multiple chips connected via the same
method, they should all go to the same communications block in the chip. The dia‐
gram will at that point warn us to be extra careful about sharing that resource, and to
consider the performance and resource contention issues that sharing brings.

Figure 2-2 shows a snippet of a schematic and the beginnings of a software block dia‐
gram. Note that the schematic is far more detailed. At this point in a design, we want
to see the high-level items to determine what objects we’ll need to create and how
they all fit together. Keep the detailed pieces in mind (or on a different piece of
paper), particularly where the details may have a system impact, but try to keep the
details out of the diagram if possible. The goal is to break the system down from a
complete thing into bite-sized chunks you can summarize enough to fit in a box.
The next step is to add some higher-level functionality. What is each external chip
used for? This is simple when each has only one function. For example, if our flash is
used to store bitmaps to put on a screen, we can put a box on the architecture to rep‐
resent the display assets. This doesn’t have an off-chip element, so its box goes in the
processor. We’ll also need boxes for a screen and its communication method, and
another box to convey flash-based display assets to the screen. It is better to have too
many boxes at this stage than too few. We can combine them later.
Add any other software structures you can think of: databases, buffering systems,
command handlers, algorithms, state machines, etc. You might not know exactly
what you’ll need for those (we’ll talk about some of them in more detail later in the
book), but try to represent everything from the hardware to the product function in
the diagram. See Figure 2-3.

Figure 2-3. More detailed software block diagram

After you have sketched out this diagram on a piece of paper or a whiteboard (proba‐
bly multiple times because the boxes never end up being big enough or in the right
place), you may think you’ve done enough. However, other types of drawings often
will give additional insight.

               If you are trying to understand an existing codebase, get a list of
               the code files. If there are too many to count, use the directory
               names and libraries. Someone decided that these are modules, and
               maybe they even tried to consider them as objects, so they go in
               our diagram as boxes.
               Where to put the boxes and how to order them is a puzzle, and one
               that may take a while to figure out.

Looking at other types of drawings may show you some hidden, ugly spots with criti‐
cal bottlenecks, poorly understood requirements, or an innate failure to implement
the product’s features on the intended platform. Often these deficiencies can be seen
from only one view or are represented by the boxes that change most between the
different diagrams. By looking at them from the right perspective, ideally you will
identify the tricky modules and also see a path to a good solution.

Organigram
The next type of software architecture diagram, organigram, looks like an organiza‐
tional chart. In fact, I want you to think about it as an org chart. Like a manager, the
upper-level components tell the lower ones what to do. Communication is not
(should not be!) only one direction. The lower-level pieces will act on the orders to
the best of their ability, provide requested information, and notify their boss when
errors arise. Think of the system as a hierarchy, and this diagram shows the control
and dependencies.
Figure 2-4 shows discrete components and which ones call others. The whole system
is a hierarchy, with main at the highest level. If you have the device’s algorithm plan‐
ned out and know how the algorithm is going to use each piece, you can fill in the
next level with algorithm-related objects. If you don’t think they are going to change,
you can start with the product-related features and then drop down to the pieces we
do know, putting the most complex on top. Next, fill in the lower-level objects that
are used by a higher-level object. For instance, our SPI object is used by our flash
object, which is used by our display assets object, and so on. You may need to add
some pieces here, ones you hadn’t thought of before. You should determine whether
those pieces need to go on the block diagram, too (probably).

Figure 2-4. Organizational diagram of software architecture

However, as much as we’d like to devote a component to one function (e.g., the dis‐
play assets in the flash memory), the limitations of the system (cost, speed, etc.) don’t
always support that. Often you end up cramming multiple, not particularly compati‐
ble functions into one component or communication pathway.
In the diagram, you can see where the text and images share the flash driver and its
child SPI driver. This sharing is often necessary, but it is a red flag in the design
because you’ll need to take special care to avoid contention around the resource and
make sure it is available when needed. Luckily, this figure shows that the rendering
code controls both and will be able to ensure that only one of the resources—text or
images—is needed at a time, so a conflict between them is unlikely.
Let’s say that your team has determined that the system we’ve been designing needs
each unit to have a serial number. It is to be programmed in manufacturing and com‐
municated upon request. We could add another memory chip as a component, but
that would increase cost, board complexity, and software complexity. The flash we
already have is large enough to fit the serial number. This way, only software com‐
plexity has to increase. (Sigh.)
In Figure 2-5, we print the system serial number through the flash that previously was
devoted to the display assets. If the logging subsystem needs to get the serial number
asynchronously from the display assets (say I have two threads, or my display assets
are used in an interrupt), the software will have to avoid collisions and any resulting
corruption.

Figure 2-5. Organizational diagram with a shared resource

Each time something like this is added, some little piece where you are using A and B
and have to consider a potential interaction with C, the system becomes a little less
robust. This added awareness is very hard to document, and shared resources cause
pains in the design, implementation, and maintenance phases of the project. The
example here is pretty easily fixed with a flag, but all shared resources should make
you think about the consequences.
Returning to the org chart metaphor, people managed by two entities will have con‐
flicting instructions and priorities. While it’s best to avoid the situation, sometimes
you need to manage yourself a bit to handle the complexities of the job.

               If you are trying to understand an existing codebase, the organi‐
               gram can be constructed by walking through the code in a debug‐
               ger. You start in main() and step into interesting functions, trying
               not to get too lost in the details.
               It might take a few repetitions, but the goal is to get a feel for where
               the flow of code is going and how it gets there.

Layering Diagram
The last architecture drawing looks for layers and represents objects by their estima‐
ted size, as in Figure 2-6. This is another diagram to start with paper and pencil. Start
at the bottom of the page and draw boxes for the things that go off the processor
(such as our communication boxes). If you anticipate that one is going to be more
complicated to implement, make it a little larger. If you aren’t sure, make them all the
same size.
Next, add to the diagram the items that use the lowest layer. If there are multiple users
of a lower-level object, they should all touch the lower-level object (this might mean
making the lower-level component bigger). Also, each object that uses something
below it should touch all of the things it uses, if possible.
That was a little sneaky. I said to make the object size depend on its complexity. Then
I said that if an object has multiple users, make it bigger. As described in the previous
section, shared resources increase complexity. So when you have a resource that is
shared by many things, its box gets bigger so it can touch all of the upper modules.
This reflects an increase in complexity, even if the module seems straightforward. It
isn’t only bottom layers that have this problem. In the diagram, I initially had the ren‐
dering box much smaller because moving data from the flash to the LCD is easy.
However, once the rendering box had to control all the bits and pieces below it, it
became larger. And sure enough, on the project that I took this snippet from, ulti‐
mately rendering became a relatively large module and then two modules.
Eventually, the layering diagram shows you where the layers in your code are, letting
you bundle groups of resources together if they are always used together. For exam‐
ple, the LCD and parallel I/O boxes touch only each other. If this is the final diagram,
maybe those could be combined to make one module. The same goes for the back‐
light and PWM output.
Also look at the horizontal groupings. Fonts and images share their higher-level and
lower-level connections. It’s possible they should be merged into one module because
they seem to have the same inputs and outputs. The goal of this diagram is to look for
such points and think about the implications of combining the boxes in various ways.
You might end up with a simpler design.
Finally, if you have a group of several modules that try to touch the same lower-level
item, you might want to take some time to break apart that resource. Would it be use‐
ful to have a flash driver that dealt only with the serial number? Maybe one that read
the serial number on initialization and then never reread it, so that the display sub‐
system could keep control of the flash? Understand the complexity of your design
and your options for designing the system to modify that complexity. A good design
can save time and money in implementation and maintenance.

Figure 2-6. Software architecture layering diagram

Designing for Change
So now, sitting with the different architecture drawings, where do you go next?
Maybe you’ve realized there are a few pieces of code you didn’t think about initially.
And maybe you have progressed a bit at figuring out how the modules interact.
Before we consider those interactions (interfaces), there is one thing that is really
worth spending some time on: what is going to change? At this stage everything is
experimental, so it is a good bet that any piece of the system puzzle could change.
However, the goal is to harden your initial architecture (and code) against the possi‐
ble changes to the system features or actual hardware.
Given your product requirements, you may have confidence that some features of
your system won’t change. Our example, whatever it does, needs a display, and the
best way to send bitmaps to it seems like flash. Many flash chips are SPI, so that seems
like a good bet, too. However, exactly which flash chip is used will likely change. The
LCD, the image, or font data also may change. Even the way you store the image or
font data might change. The boxes in the diagram should represent the Platonic ide‐
als of each thing instead of a specific implementation.

Encapsulate Modules
The diagramming process leads to interfaces that don’t depend specifically on the
content or behavior of the modules that they connect (this is encapsulation!). We use
the different architecture drawings to figure out the best places for those interfaces.
Each box will probably have its own interface. Maybe those can be mashed together
into one object. But is there a good reason to do it now instead of later?
Sometimes, yes. If you can reduce some complexity of your diagrams without giving
up too much flexibility in the future, it may be worth collapsing some dependency
trees.

                                                                 Designing for Change   |   21
Here are some things to look for:

     • In the organigram, look for objects that are used by only one other object. Are
       these both fixed? If they are unlikely to change or are likely to change together as
       you evolve the system, consider combining them. If they change independently, it
       is not a good area to consider for encapsulation.
     • In the layering diagram, look for collections of objects that are always used
       together. Can these be grouped together in a higher-level interface to manage the
       objects? You’d be creating a hardware abstraction layer.
     • Which modules have lots of interdependencies? Can they be broken apart and
       simplified? Or can the dependencies be grouped together?
     • Can the interfaces between vertical neighbors be described in a few sentences?
       That makes it a good place for encapsulation to help you create an interface (for
       others to reuse your code or just for ease of testing).

In the example system, the LCD is attached to the parallel interface. In every diagram,
it is simple, with no additional dependencies and no other subsystems requiring
access to the parallel interface. You don’t need to expose the parallel interface; you can
encapsulate (hide) it within the LCD module.
Conversely, imagine the system without the rendering module to encapsulate the dis‐
play subsystem. The layering diagram might show this best (Figure 2-5). The fonts,
images, LCD, and backlight would all try to touch each other, making a mess of the
diagram.
Each box you’re left with is likely to become a module (or object). Look at the draw‐
ing. How can you make it simpler? Encapsulation in the software makes for a cleaner
architecture drawing, and the converse is true as well.

Delegation of Tasks
The diagrams also help you divide up and apportion work to minions. Which parts of
the system can be broken off into separate, describable pieces that someone else can
implement?
Too often we want our minions to do the boring part of the job while we get to do all
of the fun parts. (“Here, minion, write my test code, do my documentation, fold my
laundry.”) Not only does this drive away the good minions, it tends to decrease the
quality of your product. Instead, think about which whole box (or whole subtree) you
can give to someone else. As you try to describe the interdependencies to your imagi‐
nary minion, you may find that they become worse than you’ve represented in the
diagrams. Or you may find that a simple flag (such as a semaphore) to describe who
currently owns the resource may be enough to get started.

               What if you have no chance of getting minions? It is still important
               to go through this thought process. You want to reduce interdepen‐
               dencies where possible, which may cause you to redesign your sys‐
               tem. And where you can’t reduce the interdependencies, you can at
               least be wary of them when coding.

Looking for things that can be split off and accomplished by another person will help
you identify sections of code that can have a simple interface between them. Also,
when marketing asks how this project could be made to go faster, you’ll have an
answer ready for them. However, there is one more thing our imaginary minion pro‐
vides: assume they are slightly deficient and you need to protect yourself and your
code from the faulty minion’s bad code.
What sort of defensive structures can you picture erecting between modules? Imagine
the data being passed between modules. What is the minimum amount of data that
can move between boxes (or groups of boxes)? Does adding a box to your group
mean that significantly less data is passed? How can the data be stored in a way that
will keep it safe and usable by all those who need it?
The minimization of complexity between boxes (or at least between groups of boxes)
will make the project go more smoothly. The more that your minions are boxed into
their own sets of code, with well-understood interfaces, the more everyone will be
able to test and develop their own code.

Driver Interface: Open, Close, Read, Write, IOCTL
The previous section used a top-down view of module interfaces to train you to con‐
sider encapsulation and think about where you can get help from another person.
Going from the bottom up works as well. The bottom here consists of the modules
that talk to the hardware (the drivers).

               Top-down design is when you think about what you want and then
               dig into what you need to accomplish your goals. Bottom-up design
               is when you consider what you have and build what you can out of
               that.
               Usually I end up using a combination of the two: yo-yo design.

Many drivers in embedded systems are based on the POSIX API used to call devices
in Unix systems. Why? Because the model works well in many situations and saves
you from reinventing the wheel every time you need access to the hardware.

                                                                    Designing for Change   |   23
The interface to Unix drivers is straightforward:
open
        Opens the driver for use. Similar to (and sometimes replaced by) init.
close
        Cleans up the driver after use.
read
        Reads data from the device.
write
        Sends data to the device.
ioctl (pronounced “eye-octal” or “eye-oh-control”)
        Stands for input/output (I/O) control and handles the features not covered by the
        other parts of the interface. Its use is somewhat discouraged by kernel program‐
        mers due to its lack of structure, but it is still very popular.
In Unix, a driver is part of the kernel. Each of these functions takes an argument with
a file descriptor that represents the driver in question (such as /dev/tty01 for the
first terminal on the system). That gets pretty cumbersome for an embedded system
without an operating system. The idea is to model your driver upon Unix drivers. A
sample functionality for an embedded system device might look like any of these:1

     • spi.open()
     • spi_open()
     • SpiOpen(WITH_LOCK)
     • spi.ioctl_changeFrequency(THIRTY_MHz)
     • SpiIoctl(kChangeFrequency, THIRTY_MHz)

This interface straightens out the kinks that can happen at the driver level, making
them less specific to the application and creating reusable code. Further, when others
come up to your code and the driver looks like it has these functions, they will know
what to expect.

1 Style is very important. Coding guidelines will save you debugging time, and they won’t quash your creativity.
     If you don’t have a style guide, look at the ones Google suggests for open source projects (search for “Google
     Style Guides”). The explanations of why they chose what they did might help you formulate your own guide.

                The driver model in Unix sometimes includes two newer functions.
                The first, select (or poll), waits for the device to change state.
                That used to be done by getting empty reads or polling ioctl mes‐
                sages, but now it has its own function. The second, mmap, controls
                the memory map the driver shares with the code that calls it.

If your round peg can’t fit into this POSIX-compliant square hole, don’t force it. But if
it looks like it might, starting with this standard interface can make your design just a
little better and easier to maintain.

Adapter Pattern
One traditional software design pattern is called adapter (or sometimes wrapper). It
converts the interface of an object into one that is easier for a client to use (a higher-
level module). Often, adapters are written over software APIs to hide ugly interfaces
or libraries that change.
Many hardware interfaces are like ungainly software interfaces. That makes each
driver an adapter, as shown in Figure 2-7. If you create a common interface to your
driver (even if it isn’t open, close, read, write, ioctl), the hardware interface can
change without your upper-level software changing. Ideally, you can switch platforms
altogether and need only to rework the underpinnings.

Figure 2-7. Drivers implement the adapter pattern

                                                                    Designing for Change   |   25
Note that drivers are stackable, as shown in Figure 2-7. In our example we have a dis‐
play that uses flash memory, which in turn uses SPI communication. When you call
open for the display, it will call its subsystems initialization code, which will call open
for the flash, which will call open for the SPI driver. That’s three levels of adapters, all
for the cause of portability and maintainability.
The layers and the adapters add complexity to the implementation. They may also
require more memory or add delays to your code. That is a trade-off. You can have
simpler architectures with all of the good maintainability, testing, portability, and so
on for a small price. Unless your system is very resource constrained, this is usually a
good trade.
If the interface to each level is consistent, the higher-level code is pretty impervious to
change. For example, if our SPI flash changes to an I2C EEPROM (a different com‐
munication bus and a different type of memory), the display driver might not need to
change, or it might only need to replace flash functions with EEPROM (electrically
erasable programmable read-only memory) ones.
In Figure 2-8, I’ve added a function called test to the interface of each of the mod‐
ules. In Chapter 3, I’ll discuss some strategies for choosing automated tests to make
your code more robust. For now, they are just placeholders.

Figure 2-8. Interfaces for display subsystem and below

Creating Interfaces
Moving away from drivers, your definition of a module interface depends on the
specifics of the system. It is pretty safe to say that most modules will also need an ini‐
tialization function (though drivers often use open for this). Initialization may hap‐
pen as objects are instantiated during start-up, or it may be a function called as the
system initializes. To keep modules encapsulated (and more easily reused), high-level
functions should be responsible for initializing the modules they depend upon. A
good init function should be able to be called multiple times if it is used by different
subsystems. A very good init function can reset the subsystem (or hardware
resource) to a known good state in case of partial system failure.
Now that you don’t have a completely blank slate anymore, it may be easier to fill in
the interface of each of your boxes. Consider how to retain encapsulation for your
module, your hypothetical minion’s contribution, and the driver model, and then
start working out the responsibilities of each box in your architecture diagrams.

                Having created different views of the architecture, you probably
                won’t want to maintain each one. As you fill in the interface, you
                may want to focus on whichever one is most useful to you (or
                clearest to your boss or minions).

Example: A Logging Interface
The goal of the logging module is to implement a robust and reusable logging system.
In this section we’ll start off by defining the requirements of the interface, and then
explore some options for the interface (and the local memory). It doesn’t matter what
your communication method is. By coding to the interface in the face of limitations,
you leave yourself open to reusing your code in another system.

                Logging debug output can slow down a processor significantly. If
                your code behavior changes when you turn logging on and off,
                consider how the timing of various subsystems works together.

The implementation is dependent on your system. Sometimes the best you can do is
toggle an I/O line attached to an LED and send your messages via Morse code (I kid
you not). However, most of the time you get to write text debug messages to some
interface. Making a system debuggable is part of making it maintainable. Even if your
code is perfect, the person who comes after you might not be so lucky when they add
a newly required feature. A logging subsystem will not only help you during develop‐
ment, it is an invaluable tool during maintenance.

A good logging interface hides the details of how the logging is actually accom‐
plished, letting you hide changes (and complexity). Your logging needs may change
with the development cycle. For example, in the initial phase, your development kit
may come with an extra serial port and your logging information can go to a com‐
puter. In a later phase, the serial port might not be available, so you might have to
pare your output back to an LED or two.
I have occasionally wished for a complete mind meld when a system is acting oddly.
Sadly, there are never enough resources available to output everything you might
want. Further, your logging methodology may change as your product develops. This
is an area where you should encapsulate what changes by hiding its functions called
from the main interface. The small overhead you add will allow greater flexibility. If
you can code to the interface, changing the underlying pathway won’t matter.
Commonly, you want to output a lot of information over a relatively small pipe. As
your system gets bigger, the pipe looks smaller. Your pipe may be a simple serial port
connecting to your computer, a pathway available only with special hardware. It may
be a special debug packet that happens over your network. The data may be stored in
an external RAM source and be readable only when you stop the processor and read
via JTAG. The log may be available only when you run on the development kit, and
not on the custom hardware. So the first big requirement for the module is this: the
logging interface should be able to handle different underlying implementations.
Second, as you work on one area of the system at a time, you may not need (or want)
messages from other areas. So the requirement is that logging methods should be
subsystem-specific. Of course, you do need to know about catastrophic issues with
other subsystems.
The third requirement is a priority level that will let you debug the minutiae of the
subsystem you are working on without losing critical information from other parts of
the code.

From requirements to an interface
Defining the main interface requirements of a module is often enough, particularly
during design. However, those are a lot of words for something that can be summed
up in one line of code:
     void Log(enum eLogSubSystem sys, enum eLogLevel level, char *msg);
This prototype isn’t fixed in stone and may change as the interface develops, but it
provides a useful shorthand to other developers.
The log levels might include none, information only, debugging, warning, error, and
critical. The subsystems will depend on your system but might include communica‐
tions, display, system, sensor, updating firmware, etc.

Note that the log message takes a string, unlike printf or iostream, which take vari‐
able arguments. You can always use a library to provide similar formatting and even
variable argument functionality if you need to. However, the printf and iostream
family of functions is one of the first things cut from a system that needs more code
space and memory. If that is the case, you’ll probably end up implementing what you
need most on your own, so this interface should have the bare minimum of what
you’ll need. In addition to printing strings, usually you’ll need to be able to print out
at least one number at a time:
    void LogWithNum(enum eLogSubSystem sys, enum eLogLevel level, char *msg,
    int number);
Using the subsystem identifiers and the priority levels allows you to change the debug
options remotely (if the system allows that sort of thing). When debugging some‐
thing, you might start with all subsystems set to a verbose priority level (e.g., debug),
and once a subsystem is cleared, raise its priority level (e.g., error). This way, you get
the messages you want when you want them. So we’ll need an interface to allow this
flexibility on a subsystem and priority level:
    void LogSetOutputLevel(enum eLogSubSystem sys, enum eLogLevel level)
Because the calling code doesn’t care about the underlying implementation, it
shouldn’t have direct access to it. All logging functions should go through this log
interface. Ideally, the underlying interface isn’t shared with any other modules, but
your architecture diagram will tell you if that isn’t true. The log initialization function
should call whatever it depends on, whether it’s to initialize a serial port driver or set
up I/O lines.
Because logging can change the system timing, sometimes the logging system needs
to be turned off globally. This allows you to say with some certainty that the debug‐
ging subsystem is not interfering in any way with any other part of the code.
Although it might not be used often, an on/off switch is an excellent addition to the
interface:
    void LogGlobalOn();
    void LogGlobalOff();

                                   Version Your Code
  At some point, someone will need to know exactly what revision of code is running.
  In the application world, putting a version string in the help/about box is straightfor‐
  ward. In the embedded world, the version should be available via the primary com‐
  munication path (USB, WiFi, UART, or other bus). If possible, this should print out
  automatically on boot. If that is not possible, try to make it available through a query.
  If that is not possible, it should be compiled into its own object file and located at a
  specific address so that it is available for inspection.

     Consider semantic versioning, where the version is in the form A.B.C.:

       • A is the major version (1 byte).
       • B is the minor version (1 byte).
       • C is a build indicator (2 bytes).

     If the build indicator does not increment automatically, you should increment it often
     (numbers are cheap). Depending on your output method and the aesthetics of your
     system, you may want to add an interface to your logging code for displaying the ver‐
     sion properly:
         void LogVersion(struct sFirmwareVersion *v)
     The runtime code is not the only piece of the system that should have a version. Each
     piece that gets built or updated separately should have a version that is part of the
     protocol. For example, if an EEPROM is programmed in manufacturing, it should
     have a version that is checked by the code before the EEPROM is used. Sometimes
     you don’t have the space or processing power to make your system backward compat‐
     ible, but it is critical to make sure all of the moving pieces are currently compatible.

Designs of the other subsystems do not (and should not) depend on the way that log‐
ging is carried out. If you can say that about the interface to your modules (“The
other subsystems do not depend on the way XYZ is carried out; they just call the
given interface”), you’ve successfully designed the interfaces of the system.

State of logging
As you work on the architecture, some areas will be easier to define than others, espe‐
cially if you’ve done something similar before. And as you define interfaces, you may
find that ideas come to you and implementation will be easy (even fun), but only if
you start right now.
Hold back a bit when you get this urge to jump into implementation; try to keep
everything at the same level. If you finish gold-plating one module before defining
the interface to another, you may find that they don’t fit together very well.
Once you’ve gotten a little further with all the modules in the system, it may be time
to consider the state associated with each module. In general, the less state held in the
module, the better (so that your functions do the same things every time you call
them). However, eliminating all state is generally unavoidable (or at least extremely
cumbersome).
Back to our logging module: can you see the internal state needed? The LogGlobalOn
and LogGlobalOff functions set (and clear) a single variable. LogSetOutputLevel
needs to have a level for each subsystem.

You have some options for how to implement these variables. If you want to eliminate
local state, you could put them in a structure (or object) that every function calling
into the logging module would need to have. However, that means passing the log‐
ging object to every function that might possibly need logging and passing it to every
function that has a function that needs to log something.

               You may think passing around the state like that is convoluted. And
               for logging, I’d agree. However, have you ever wondered what is in
               the file handler you get back when your code opens a file? Open
               files embody lots of state information including the current read
               and write positions, a buffer, and a handle to where the file is on
               the drive.

Maybe passing all these parameters around isn’t a good idea. How can every user of
the logging subsystem get access to it? As noted in the “Object-Oriented Program‐
ming in C” sidebar, with a little extra work, even C can create objects that make this
parameter-passing problem simpler. Even in a more object-oriented language, you
could have a module where the functions are globally available and the state is kept in
a local object. However, there is another way to give access to the logging object
without opening up the module completely.

                       Object-Oriented Programming in C
 Why not use C++? Most systems have pretty good embedded C++ compilers. How‐
 ever, there is a lot of code already written in C, and sometimes you need to match
 what is already there. Or maybe you just like C for its speed. That doesn’t mean you
 should leave your object-oriented principles behind.
 One of the most critical ideas to retain is data hiding. In an object-oriented language,
 your object (class) can contain private variables. This is a polite way of saying they
 have internal state that no one else can see. C has different kinds of global variables.
 By scoping a variable appropriately, you can mimic the idea of private variables (and
 even friend objects). First, let’s start with the C equivalent of a public variable,
 declared outside a function, usually at the top of your C file:
      // Anyone can see this global if they have
      // "extern tBoolean gLogOnPublic;"
      tBoolean gLogOnPublic;
 These are the global variables upon which spaghetti code is built. Try to avoid them.
 A private variable is declared with the static keyword and is declared outside a func‐
 tion, usually at the top of your C file:
      // file variables are globals with some encapsulation
      static tBoolean gLogOnPrivate;

                         The static keyword means different things in different places;
                         it’s actually kind of annoying that way. For functions and vari‐
                         ables outside functions, the keyword means “hide me so no
                         other files can see” and limits scope. For variables within a
                         function, the static keyword maintains the value between calls,
                         acting as a global variable whose scope is only the function it is
                         declared in.

     A set of loose variables is a little difficult to track, so consider a structure filled with
     the variables private to a module:
         // contain all the global variables into a structure:
         struct {
           tBoolean logOn;
           enum eLogLevel outputLevel[NUM_LOG_SUBSYSTEMS];
         } sLogStruct;
         static struct sLogStruct gLogData;
     If you want your C code to be more like an object, this structure would not be part of
     the module, but would be created (malloc’d) during initialization (LogInit, for the
     logging system discussed in this chapter) and passed back to the caller like this:
         struct sLogStruct* LogInit(){
           int i;
           struct sLogStruct *logData = malloc(sizeof(*logData));
           logData->logOn = FALSE;
           for (i=0; i < NUM_LOG_SUBSYSTEMS; i++) {
             logData-> outputLevel[i] = eNoLogging;
           }
           return logData;
         }
     The structure can be passed around as an object. Of course, you’d need to add a way
     to free the object; that just requires adding another function to the interface.

Pattern: Singleton
Another way to make sure every part of the system has access to the same log object
is to use another design pattern, this one called the singleton.
When it is important that a class have exactly one instance, the singleton pattern is
commonly seen. In an object-oriented language, the singleton is responsible for inter‐
cepting requests to create new objects in order to preserve its solitary state. The
access to the resource is global (anyone can use it), but all access goes through the
single instance. There is no public constructor. In C++ this would look like:
       class Singleton {
       public:
         static Singleton* GetInstance() {

        if (instance_ == NULL) {
          instance_ = new Singleton;
        }
        return instance_;
      }
    protected:
      Singleton(); // no one can create this except itself

    private:
      static Singleton* instance_; // the one single instance
    };

    // Define the one and only Singleton pointer
    Singleton* Singleton::instance_ = nullptr;
For logging, the singleton lets the whole system have access to the logging subsystem
with only one instantiation. Often when you have a single resource (such as a serial
port) that different parts of the system need to work with, a singleton can come in
handy to avoid conflicts.
In an object-oriented language, singletons also permit lazy allocation and initializa‐
tion so that modules that are never used don’t consume resources.

Sharing private globals
Even in a procedural language like C, the concept of the singleton has a place. The
data-hiding goodness of object-oriented design was noted in “Object-Oriented Pro‐
gramming in C” on page 31. Protecting a module’s variables from modification (and
use) by other files will give you a more robust solution.
However, sometimes you need a back door to the information, either because you
need to reuse the RAM for another purpose (Chapter 8) or because you need to test
the module from an outside agency (Chapter 3). In C++, you might use a friend class
to gain access to otherwise hidden internals.
In C, instead of making the module variables truly global by removing the static
keyword, you can cheat a little and return a pointer to the private variables:
    static struct sLogStruct gLogData;
    struct sLogStruct* LogInternalState() {
      return &gLogData;
    }
This is not a good way to retain encapsulation and keep data hidden, so use it spar‐
ingly. Consider guarding against it during normal development:
    static struct sLogStruct gLogData;
    struct sLogStruct* LogInternalState() {
    #if PRODUCTION
      #error "Internal state of logging protected!"
    #else

         return &gLogData;
       #endif /* PRODUCTION */
       }
As you design your interface and consider the state information that will be part of
your modules, keep in mind that you will also need methods for verifying your
system.

A Sandbox to Play In
That pretty much covers the low- and mid-level boxes, but we still have some algo‐
rithm boxes to think about. One goal of a good architecture is to keep the algorithm
as segregated as possible. The common pattern of model-view-controller (MVC) is an
excellent one to apply here. The purpose of the pattern is to isolate the gooey center
of the application from the user interface so they can be developed and tested
independently.
Usually MVC is used to allow different displays, interfaces, and platform implementa‐
tions. However, it can also be used to allow the application and algorithms to be
developed separately from the hardware. In this pattern, the view is the interface to
the user, both input and output. In our device, the user might not be a person; it
could be hardware sensors (input) and a screen (output). In fact, if you have a system
without a screen but that sends data over a network, the view may have no visual
aspect, but it is still a part of the system as the form of input and output. The model is
the domain-specific data and logic. This is the part that takes raw data from the input
and creates something useful, often using the algorithm that makes your product spe‐
cial. The controller is the glue that works between the model and the view: it handles
how to get the input to the model for processing and the data from the model for
display or outside communication. There are standard ways for these three elements
to interact, but for now it is enough to understand the separation of functions.

                       Different Aspects of the Model-View-Controller
     The good news about MVC is that nearly everyone agrees that there are three parts to
     it. The bad news is that this might be the only thing everybody agrees on.
     The model holds the data, state, and application logic. If you are building a weather
     station, the model has the temperature monitoring code and predictive models. For
     an MP3 player, the model consists of a database of music and the codec necessary to
     play it.
     Traditionally thought of in contexts where there is a screen, the view represents the
     display-handling functions. The view is what the user sees of the model. A view could
     be a picture of a sun or a detailed readout of the statistics from a weather service.
     Those are both views of the same information.

 The controller is the somewhat nebulous cloud that sits between (or near) the model
 and view to help them work together. The goal of the controller is to make the view
 and model independent of each other so that each can be reused. For that MP3 player,
 your company may want a consistent interface even when your audio-playing hard‐
 ware is revamped. Or maybe it is the same hardware but marketing wants to make the
 system look more child-friendly. How can you achieve both of these, while touching
 the smallest amount of code? The controller enables the model/view separation by
 providing services such as translating a user button press into an event for the model.
 Figure 2-9 shows a basic interpretation of MVC and some common variants. There
 are a lot of different ways to put it together, some of them seemingly contradictory.
 The term “MVC” is kind of like the adjective “sanguine,” which can mean either mur‐
 derous or cheerfully optimistic. You may need some context clues to know which it is,
 but either way, you are probably talking about someone’s mood.

Figure 2-9. Overview of the model-view-controller pattern

There is another way to use the MVC pattern, which serves as a valuable way to
develop and verify algorithms for embedded systems: use a virtual box, or sandbox.
The more complex the algorithm, the more this is a necessity.
If you can make all of the inputs to an algorithm’s box and put them through a single
interface, you can switch back and forth between a file on a PC and the actual system.

                                                                   A Sandbox to Play In   |   35
Similarly, if you can redirect the output of the algorithm to a file, you can test the
algorithm on a PC (where the debugging environment may be a lot better than an
embedded system), and rerun the same data over and over again until any anomalous
behavior can be isolated and fixed. This is a great way to do regression tests to verify
that minor algorithm changes don’t have unforeseen side effects.
In the sandbox environment, your files and the way you read the data in are the view
part of MVC. The algorithm you are testing is the model, and this shouldn’t change.
The controller is the part that changes when you put the algorithm on a PC. Consider
an MP3 player (Figure 2-10) and what the MVC diagram might look like with a sand‐
box. Note that both the view and controller will have relatively strict APIs because
you will be replacing those as you move from virtual device to actual device.

Figure 2-10. Model-view-controller in a sandbox

Your input view file might be like a movie script, directing the sandbox to act as the
user might. The first field is a time when the second field, a method in your system, is
fired:
     Time, Action, Variable arguments // comment
     00:00.00, PowerOnClean          // do all of the initialization
     00:01.00, PlayPressed           // no action, no song loaded
     00:02.00, Search, "Still Alive" // expect list back based on available matches
     00:02.50, PlayPressed           // expect song to be played

The output file can look however you want. For instance, you might have multiple
output files, one to describe the state and the changes sent to the user interface from
the controller and the model and another one to output what the model would send
to the digital-to-analog converter (DAC). The first output file might look like this:
    Time, Subsystem, Log message
    00:00.01, System, Initialization: sandbox version 1.3.45
    00:01.02, Controller, Minor error: no song loaded
    00:02.02, Controller, 4 songs found for "Still Alive" search, selecting ID 0x1234
    00:02.51, Controller, Loading player class to play ID 0x1234
Again, you get to define the format so that it meets your needs (which will probably
change). For instance, if you have a bug where the player plays the wrong song, the
sandbox could output the song ID in every line.
The Model-View-Controller here is a very high-level pattern, specifically a system-
level pattern. Once you look at breaking up the system this way, you might find that it
has fractal qualities. For instance, what if you only want to be able to test the code
that reads a file from the memory and outputs it to a DAC? The filename and the
resulting bitstream of information that would go to the DAC could be considered the
view (which consists of inputs and outputs, even if no humans are involved), the logic
and data necessary to convert the file would be the model, and the file handler may be
the controller since that would have to change between platforms.
With this idea of separation and sandboxing in mind, take a look at the architecture
drawings and see how many inputs the algorithm has. If there is more than one, does
it make sense to have a special interface object? Sometimes it is better to have multi‐
ple files to represent multiple things going on. Looking further into the diagrams,
does it make sense to incorporate the sandbox at a lower level than just the product
feature algorithms? This expands your model and, more importantly, lets you test
more of your code in a controlled environment.
Your sandbox could be expensive to develop, so you may not want to start implemen‐
tation immediately. In particular, your sandbox may have different sizes for your vari‐
ables and its compiler potentially could act differently, so you may want to hold off
building it unless your algorithms are complex or your hardware is a long time in
coming. There is a trade-off between time to develop the sandbox and its extraordi‐
nary powers of debuggability and testability. But identifying how to get to a sandbox
from the design and keeping it in mind as you develop your architecture will give you
leeway for when things go wrong.

                                                                 A Sandbox to Play In   |   37
Back to the Drawing Board
I asked you to make four sketches of your system. Remember, sketches are cheap! It’s
easy to try out different ideas and different options before committing. You can
change sketches much more easily than you can change a system’s worth of source
code.
If you look at your sketches with a mind full of encapsulation, data hiding, interfaces,
and design patterns, what do you see? The drawings I’ve chosen are intended to give
you different perspectives about the system. Together they will ask questions about
the architecture so you think about issues earlier in the process, during design instead
of development.
No design will remain static. The goal of design is to understand things from the sys‐
tem perspective. This doesn’t mean you need to update your diagrams with every
change. Some of the diagrams may become part of the documentation and need to be
maintained, but these sketches are for you, to improve your understanding of the sys‐
tem and your ability to communicate with your team.
The context diagram is a you-are-here map that keeps you on track for what you are
supposed to be doing. This is likely to be useful when talking about what the system
requirements are.
The block diagram shows the pieces of the hardware and software. The available
resources are shown along with a box-sized description of how they are intended to
be used. The whole-picture view helps with identifying the tasks that will need to be
accomplished. I recommend starting out with nonspecific component boxes; the
chips these represent will change, so how can you harden your code against those
changes? The block diagram is the most common drawing and will likely be very use‐
ful when talking to colleagues.
The organigram shows where control flows and where there will be conflicts as multi‐
ple subsystems try to access the same resources. It can help with encapsulating mod‐
ules that don’t need to talk to each other (or that do need to talk to each other but
shouldn’t do so directly). This one may be hard to get your head around, but I find
the manager relationship helps me think about it: who is bossing this component
around? This diagram is most useful for understanding the details of the system and
debugging weird errors.
The layering diagram shows how modules can be grouped to provide interfaces and
abstraction layers. It helps with identifying what information can be hidden. It can
also identify when modules are too big and need to be broken apart. This view can
help you reduce complexity and reuse code (or understand those deep vendor-
provided hardware abstraction layers).

Each of these diagrams were presented at the whole-system level. However, systems
are made of subsystems, which are made of subsystems. Making the high-level dia‐
gram too detailed is a good way to lose the whole-system picture. Sometimes a large
box needs to be moved to a new page for more detail (and more thought as you
design and understand this subsystem).
If diagramming is useful but my diagrams don’t work for you, look up the C4 model
for visualizing software architecture or the 4+1 architectural view model—both are
excellent alternatives. For a drawing program, when I’m ready to formalize my
sketches, I like to use mermaid.live, because it is based on written text and can be put
into most Markdown documents.

Further Reading
This chapter touched on a few of the many design patterns. The rest of the book will
as well, but this is a book about embedded systems, not about design patterns. Think
about exploring one of these to learn more about standard software patterns:

  • Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. This is the origi‐
    nal, seminal work on design patterns. It uses C++ as the reference language.
  • Head First Design Patterns. Using Java as the example language, this book gives
    great examples with an engaging style.
  • Search in Wikipedia for “software design patterns.”

I’ve given an overview of architecture and sketching it out, but if your system is more
complex or your diagrams need to become part of a safety certification process, there
are other good resources:

  • Documenting Software Architectures by Len Bass, et al. (Addison-Wesley) is an
    excellent book that covers different architectural styles and the corresponding
    visual models.
  • Real-Time Software Design for Embedded Systems by Hassan Gomaa (Cambridge
    University Press) discusses different models and diagrams you can create to
    sketch out your system.

While we’ll be looking more at developing a module later, if you want to jump ahead
or are interested in going beyond the short logging code I put here, take a look at
Embedded Artistry’s Arduino Logging Library. The author goes through the process
of development and ends up with code you can use. (While you are there, click the
Welcome link because Embedded Artistry has a wealth of code and information.)

                                                                     Further Reading   |   39
                           Interview Question: Create an Architecture
     Describe the architecture for this [pick an object in the room].
     Looking around an interviewing area for a suitable object is usually fairly dicey
     because such places are devoid of most interesting things. The conference phone gets
     picked a lot because it is sometimes the most complicated system in the room.
     Another good target is the projector.
     When asking this question, I want to know that the candidate can break a problem
     down into pieces. I want to see the process as they mentally deconstruct an object. In
     general, starting with the inputs and outputs is a safe bet. For a conference phone, the
     speaker and the display are outputs; the buttons and the microphone are inputs. I like
     to see these as boxes on a piece of paper. A candidate shouldn’t be afraid to pick up
     the object and see the connections it has. Those are inputs and outputs as well. Once
     they have the physical hardware down, they can start making connections by asking
     (themself) how each component works: how does the power button work, and how
     might the software interface to it? How does the microphone work, and what does it
     imply about other pieces of the system (e.g., is there an analog-to-digital converter)?
     A candidate gets points for mentioning good software design practices. Calling the
     boxes drivers for the lowest level and objects for the next level is a good start. It is also
     good to hear some noises about parts of the system that might be reused in a future
     phone and how to keep them encapsulated.
     I expect them to ask questions about specific features or possible design goals (such as
     cost). However, they get a lot of latitude to make up the details. Want to talk about
     networking? Pretend it is a voice over internet protocol (VoIP) phone. Want to skip
     that entirely? Focus instead on how it might store numbers in a mini-database or
     linked list. I’m happy when they talk about things they are interested in, particularly
     areas that I’ve failed to ask about in other parts of the interview.
     In that same vein, although I want to see a good overview of the whole system, I don’t
     mind if a candidate chooses to dig deep into one area. This question gives a lot of
     freedom to expound on how their particular experience would help them design a
     phone. When I ask a question, I don’t mind if they admit some ignorance and talks
     about something they know better.
     Asking an interviewee about architecture is not about getting perfect technical details.
     It is crucial to draw something, even if it is only mildly legible. The intent of the ques‐
     tion is about the candidate showing enthusiasm for problem solving and effectively
     communicating their ideas.

