                                                                           CHAPTER 3
              Getting Your Hands on the Hardware

It can be tough to start working with embedded systems. Most software engineers
need a crash course in electrical engineering, and most electrical engineers need a
crash course in software design. Working closely with a member of the opposite dis‐
cipline will make getting into embedded systems much easier. Some of my best
friends are electrical engineers.
If you’ve never been through a development cycle that includes hardware, it can be a
bit daunting to try to intuit your roles and responsibilities. In this chapter, I’ll start
out with an overview of how a project usually flows. Then I’ll give you some more
detailed advice on the skills you need to hold up your end of the team, including:

  • Reading a datasheet
  • Getting to know a new processor
  • Unraveling a schematic
  • Creating your own debugging toolbox
  • Testing the hardware (and software)

Hardware/Software Integration
The product starts out as an idea or a need to be filled. Someone makes a high-level
product design based on features, cost, and time to market. At this point, a schedule
is usually created to show the major milestones and activities (see Figure 3-1).

Figure 3-1. Ideal project schedule example

Ideal Project Flow
This sort of schedule is based on the engineering managers (or tech leads) talking
about the goals and then estimating the time and resources the project will take. This
is only part of the schedule; it doesn’t include the mechanical engineering, server-side
software, marketing launch, or a host of other activities. On the other hand, this is
likely the part of the schedule that includes hardware and embedded software, so it
likely shows your work and that of your immediate team.
The schedule in Figure 3-1 shows a waterfall type of development, where one activity
flows into the next. It makes sense that a schematic review is necessary before the
boards get created. Of course the boards are created before embedded software devel‐
opment has an alpha release.
But this won’t be the actual schedule. It can be quite frustrating to spend a lot of time
creating such a masterpiece only to have it be out of date before it is finished. The
goal of planning is to identify dependencies. If it takes 12 weeks to make the boards
and 14 weeks to create the embedded software, then the whole project can be done in

14 weeks, right? Well, no: the software likely needs more time with the completed
boards. But hopefully the whole project doesn’t need 26 weeks (12 + 14).
A large part of putting together a schedule is figuring out which tasks can be done in
parallel versus those that must be done after hardware is complete. Too often the
focus is on the end date, the all-important ship date, but there is more information in
the schedule: dependencies, human resource needs, and when cash needs to be spent
(aside from salaries).
Of course, no matter how much scheduling and planning you do, nothing ever goes
according to plan. There will be overruns and backtracking. The act of planning helps
you figure out where you need to be careful and which dependencies matter in the
long run (and which don’t).
Sadly, embedded software is often at the end, trying to make up for delays due to
changing requirements or hardware fixes. You develop with partial hardware, with
prototype boards, and will make good bring-up tests so you’ll be ready when the
boards finally arrive.
You may develop using Agile methods instead of waterfall, allowing for more and
faster releases. But at some level, when creating physical, shippable products, you will
likely need to look into the pieces your firmware depends upon and how they get
developed.

Hardware Design
Once they know what they are building, the hardware team goes through datasheets
and reference designs to choose components, ideally consulting the embedded soft‐
ware team. Often development kits are purchased for the riskiest parts of the system,
usually the processor and the least-understood peripherals (more on processors and
peripherals in a bit).
The hardware team creates schematics, while the software team works on the devel‐
opment boards. It may seem like the hardware team is taking weeks (or months) to
make a drawing, but most of that time is spent wading through datasheets to find a
component that does what it needs to for the product, at the right price, in the correct
physical dimensions, with a good temperature range, and so on. During that time, the
embedded software team is finding (or building) a toolchain with compiler and
debugger, creating a debugging subsystem, trying out a few peripherals, and possibly
building a sandbox for testing algorithms.
Schematics are entered using a schematic capture program (aka CAD package). These
programs are often expensive to license and cumbersome to use, so the hardware
engineer will usually generate a PDF schematic at checkpoints or reviews for your
use. Although you should take the time to review the whole schematic (described in
“Reading a Schematic” on page 58), the part that has the largest impact on you is the

                                                          Hardware/Software Integration   |   43
processor and its view of the system. Because hardware engineers understand that,
most will generate an I/O map that describes the connection attached to each pin of
the processor. (Chapter 4 suggests taking the I/O map and making a header file
from it.)
The schematic shows the electrical connections but it doesn’t specify exactly which
parts need to be on the board. It may show a header with ten pins, but for the boards
to be assembled, the manufacturer will need to know exactly what kind of header,
usually with a link to a datasheet specifying everything about it. All of the compo‐
nents are on the bill of materials (BOM), something that is started during schematic
capture.
Once the schematic is complete (and the development kits have shown that the pro‐
cessor and risky peripherals are probably suitable), the board can be laid out. In lay‐
out, the connections on the schematic are made into a drawing of physical traces on a
board, connecting each component as it is in the schematic.

                     Board layout is often a specialized skill, different from electrical
                     engineering, so don’t be surprised if someone other than your
                     hardware engineer does the board layout.

After layout, the board goes to fabrication (fab), where the printed circuit boards
(PCBs) are built. Then they get assembled with all of their components. Gathering the
items on the BOM so you can start assembly is called putting together the kits. Get‐
ting the parts with long lead times can make it difficult to create a complete kit, which
delays assembly. An assembled board is called a PCBA (printed circuit board assem‐
bly), or just a PCA, which is what will sit on your desk.
When the schematic is done and the layout has started, the primary task for the
embedded software team is to define the hardware tests and get them written while
the boards are being created. Working on the user-facing code may seem more pro‐
ductive, but when you get the boards back from fabrication, you won’t be able to
make progress on the software until you bring them up. The hardware tests will not
only make the bring-up smoother, but they also will make the system more stable for
development (and production). As you work on the hardware tests, ask your electri‐
cal engineer which parts are the riskiest. Prioritize development for the tests for those
subsystems (and try them out on a development kit, if you can).
When the boards come back, the hardware engineer will power them on to verify
there aren’t power issues, possibly verifying other purely hardware subsystems. Then
you get a board (finally!) and bring-up starts.

Board Bring-Up
This can be a fun time, one where you are learning from an engineer whose skill set is
different from yours. Or it can be a shout-fest where each team accuses the other of
incompetence and maliciousness. Your call.
The board you receive may or may not be full of bugs. Electrical engineers don’t have
an opportunity to compile their code, try it out, make a change, and recompile. Mak‐
ing a board is not a process with lots of iterations. Remember that people make mis‐
takes, and the more fluffheaded the mistake, the more likely it will take an eternity to
find and fix (what was the longest time you ever spent debugging an error that turned
out to be a typo?).
Don’t be afraid to ask questions, though, or to ask for help finding your problem (yes,
phrase it that way). An electrical engineer sitting with you might be what you need to
see what is going wrong.
Finding a hardware (or software) bug at an early stage of design is like getting a gift.
The earlier you find a bug, the happier you’ll be. Your product team’s bugs reflect
upon you, so be willing to give your time and coding skills to unravel a problem. It
isn’t just polite and professional; it is a necessary part of being on a team. If there is a
geographic or organizational separation and getting the hardware engineer’s help
requires leaping through hoops, consider some back-channel communications (and
trade in lunches). It might make you poor in the short term, but you’ll be a hero for
getting things done, and your long-term outlook will be good.

                Don’t be embarrassed when someone points out a bug; be grateful.
                If that person is on your team or in your company, that bug didn’t
                get out to the field where it could be seen by customers.

To make bring-up easier on both yourself and your hardware engineer, first make
each component individually testable. If you don’t have enough code space, make
another software subproject for the hardware test code (but share the underlying
modules as much as possible).
Second, when you get the PCBA, start on the lowest-level pieces, at the smallest steps
possible. For example, don’t try out your fancy motor controller software. Instead, set
an I/O device to go on for a short time, and hook up an LED to make sure it flashes.
Then (still taking things one step at a time), do the minimum necessary to make sure
the motor moves (or at least twitches).
Finally, make your tools independent of you being present to run them, so that some‐
one else is able to reproduce an issue. Once an issue is reproducible, even if the cause
isn’t certain, fixes can be tried. (Sometimes the fix will explain the cause.) The time

                                                             Hardware/Software Integration   |   45
spent writing good tests will pay dividends. There is a good chance that this hardware
verification code will be around for a while, and you’ll probably want it again when
the next set of boards comes back. Also, these tests tend to evolve into manufacturing
tests used to check the board’s functionality during production.
How do you know what tests need to be written? It starts with an in-depth knowledge
of the processor and peripherals. That leads to the topic of reading a datasheet.

Reading a Datasheet
With the pressure to get products released, it can be tough to slow down enough to
read the component datasheets, manuals, and application notes. Worse, it can feel like
you’ve read them (because you’ve turned all the pages), but nothing sticks, because it
is a foreign language. When the code doesn’t work, you’re tempted to complain that
the hardware is broken.
If you are a software engineer, consider each chip as a separate software library. Think
of all the effort you would need to put into learning a software package (Qt, OpenCV,
Zephyr, Unity, TensorFlow, etc.). That is about how long it will take to become famil‐
iar with your processor and its peripherals. The processors will even have methods of
talking to the peripherals that are somewhat like APIs. As with libraries, you can
often get away with reading only a subset of the documentation—but you are better
off knowing which subset is the most important one for you before you end up down
a rabbit hole.
Datasheets are the API manuals for peripherals. Make sure you have the latest version
of your datasheet (check the manufacturer’s site and do an online search just to be
sure) before I let you in on the secrets of what to read twice and what to ignore until
you need it.

                     Unfortunately, some manufacturers release their datasheets only
                     under NDA, so their websites contain only an overview or sum‐
                     mary of their product.

Hardware components are described by their datasheets. Datasheets can be intimidat‐
ing; they are packed densely with information. Reading datasheets is an art, one that
requires experience and patience. The first thing to know about datasheets is that
they aren’t really written for you. They are written for an electrical engineer, more
precisely for an electrical engineer who is already familiar with the component or its
close cousin.

In some ways, reading a datasheet is like coming into the middle of a technical con‐
versation. Take a look at Figure 3-2, which resembles a real datasheet, even though it’s
not a component you’re likely to interface with in your software (it is a prehistoric
gait controller for leg actuators).
Near the top of each datasheet is an overview or feature list. This is the summary of
the chip, but if you haven’t already used a component with a datasheet that is 85% the
same as this one, the overview isn’t likely to be very helpful. On the other hand, once
you have used three or four analog triceratops (or accelerometers, or whatever you
are really looking at), you can just read the overview of the next one and get an idea
of how this chip is the same and different from your previous experience. If the data‐
sheet took the time to explain everything a newcomer might want to know, each one
would be a book (and most would have the same information). Additionally, it isn’t
the newcomers who buy components in volume; it is the experienced engineers who
are already familiar with the devices.

Figure 3-2. Top of the Analog Triceratops datasheet from Dino Industries

So I say skip the overview header (or at least come back to it later).
I like the functional diagrams that are often on the first page, but they are a lot like
the overview. If you don’t know what you are looking for, the block diagram probably
isn’t going to enlighten you. So the place to start is the description. This usually cov‐
ers about half the first page, maybe extending a little on to the second page.
The description is not the place to read a few words and skip to the next paragraph.
The text is dense and probably less than a page long. Read this section thoroughly.
Read it aloud, underline the important information (which could be most of the
information), or try to explain it to someone else (I keep a teddy bear in my office for
this purpose, but some people use their EEs).

Datasheet Sections You Need When Things Go Wrong
After the first page, the order of information in each datasheet varies. And not all
datasheets have all sections. Nonetheless, you don’t want to scrutinize sections that
won’t offer anything to help your software. Save time and mental fatigue by skipping
over the absolute maximum ratings, recommended operating conditions, electrical
characteristics, packaging information, layout, and mechanical considerations.
The hardware team has already looked at that part of the sheet; trust them to do their
jobs.
Although you can skip the following sections now, remember that these sections
exist. You may need them when things go wrong, when you have to pull out an oscil‐
loscope and figure out why the driver doesn’t work, or (worse) when the part seems
to be working but not as advertised. Note that these sections exist, but you can come
back to them when you need them; they are safe to ignore on the first pass.

Pinout for each type of package available
You’ll need to know the pinout if you have to probe the chip during debugging. Ide‐
ally, this won’t be important, because your software will work and you won’t need to
probe the chip.
The pin configuration shows some pin names with bars over them (Figure 3-3).

Figure 3-3. Analog Triceratops pinout

The bars indicate that these pins are active low, meaning that they are on when the
voltage is low. In the pin description, active low pins have a slash before the name.
You may also see other things to indicate active low signals. If most of your pins have
a NAME, look for a modifier that puts the name in the format nNAME, #NAME, _NAME,

NAME*, NAME_N, etc. Basically, if it has a modifier near the name, look to see whether it
is active low, which should be noted in the pin descriptions section.
If this is all brand new to you, consider picking up a beginner’s guide to electronics,
such as one of those listed in “Further Reading” on page 84.

Pin descriptions
This is a table that looks like Figure 3-4. Come back when you need this information,
possibly as you look to see whether the lines should be active low or as you are trying
to make your oscilloscope show the same image as the datasheet’s timing diagrams.

Figure 3-4. Analog Triceratops pin descriptions

Performance characteristics
These tables and graphs, describing exactly what the component does, offer too much
detailed information for your first reading. However, when your component commu‐
nicates but doesn’t work, the performance characteristics can help you determine
whether there might be a reason (e.g., the part is rated to work in the range 0°C–
70°C, but it’s right next to your extremely warm processor, or the peripheral works
when the input voltage is just right but falls off in accuracy when the input gets a little
outside the specified range).

Sample schematics
Sometimes you get driver code, it works as you need it to, and you don’t end up
changing much, if anything. The sample schematics are the electrical engineering ver‐
sion of driver code. When your part is acting up, it can be reassuring to see that the
sample schematics are similar to your schematics. However, as with vendor-provided
driver code, there are lots of excellent reasons why the actual implementation doesn’t
match the sample implementation. If you are having trouble with a part and the
schematic doesn’t match, ask your electrical engineer about the differences. It may be
nothing, but it could be important.

Datasheet Sections for Software Developers
Eventually, possibly halfway through the datasheet, you will get to some text
(Figure 3-5). This could be titled “Application Information” or “Theory of Operation.”
Or possibly the datasheet just switches from tables and graphs to text and diagrams.
This is the part you need to start reading. It is fine to start by skimming this to see
where the information you need is located, but eventually you will really need to read
it from start to end. As a bonus, the text there may link to application notes and user
manuals of value. Read through the datasheet, considering how you’ll need to imple‐
ment the driver for your system. How does it communicate? How does it need to be
initialized? What does your software need to do to use the part effectively? Are there
strict timing requirements, and how can your processor handle them?

Figure 3-5. Analog Triceratops theory of operation

As you read through the datasheet, mark areas that may make an impact on your
code so you can return to them. Timing diagrams are good places to stop and catch
your breath (Figure 3-6). Try to relate those to the text and to your intended imple‐
mentation. More information on timing diagrams is provided in the sidebar “How
Timing Diagrams Help Software Developers” on page 52.
In addition to making sure you have the latest datasheet for your component, check
the manufacturer’s web page for errata, which provide corrections to any errors in the
datasheet. Search the web page for the part number and the word “errata”
(Figure 3-7). Errata can refer to errors in the datasheet or errors in the part. Most
parts have some sort of errata.

                     Datasheets can have revisions, and components can have revisions.
                     Get the latest datasheet for the component revision you are using.

Figure 3-6. Analog Triceratops timing diagrams

When you are done, if you are very good or very lucky, you will have the information
you need to use the chip. Generally, most people will start writing the driver for the
chip and spend time re-reading parts as they write the interface to the chip, then the
communication method, then finally actually use the chip. Reading datasheets is a
race where the tortoise definitely wins over the hare.
Once you are all done with the driver and it is working, read through the feature
summary at the top of the datasheet because now you have conquered this type of
component and can better understand the summary. Even so, when you implement
something similar, you’ll probably still need to read parts of the datasheet, but it will
be simpler and you’ll get a much better overview from the summary on the data‐
sheet’s front page.

Figure 3-7. Analog Triceratops errata

Other resources may also be available as you work with peripherals:

     • If the chip has a user manual, be sure to look at that.
     • Application notes often have specific use cases that may be of interest. These
       often have vendor example code associated with them. Also look for a vendor
       code repository.
     • Search the part on GitHub or the web. Example code from other folks using the
       part can show you what you should be doing.

Look around before diving in; the answer to something you don’t know yet may be
out there.

                     How Timing Diagrams Help Software Developers
     Timing diagrams show the relationship between transitions. Some transitions may be
     on the same signal, or the timing diagram may show the relationship between transi‐
     tions on different signals. For instance, alternating states of the hands (HND1 and
     HND2) in normal mode at the top of Figure 3-6 show that one hand is raised shortly
     after the other is put down. When approaching a timing diagram, start on the left side
     with the signal name. Time advances from left to right.
     Most timing diagrams focus on the digital states, showing you when a signal is high
     or low (remember to check the name for modifiers that indicate a signal is active
     low). Some diagrams include a ramp (such as hands and feet in the boot sequence in
     Figure 3-6) to show you when the signal is in a transitory state. You may also see

  signals that are both high and low (such as the horn in the boot sequence of
  Figure 3-6); these indicate the signal is in an indeterminate logical state (for output)
  or isn’t monitored (for input).
  The important time characteristics are highlighted with lines with arrows. These are
  usually specified in detail in a table. Also look for an indication of signal ordering
  (often shown with dashed lines) and causal relationships (usually arrows from one
  signal to another). Finally, footnotes in the diagram often contain critical
  information.

Evaluating Components Using the Datasheet
It may seem odd to have this section about evaluating a component after its imple‐
mentation. That isn’t the way it goes in projects. However, it is the way it goes in engi‐
neering life. Generally, before you get to the point where you choose pieces of the
system, you have to cut your teeth on implementing pieces of systems designed by
other people. So evaluating a component is a more advanced skill than reading the
datasheet, a skill that electrical engineers generally develop before software engineers.
When you are evaluating a component, your goal is to quickly eliminate components
that won’t work. Don’t waste valuable time determining precisely how a component
does feature X if the component can’t be used because it requires 120 V AC and your
system has 5 V of DC. Start off with a list of must-haves and a list of wants. Then
you’ll want to generate your potential pool of parts that require further investigation.
Before you get too deep into that investigation, let’s talk about the things that data‐
sheets don’t have. They usually don’t have prices, because those depend on many fac‐
tors, especially how many you plan to order. And datasheets don’t have lead times, so
be careful about designing around the perfect part; it may be available only after a six-
month wait. Unless you are ordering online, you’ll need to talk to your vendor or
distributor.
Talking with your vendor is a good opportunity to ask whether they have any guid‐
ance for using the part, initialization code, application notes, whitepapers, forums, or
anything that might get you a little further along. Vendors recognize that these can be
selling points, and their application engineers are generally willing to help. Distribu‐
tors might even help you compare and contrast the different options available to you.

                Even when working with a distributor, DigiKey is often a great way
                to get some idea of price and lead times.

Back to the datasheet. Some of those information-dense sections previously skipped
are now important. Start with the absolute maximum ratings and electrical character‐
istics (see Figure 3-8). If they don’t match (or exceed) your criteria, set the datasheet
aside. The present goal is to wade through the pile of datasheets quickly; if a part
doesn’t meet your basic criteria, note where it fails and go on. (Keeping notes is use‐
ful; otherwise, you may end up rejecting the same datasheet repeatedly.) You may
want to prioritize the datasheets by how far out of range they are. If you end up
without any datasheets that meet your high standards, you can recheck the closest
ones to see whether they can be made to work.
Once the basic electrical and mechanical needs are met, the next step is to consider
the typical characteristics, determining whether the part is what you need. I can’t help
you much with specifics, as they depend on your system’s needs and the particular
component. Some common questions at this level are about your functional parame‐
ters: does the component go fast enough? Does the output meet or exceed that
required by your system? In a sensor, is the noise acceptable?

Figure 3-8. Analog Triceratops absolute maximum ratings

Once you have two or three datasheets that pass the first round of checking, delve
deeper into them. If there is an application section, that is a good place to start. Are
any of these applications similar to yours? If so, carry on. If not, worry a bit. It is
probably all right to be the first to use a peripheral in a particular way, but if the part
is directed particularly to underwater sensor networks and you want to use it in your
supersmart toaster, you might want to find out why they’ve defined the application so
narrowly. More seriously, there may be a reason why the suggested applications don’t
cover all uses. For example, chips directed toward automotive use may not be avail‐
able in small quantities. The goal of the datasheet is to sell things to people already
using similar things, so there may be a good reason for a limited scope.

Next, look at the performance characteristics and determine whether they meet your
needs. Often you’ll find new requirements while reading this section, such as realiz‐
ing your system should have the temperature response of part A, the supply voltage
response of part B, and the noise resistance of part C. Collect these into the criteria,
and eliminate the ones that don’t meet your needs (but also prioritize the criteria so
you don’t paint yourself into a corner).
At this point, you should have at least two but no more than four datasheets per part.
If you have more than four, ask around to see whether one vendor has a better repu‐
tation in your purchasing department, shorter lead times, or better prices. You may
need to come back to your extras, but select four that seem good.
If you have eliminated all of your datasheets or you have only one, don’t stop there. It
doesn’t mean that everything is unusable (or that only one is usable). Instead, it may
mean that your criteria are too strict and you’ll have to learn more about the options
available to you. So choose the two best components, even if one or both fail your
most rigorous standards.
For each remaining datasheet, you want to figure out the tricky pieces of the imple‐
mentation and see how well the component will fare in your system. This is where
some experience dealing with similar parts is useful. You want to read the datasheet
as though you were going to implement the code. In fact, if you don’t have experience
with something pretty similar, you may want to type up some code to make it real. If
you can prototype the parts with actual hardware, great! If not, you can still do a
mental prototype, going through the steps of implementation and estimating what
will happen.
Even though you will be doing this for two to four parts and probably using only one
of them, this will give you a jump start on your code when the part is finally chosen.
Such in-depth analysis takes a significant amount of time but reduces the risk of the
part not working. How far you take your prototype is up to you (and your schedule).
If you still have multiple choices, look at the family of the component. If you run out
of something (space, pins, or range), is there a pin-for-pin compatible part in the
same family (ideally with the same software interface)? Having headroom can be very
handy.
Finally, having selected the component, the feature summary is an exercise in compa‐
rative literature. Now that you have become that person who has already read several
datasheets for similar components, the overview that starts the datasheet is for you. If
you have any remaining datasheets to evaluate, start there. Compare the ones you’ve
done against the new ones to get a quick feel for what each chip does and how differ‐
ent parameters interact (e.g., faster speed likely will be proportional to higher cost).

Your Processor Is a Language
The most important component is the one your software runs on: your processor.
Some vendors (ST, TI, Microchip, NXP, and so on) use a common core (i.e., Arm
Cortex-M4F). The vendors provide different on-chip peripherals. How your code
interfaces with timers or communication methods will change. Sharing a core will
make the change less difficult than moving between a tiny 8-bit processor and a
mighty 64-bit processor, but you should expect differences.
As you get to know a new processor, expect that it will take almost the same level of
effort as if you were learning a new programming language. And, like learning a lan‐
guage, if you’ve already worked with something similar, it will be simpler to learn the
new one. As you learn several programming languages or several processors, you will
find that learning the new ones becomes easier and easier.
Although this metaphor gives you an idea of the scale of information you’ll need to
assimilate, the processor itself is really more like a large library with an odd interface.
Talking to the hardware is a misnomer. Your software is actually talking to the pro‐
cessor software through special interfaces called registers, which I’ll cover in more
detail in Chapter 4. Registers are like keywords in a language. You generally get to
know a few (if, else, while), and then later you get to know a few more (enum, do,
sizeof), and finally you become an expert (static, volatile, union).
The amount of documentation for a processor scales with the processor complexity.
Your primary goal is to learn what you need to get things accomplished. With a flood
of information available, you’ll need to determine which pieces of documentation get
your valuable time and attention. Some documents to look for include:
User Manual (or User Guide or Reference Manual) from the processor vendor
    Often voluminous, the user manual provides most of what you’ll need to know.
    Reading the introduction will help you get to know the processor’s capabilities
    (e.g., how many timers it has and its basic memory structure).

                          Why get the user manual from the vendor? Take for example
                          the STM32F103 processor, which uses an Arm Cortex-M3
                          core. You don’t want to read the Arm user manual if you are
                          using the F103, because 88% of the information in the Arm
                          manual is extraneous, 10% will be in the STM32F10x manual,
                          and the last few percent you probably won’t ever need.

     Often these are written for families of processors, so if you want to use an
     STM32F103, you’ll need to get an STM32F10x manual and look for the notes
     that differentiate the processors. Once you read the introduction, you’ll probably

    want to skip to the parts that will be on your system. Each chapter usually has a
    helpful introduction of its own before moving into gritty details.
    The user manual will have the information you need to work with the chip,
    though it may not help you get a system up and working.
Getting Started Guide or User Manual for the development kit
    A development kit (dev kit) is often the place to start when working with a new
    processor. Using a dev kit lets you set up your compiler and debugger with confi‐
    dence, before custom hardware comes in (and gives you something to compare
    against if your hardware doesn’t work immediately). The dev kit is generally a
    sales tool for the processor, so it isn’t too expensive and tends to have excellent
    documentation for setting the system up from scratch. The kit recommends
    compilers, debuggers, and necessary hardware, and even shows you how to con‐
    nect all the cables. The development kit documentation is intended to be an ori‐
    entation for programmers, so even if you don’t purchase a kit, the associated
    documentation may help orient you to the processor’s ecosystem.
Getting Started Guide (slides)
    This document describes how to get started using the processor for both electri‐
    cal engineers and software developers. Although interesting and fast to read, this
    slide deck generally won’t answer questions about how to use the processor. It
    can be helpful when evaluating a processor for use in a project, as it does discuss
    what the processor is and common applications. Also, it might give you an idea
    of what dev kits are available.
Application Notes (App Notes)
   That complicated thing you want to do with your system? It is quite possible that
   someone else has done it. Or even better, the vendor got tired of answering the
   same questions about how to do it, so they wrote up a description. App notes are
   like cheat codes for development. While the user manual will tell you everything
   about the processor, application notes are usually more tactical, describing how
   to accomplish different goals. They often have code associated with them.
Wikis and forums
   While the main Wikipedia page for your processor probably won’t have enough
   information to help you get code written, it may give you a high-level overview
   (though usually the user manual’s introduction is more useful to you). The Wiki‐
   pedia page may have valuable links to forums and communities using the pro‐
   cessor where you can search for problems you might encounter and see how
   other people solved them.
    The vendor may also have wiki pages or forums devoted to the processor. These
    can be valuable for another perspective on the information in the user manual or
    getting started guide. They are often easy to search, with links to lots of examples.

                                                             Your Processor Is a Language   |   57
Vendor or distributor visits
   Sit in on these. They may have little readily pertinent information, but the net‐
   working is useful later when you ask for code or support.
Processor datasheet
    The datasheet for your processor is usually more focused on the electrical
    aspects. Since you’ll be writing the software, you want something more software
    oriented. So for processors, unless you are looking up electrical spec, skip the
    datasheet and go to the user manual (or user guide).
Errata
    Even more difficult to read than a very dense datasheet, you still need to skim the
    errata to know what parts of the chip have errors. For instance, if the errata men‐
    tion seven separate I2C bugs, you’ll know to dig in further if you’re using I2C.
Most processors now come with many examples, including a ton of driver code.
Sometimes this is good code, sometimes not. Even with the not-so-great code, it is
nice to have an example to start from. Though the examples generally work as
described, they probably won’t be robust or efficient enough for your needs. If you
are going to use the code, it becomes your code to own, so make sure you under‐
stand it.
Once you get oriented, preferably with a dev kit up and running, hunker down with
the user manual and read the chapters for every interface you are using (even if your
vendor gave you example code that does what you need). As we work through the
specifics of an embedded system, there will be more details about what to expect from
chapters in the user manual (inputs and outputs, interrupts, watchdogs and commu‐
nications, etc.). For now, let’s go back to the bigger picture of the system we are about
to bring up.

Reading a Schematic
If you come from the traditional software world, schematics can seem like an eye
chart with hieroglyphics, interspersed with strange boxes and tangled lines. As with a
datasheet, knowing where to start can be daunting. Beginning on page one of a multi‐
page schematic can be dicey because many electrical engineers put their power-
handling hardware there, something you don’t necessarily care about. Figure 3-9
shows you a snippet of one page of a schematic.
Some schematics have blocks of textual data (often in the corner of a page). Those are
comments; read them carefully, particularly if the block is titled “Processor I/Os” or
something equally useful. These are like block comments in code: they aren’t always
there, so you should take your electrical engineer out to lunch when their schematic
is well commented.

Figure 3-9. Example schematic snippet

                                        Reading a Schematic   |   59
                     Most of the time you’ll get a hardware block diagram to help you
                     decode a schematic. However, a question I’ve been asked in several
                     interviews is, “What does this schematic do?” So this section gives
                     you tips on getting through that as well as a more friendly
                     schematic.

As you go through a schematic for the first time, start by looking for boxes with lots
of connections. Often this can be simplified further because box size on the schematic
is proportional to the number of wires, so look for the largest boxes. Your processor is
likely to be one of those things. Because the processor is the center of the software
world, finding it will help you find the peripherals that you most care about.
Above the box is the component ID (U1), often printed on the PCB. Inside or under
the boxes is usually the part number. As shown in Figure 3-9, the part number might
not be what you are used to seeing. For example, your processor manual may say
Atmel AT91R40008, but the schematic may have AT91R40008-66AI, which is more
of a mouthful. However, the schematic describes not only how to make the traces on
the printed circuit board, but also how to put together the board with the correct
components. The extra letters for the processor describe how the processor is pack‐
aged and attached to the board.
By now you’ve found two to four of the largest and/or most connected components.
Look at their part numbers to determine what they actually are. Hopefully, you’ve
found your processor. (If not, keep looking.) You may also have found some memory.
Memory used to be on the address bus, so it would have almost as many connections
as the processor, often with 8 or more address lines and 16 data lines, as in Figure 3-9.
Many newer processors have enough embedded memory to alleviate the need for
external RAM or flash, so you may not find any large components in addition to your
processor.
Next, look at the connectors, which can look like boxes or long rectangles. These are
labeled with a J instead of a U (e.g., J3). There should be a connector for power to the
system (at least two pins: power and ground). There is probably a connector for
debugging the processor (J1 in Figure 3-9). The other connectors may tell you quite a
bit about the board; they are how the world outside sees the board. Is there a connec‐
tor with many signals that could indicate a daughter board? Is there a connector with
an RS-232 signal to indicate a serial port? A connector filled with net labels (the wire
names) that start with USB or LCD? The names are intended to give you a hint.
With connectors and the larger chips identified, you can start building a mental
model of the system (or a hardware block diagram if you don’t already have one).
Now go back to the boxes and see if you can use the names to estimate their function.
Looking for names such as SENSOR or ADC might help. Chapter 7 will give you
some other signal names that might help you find interesting peripherals.

               In a schematic, wires can cross without connecting. Look for a dot
               to indicate the junction is connected. Schematics seldom have a dot
               at a four-way cross, as it can be difficult to tell if there is a dot there
               when the schematic is printed.

In all this time, we’ve been ignoring the non-box-shaped components. Although it is
useful to be able to understand a resistor network, an analog filter, or an op-amp cir‐
cuit, you don’t need to know these right away. Figure 3-10 shows some common sche‐
matic components and their names, though they will be drawn a little differently in
your schematic. This will let you express curiosity about the function of a particular
resistor. “Further Reading” on page 84 gives you some suggestions on how to increase
your hardware knowledge.

Figure 3-10. Common schematic components

There are two exceptions to my recommendation that you ignore everything but
boxes. First, LEDs, switches, and buttons are often connected to the processor. The
schematic will tell you the processor line this type of component is connected to so
you know where to read the state of a switch or turn on an LED.
The other kind of components to pay attention to are resistors connected to the pro‐
cessor and power, known as pull-ups because they pull the voltage up (toward power).
Usually, pull-ups are relatively weak (high amounts of resistance) so the processor can
drive a pulled-up I/O line to be low. The pull-up means that the signal on that line is

                                                                          Reading a Schematic   |   61
defined to be high when the processor isn’t driving it. A processor may have internal
pull-ups so that inputs to the processor have a default state even when unconnected.
Note that there are also pull-downs, which means resistors to ground. All of the pull-
up information also applies to them, except that their default logic level is low instead
of high. Inputs without a pull-up or pull-down are driven to neither a logical high nor
low, so they are floating (they can also be called hi-Z, high impedance, or tri-stated).

Practice Reading a Schematic: Arduino!
Arduinos are awesome little boards, designed to be easy to use, to make electronics
accessible to artists, students, and generally everyone. For many people, the Arduino
is the gateway into embedded systems; it’s the first hardware they ever program.
I want to show you how to go from looking at the Arduino as an opaque system to
looking it as a board with a familiar schematic.
Figure 3-11 shows a hardware block diagram of the Arduino UNO schematic. On the
bottom right is the microcontroller. This is the end-user feature of the board. The I/O
pins come directly from the microcontroller but are kind of separate on the board
(and are an important feature of this system) so they get their own box.

Figure 3-11. Arduino hardware block diagram

To the left of the microcontroller, there is a USB-to-UART (or USB-to-serial) box
representing the hardware that translates from what your computer speaks to some‐
thing the microcontroller understands. It is used for programming the board with
new code as well as for printing out data as your code runs. On most block diagrams
this piece would be a small box; it is a minor feature, sometimes part of a cable. How‐
ever, I’m building up to a schematic so I’m keeping it about as large as the space it
takes on the schematic.
The final box, on top, is the power subsystem. The Arduino board is a little odd
because you can plug it into USB or into a 5 V DC wall wart. If you think about the
electronic devices around you (phone, mouse, webcam), it is usually one or the other.
But on this board you can plug into both and not blow anything up. The power sub‐
system is more complicated because of that flexibility.

Take a look at Figure 3-12. Even better, print out your own copy and get out some
colored pencils.

Figure 3-12. Arduino schematic, retrieved from https://content.arduino.cc/assets/UNO-
TH_Rev3e_sch.pdf

Draw the hardware block diagram over the schematic. The microcontroller is on the
bottom right with the I/O pins on the very right. Then there are some passive compo‐
nents (which we don’t care about, so we’ll just skip those pesky symbols). On the left
of those is the USB-to-UART section (and to the left of that, more pesky passives as
well as the USB connector on X2).
Over the top is the power subsystem. Find a connector marked with the word
POWER. Everything above that is power-related stuff. In the end, your colored pencil
diagram should look like Figure 3-11.
What else can you find on the schematic?

  • If we go with the “larger things are more interesting” methodology, we’d find the
    ATMEGA16U2-MU(R) and the ATMEGA328P-PU are the two big chips. From
    the block diagram I gave you, the ATMEGA328P-PU is the microcontroller for
    the user. The other is the USB-to-UART section.
  • Can you find the LEDs? Not only do the names include the color, look for the
    triangle symbol with arrows. These are useful on your schematics.

                                                    Practice Reading a Schematic: Arduino!   |   63
     • Look for ICSP and ICSP1 (they are above the chips). These are connectors used
       to program the boards in manufacturing. If you have an Arduino UNO board,
       can you find these connectors? Are they different from the general I/O
       connectors?

If you take some time to look for the ATMEGA328 datasheet, you’ll find it has two
pages of dense, possibly impenetrable, summary information. Then it will show pin
descriptions that look similar to the physical processor on your board. The datasheet
has a comparison of different, but similar, processors. It will talk about the core of the
processor (the AVRCore). This is an interesting view into microcontroller design, but
the compiler will hide most of this behind the magic of our programming language.
The datasheet will include a chapter about memories—Flash, RAM, EEPROM—and
then chapters about each subsystem and communication protocol. It has all the basic
information.
If you’ve been following along, you may have already noticed that Microchip is the
vendor of this chip. If you find the processor on the Microchip site, you’ll discover
pages and pages of documents and application notes that dive deeper (ADC basics,
reference manuals, errata, and dozens more). The vendors provide this information
because they want to sell their chips.

Keep Your Board Safe
The datasheets, user manuals, and schematics are just paper (or electronic forms of
paper). Let’s get to the hardware. Wait: before you grab it, be aware that touching
hardware can give it an electrostatic zap and damage it (especially if you’ve just taken
off a fleece jacket on a dry day).
Ask your hardware engineer for the tools to keep your board safe. Try to be conscious
of what your board is sitting on (standoffs keep your board off of coffee-carrying sur‐
faces!). Always carry it around in the bag it came in; the bag is likely made from anti‐
static material to protect the board. Antistatic mats are cheap and force you to
allocate a portion of your desk for hardware (even if you don’t use the antistatic wrist
band, it is still an improvement over crushing the hardware under a falling book or
spilling coffee on it).
If possible, when any wires are added to the board, get them glued down as well as
soldered. Many an hour has been lost to a broken rework wire. In that same vein, if
the connectors are not keyed so that they can be inserted only one way, take a picture
of the board or make notes about which way is the correct way to plug in a connector.
I like having my hardware connected to a power strip I can turn off (preferably one
my computer is not connected to). It is really good to have an emergency stop-all
plan. And note where the fire extinguisher is, just in case.

Seriously, the problem usually isn’t flames but more like little puffs of smoke. What‐
ever you do to it, though, a damaged board is unlikely to win friends. When your
manager or hardware engineer asks you how many boards you want allocated for the
embedded software, always ask for a spare or two. Nominally this is so you can make
sure the hardware tests work on more than one board. Once the system starts making
baby steps, you are the person most likely to lose access to a board so it can be shown
off to others. At least those are the reasons you should give for wanting a spare board
and not because you may very well damage the first one (or two).

                 Often there are also manufacturing errors, especially early on, in
                 dense-board designs. The bare PCB will be tested for continuity,
                 but there is only so much that can be done, especially with a new
                 design, to test for proper solder connections with no breaks and no
                 shorts. If something doesn’t work on one piece of hardware, it is
                 really useful to have a second to try it on, plus a third as a tie
                 breaker if you get different results on two boards.

Creating Your Own Debugging Toolbox
I love my toolbox because it gives me some level of independence from my hardware
engineer. With the toolbox on my desk, I can make small changes to my board in a
safer way (using needle-nose pliers to move a jumper is much less likely to damage a
board than using fingers). Not counting the detritus of assorted jumper wires, RS-232
gender changers, and half-dead batteries I’ve accumulated over the years, my toolbox
contains the following:

  • Needle-nose pliers
  • Tweezers (one pair for use as mini-pliers, one pair for use as tweezers)
  • Box cutter
  • Digital multimeter (more on this in a minute)
  • Electrical tape
  • Wire cutters (or, even better, a wire stripper)
  • Sharpies
  • Assorted screwdrivers (or one with many bits)
  • Flashlight
  • Magnifying glass
  • Safety glasses
  • Cable ties (Velcro and zip ties)

                                                        Creating Your Own Debugging Toolbox |   65
If your company has a good lab with someone who keeps the tools in labeled areas,
use those (but still have your own). If not, a trip to the hardware store may save some
frustration in the future.

Digital Multimeter
Even if you opt not to get a more complete toolbox, I strongly suggest getting a digital
multimeter (DMM).
You can get a cheap one that covers the basic functionality for about what you’d pay
for a good lunch. Of course, you can blow your whole week’s food budget on an
excellent DMM, but you shouldn’t need to. As an embedded software engineer, you
need only a few functions.
First, you need the voltage mode. Ideally, your DMM should be able to read at least
from 0–20 V with 0.1 V granularity and from 0–2 V with 0.01 V granularity. Usually
the question you are looking to answer with the voltage mode of the DMM is simple:
are any volts getting there at all? A DMM with 1 mV granularity might be nice occa‐
sionally, but 80% of your DMM use will be to answer this broader question: “Is the
chip or component even powered?”
The second most important mode is the resistance check mode, usually indicated with
the Ohm symbol (Ω) and a series of three arcs. You probably don’t need to know what
value a resistor is; the real use for this mode is to determine when things are connec‐
ted to each other. Just as voltage mode tests whether something has power, this mode
will answer the question, “Are these things even connected to each other?”
To determine the resistance between two points on the board, the DMM sends a
small current through the test points. As long as the board is off, this is safe. Don’t
run it in resistance mode with a powered board unless you know what you are doing.

                     Be careful to touch only the two points you are testing. The temp‐
                     tation to run the probe along a header to find the pin that beeps is
                     really high (trust me, I know), but if you connect three points, then
                     the small current may cause problems. Or you can damage a tiny
                     processor leg with rough handling. Be gentle!

When the DMM beeps, there is no significant resistance between the two test probes,
indicating they are connected (you can check whether the beep is on by just touching
the two probes together). Using this mode, your DMM can be used to quickly deter‐
mine whether a cable or a trace has broken.
Finally, you want a DMM with a current mode denoted with an amp or milliamp
symbol (A or mA). This is for measuring how much power your system is taking. A
good implementation of current mode can make a DMM a lot more expensive. Good

news, though: if you need the fine granularity necessary for developing very low
power products, you will need a tool that goes beyond the DMM. Get a DMM that
can measure milliamps, but realize the nanoamp versions cost more and probably
aren’t worth it. More on low-power programming and the necessary tools are in
Chapter 13.

Oscilloscopes and Logic Analyzers
Sometimes you need to know what the electrical signals on the board are doing.
There are three flavors of scopes that can help you see the signals as they move:
Traditional oscilloscope
    Measures analog signals, usually two or four of them at a time. A digital signal
    can be measured via analog, but it is kind of boring to see it in one of two spots.
    Of course, if your digital signal isn’t high or low but somewhere in between, the
    oscilloscope will help you immensely.
Logic analyzer
    Measures digital signals only, usually a lot of them at the same time (16, 32, or
    64). At one time, logic analyzers were behemoth instruments that took days to set
    up, but generally found the problem within hours of setup being complete. Many
    modern logic analyzers hook to your computer and help you do the setup, so that
    this step takes only a little while. Additionally, many logic analyzers have protocol
    analyzers that interpret the digital bus so you can easily see what the processor is
    outputting. Thus, if you have a SPI communication bus and you are sending a
    series of bytes, a protocol analyzer will interpret the information on the bus. A
    network analyzer is a specific type of protocol analyzer, one that focuses on the
    complex traffic associated with a network. (However, an RF network analyzer is
    very different; it characterizes device response in the radio frequency range.)
Mixed signal oscilloscope
   Combines the features of a traditional scope and logic analyzer with a couple of
   analog channels and 8 or 16 digital ones. A personal favorite of mine, the mixed
   signal scope can be used to look at different kinds of information simultaneously.
These scopes tend to be shared resources, as they are relatively expensive. You can
buy reasonably priced ones that hook to your computer, but sometimes their feature
sets are limited in nonobvious ways. Generally, you get what you pay for. The amount
of debugging time they can save makes them a good investment.

Setting Up a Scope
Step one is to determine which signal(s) can help you figure out a problem. Next,
you’ll need to attach the scope’s ground clip to ground. If you have more than one
ground (AC ground, DC ground, analog ground) and you aren’t sure which one to

                                                      Creating Your Own Debugging Toolbox   |   67
connect the scope to, ask your electrical engineer. Choosing the wrong one can be
detrimental to the health of your oscilloscope.
Next, attach the probes to the signals of interest. Many processors have such tiny pins
that they require specialized probes. On the other hand, many hardware engineers
put test points on their board, knowing that the software team is likely to need access
to particular signals for debugging. Alternatively, you can get wires soldered onto the
board at the signals you need and hook a probe to those.
Using a scope can be a bit daunting if you’ve never set one up before. Oscilloscope
manuals vary, but they are the best place to look for help (and most of them are
online). There is no generic manual for all of them, so I can only tell you the words to
look for as you page through the manual.
Figure 3-13 shows a representation of an archetypal oscilloscope screen. The most
important point is that time moves along the x-axis and voltage varies along the y-
axis. The scales of these axes are configurable.

Figure 3-13. Simplified oscilloscope screenshot

Somewhere on the scope’s interface, there should be a knob to make the time scale
change. Move it to the right, and each horizontal tick goes from, say, 1 s to 0.5 s (and
then down into the millisecond or microsecond range). This controls the time scale

for the whole screen. For debugging, the goal is to start with the largest possible time
base that shows what you are looking for.

                If you zoom in too far, you’ll see strange things as the supposedly
                digital signals show their true (and weird) analog colors.

Once you set the time base, you’ll need to set the scale of the voltage axis. There could
be one knob that accesses all channels (or probes), making you shift the channel
some other way, or you might get one knob per channel. Either way, as you turn it to
the right, each vertical block magnifies (5 V goes to 2 V, down to millivolts).
If you aren’t sure, set the time scale to be about 100 ms/division and the voltage gran‐
ularity to be about 2 V/block. You can zoom in (or out) from there if you need to.
A different knob will set where each channel is on the screen, in other words, where
its zero line is. Figure 3-13 shows the zero line for each channel on the left side of the
screen. There may be one knob per channel or a way to multiplex the knob between
all the channels. Keep the channels a little offset from each other so you can see each
one. (You can turn off the channels you don’t need—probably with a button.)
Next, look for a knob to set the zero point of your time scale. This will cause a vertical
line to wander across your screen. Set it near the middle. Alternatively, you can set it
toward the left of your screen if you are looking for information that happens after an
event, or toward the right if you want to know what goes on before an event.
At this point, you can probably turn on your system and see a line wiggle. It may go
by so quickly that you don’t see what it does, but it can be a start. If nothing happens,
look for the buttons that say Run/Stop. You want the scope to be in Run mode. The
Stop mode freezes the display at a single point in time, which gives you the opportu‐
nity to think about what you’ve discovered. Near Run/Stop may be a button that says
Single, which waits for a trigger and then puts the system in Stop mode. There may
also be an Auto button, which will let the system trigger continuously.

                If there is an Auto button, be very careful about pushing it. Check
                to see whether the name means auto trigger or auto set. The former
                is useful, but the latter tries to configure your scope for you auto‐
                matically. I find that this tends to reset the configuration to some‐
                thing completely random.

To set up a trigger, look for the trigger knob. This will put up a horizontal line to
show where the trigger voltage level is. It is channel dependent, but unlike the other
channel-dependent knob, you can’t usually set a trigger for each channel. Instead, it

                                                        Creating Your Own Debugging Toolbox   |   69
requires additional configuration, usually via an on-screen menu and button presses.
You want the trigger to be on the channel that changes just at the start (or end) of an
interesting event. You’ll need to choose whether the trigger is activated going up or
going down. You’ll also need to choose how often the scope will trigger. If you want to
see the first time it changes, set a long timeout. If you want to see the last time it
changes, set a short one.
There are a few other things to note. Unless you know what you are doing, you don’t
want the scope in AC mode. And there is the possibility that the probes are giving
signals that are 10x (or 1/10) the size on the screen. This depends on the probe, so if
you are off by an order of magnitude, look for a 10x marker and toggle its state.
If you’ve set up your scope according to my instructions (and the scope manual) and
it still doesn’t work the way you want it to, get someone with more experience to help
you. Scopes are powerful and useful tools, but using one well requires a lot of prac‐
tice. Don’t get discouraged if it is a bit frustrating to start.

Testing the Hardware (and Software)
I strongly recommend being ready to pull out the toolbox, DMM, and scope, but that
can reasonably be left to your hardware engineer if you aren’t ready to do it alone. As
a software person, it is more important that you get as far as possible in building soft‐
ware that will test the hardware in a manner conducive to easy debugging.
Three kinds of tests are commonly seen for embedded systems. First, the power-on
self-test (POST) runs every time you boot the system, even after the code is released.
This test verifies that all of the hardware components are in working order and what‐
ever else is needed to run your system safely. The more the POST tests, the longer the
boot time is, so there is a trade-off that might impact the customer. Once the POST
completes, the system is ready to be used by the customer.

                     Ideally, all POST debug messages printed out at boot time should
                     be accessible later. Whether it is the software version string or the
                     type of sensor attached, there will be a time when you require that
                     information without power cycling.

The second kind of test is the unit test. Unit tests should be run before every software
release, but they might not be suitable to run at every boot, perhaps because they take
too long to execute, return the system to factory default, or put unsightly test patterns
on the screen. These tests verify the software and hardware are working together as
expected.

The words “unit test” mean different things to different people. To me, a unit test is
automated test code that verifies a unit of source code is ready for use. Some develop‐
ers want tests to cover all possible paths through the code. This can lead to unit test
suites that are large and unwieldy, which is the argument used to avoid unit testing in
embedded systems. My sort of unit tests are meant to test the basic functionality and
the corner cases most likely to occur. This process lets me build testing into my devel‐
opment and keep it there, even after shipping.

                Find out what your industry (or your management) expects of your
                unit tests. If they mean for the tests to check all software paths,
                make sure you (and they) understand how much work and code
                that will take.

Some unit tests may be external to the hardware of the system (i.e., if you are using a
sandbox to verify algorithms as suggested in Chapter 2). For the ones that aren’t, I
would encourage you to leave them in the production code if you can, making them
accessible in the field upon some special set of criteria (for instance, “hold down these
two buttons and cross your eyes as the system boots”). Not only will this let your
quality department use the tests, but you may also find that using the unit tests as a
first-line check in the field will tell you whether the system’s hardware is acting oddly.
The third and final sorts of tests are those you create during bring-up, usually because
a subsystem is not functioning as intended. These are sometimes throwaway checks,
superseded by more inclusive tests or added to unit tests. Temporary bring-up code is
OK. The goal of this whole exercise is not to write classic source code, but to build
systems. And once you’ve checked such code into your version control system, delet‐
ing it is fine because you can always recover the file if you realize you need the test
again.

Building Tests
As noted earlier, the code to control peripherals (and the associated tests) often is
written while the schematic is being completed. The good news is that you’ve just
spent time with the datasheets, so you have a good idea how to implement the code.
The bad news is that while you wait for the boards to arrive, you may end up writing
drivers for six peripherals before you get to integrate your software with the
hardware.

In Chapter 2, we had a system that communicated to a flash memory device via the
SPI communication protocol (a partial schematic is reproduced in Figure 3-14).
What do we need to test, and what tools do we need to verify the results?

     • I/O lines are under software control (external verification with a DMM).
     • SPI can send and receive bytes (external verification with a logic analyzer).
     • Flash can be read and written (internal verification; use the debug subsystem to
       output results).

Figure 3-14. Flash memory schematic snippet

To make bring-up easy, you’ll need to be able to do each of these. You might choose to
run the all-inclusive flash test first. If that works, you know the other two work. How‐
ever, if it doesn’t, you’ll need the others available for debugging as necessary.
Other chapters cover controlling I/O lines (Chapter 4) and a bit more about SPI
(Chapter 7), so for now let’s focus on the tests that we can write to test the flash mem‐
ory. How flash works isn’t critical, but you can test your skills with datasheets by look‐
ing over the Macronix MX25V8035 flash memory datasheet (search for the part
number on Google, DigiKey, or the vendor’s website).

Flash Test Example
Flash memory is a type of nonvolatile memory (so it doesn’t get cleared when the
power is turned off). Other types of nonvolatile memory include ROM (read-only
memory) and electrically erasable programmable read-only memory (EEPROM).

                      Volatile memory doesn’t retain its value after a power cycle. There
                      are different kinds of volatile memory, but they are all one type of
                      RAM or another.

Like an EEPROM, flash can be erased and written to. However, most EEPROMs let
you erase and write a byte at a time. With flash, you may be able to write a byte at a
time, but you have to erase a whole sector to do so. The sector size depends on the
flash (usually the larger the flash, the larger each sector). For our test’s component, a
sector is 4 kilobytes (or 4,096 bytes), and the whole chip contains 8 Mb (1 MB or 256
sectors). Flash usually has more space than an EEPROM and is less power hungry.
However, EEPROMs come in smaller sizes, so they are still useful.
When we write a bring-up test, nothing in the flash chip needs to be retained. For the
POST, we really shouldn’t modify the flash, as the system might be using it (for stor‐
ing version and graphic data). For a unit test, we’d like to leave it the way we found it
after testing, but we might be able to set some constraints on that.
Tests typically take three parameters: the goal flash address, so that the test can run in
an unpopulated (or noncritical) sector; a pointer to memory; and the memory length.
The memory length is the amount of data the flash test will store to RAM. If the
memory is the same size as the sector, no data will be lost in the flash. The following
prototypes illustrate three types of test: an umbrella test that runs the others (and
returns the number of errors it encounters), a test that tries to read from the flash
(returning the number of bytes that were actually read), and a test that tries to write
to the flash (returning the number of bytes written):
    int FlashTest(uint32_t address, uint8_t *memory, uint16_t memLength);
    uint16_t FlashRead(uint32_t addr, uint8_t *data, uint16_t dataLen);
    uint16_t FlashWrite(uint32_t addr, uint8_t *data, uint16_t dataLen);

We’ll use the FlashTest extensively during bring-up, then put it in unit tests and turn
it on as needed when things change or before releases. We don’t want this test as part
of the POST. Flash wears out after some number of erase and write cycles (often
100,000; this information is in the datasheet). Further, at least two of these tests have
the potential to be destructive to our data.
Plus, we don’t need to do this testing on boot. If the processor can communicate with
the flash at all, then it is reasonable to believe the flash is working. (You can check
basic communication by putting a header in the flash that includes a known key, a
version, and/or a checksum.)
There are two ways to access this flash part: individual bytes and multibyte blocks.
Later, when running the real code, you’ll probably want to use the faster block access.
During initial bring-up and testing, you might want to start out with the simpler byte
method to ensure a good foundation for your driver.

Test 1: Read existing data
Testing that you can read data from the flash actually verifies that the I/O lines are
configured to work as a SPI port, that the SPI port is configured properly, and that
you understand the basics of the flash command protocol.

For this test, we’ll read out as much data as we can from the sector so we can write it
back later. Here is the start of FlashTest:
     // Test 1: Read existing data in a block to make sure it’s possible
     dataLen = FlashRead(startAddress, memory, memLength);
     if (dataLen != memLength) {
       // read less than desired, note error
       Log(LogUnitTest, LogLevelError, "Flash test: truncation on byte read");
       memLength = dataLen;
       error++;
     }
Note that there is no verification of the data, since we don’t know if this function is
being run with an empty flash chip. If you were writing a POST, you might do this
read and then check that the data is valid (and then stop testing, because that is
enough for a power-on check).

Test 2: Byte access
The next test starts by erasing the data in the sector. Then it fills the flash with data,
writing one byte at a time. We want to write it with something that changes so we can
make sure the command is effective. I like to write it with an offset based on the
address. (The offset tells me that I’m not accidentally reading the address back.)
     FlashEraseSector(startAddress);

     // want to put in an incrementing value but don't want it to be
     // the address
     addValue = 0x55;
     for (i=0; i< memLength; i++) {
       value = i + addValue;
       dataLen = FlashWrite(startAddress + i, &value, 1);
       if (dataLen != 1) {
         Log (LogUnitTest, LogLevelError, "Flash test: byte write error.");
         error++;
       }
     }
To complete this check, you need to read the data back, byte by byte, and verify the
value is as expected at each address (address + addValue).

Test 3: Block access
Now that the flash contains our newly written data, confirm that block access works
by putting back the original data. That means starting with an erase of the sector
again:

    FlashEraseSector(startAddress);
    dataLen = FlashWrite(startAddress, memory, memLength);
    if (dataLen != memLength) {
      LogWithNum(LogUnitTest, LogLevelError,
        "Flash test: block write error, len ", dataLen);
      error++;
    }
Finally, verify this data using another byte-by-byte read. We know that works from
test 2. If the results are good, then we know that block writes work from this test and
that block reads work from test 1. The number of errors is returned to the higher-
level verification code.

               This tests the flash driver software. It doesn’t check that the flash
               has no sticky bits (bits that never change, even though they
               should). A manufacturing test can confirm that all bits change, but
               most flash gets verified that way before it gets to you.

Test wrap-up
If the board passes these three tests, you can be confident that the flash hardware and
software both work, satisfying your need for a bring-up test and a unit test.
For most forms of memory, the pattern we’ve seen here is a good start:

 1. Read the original data.
 2. Write some changing but formulaic data.
 3. Verify the data.
 4. Rewrite the original.
 5. Verify the original.

However, there are many other types of peripherals—more than I can cover here.
Although automated tests are best, some will need external verification, such as an
LCD that gets a pattern of colors and lines to verify its driver. Some tests will need
fake external inputs so that a sensing element can be checked.
For each of your peripherals and software subsystems, try to figure out which tests
will give you the confidence that it is working reliably and as expected. It doesn’t
sound difficult, but it can be. Designing good tests is one of those things that can
make your software great.

Command and Response
Let’s say you take the advice in the previous section and create test functions for each
piece of your hardware. During bring-up, you’ve made a special image that executes
each test on power-up. If one of them fails, you and the hardware engineer may want
to run just that test over and over. So you recompile and reload. Then you want to do
the same thing for a different test. So you recompile and reload again. And then again
for yet another test. This recompile–reload loop is getting old. Wouldn’t it be easier to
send commands to your embedded system and have it run the tests as needed?
Embedded systems often do not have the rich user interface experience found in
computers (or even smartphones). Many are controlled through a command line.
Even those with screens often use a command-line interface for debugging. The first
part of this section describes how to send commands in C using function pointers in
a command-handling jump table. This nifty problem-and-solution gives me an
opportunity to show the standard command pattern, which is a useful pattern to
know, whatever language you are using.
Figure 3-15 shows some high-level goals for our automated command handler, one
that will let us send a command from a serial terminal on a PC and get a response
from the unit under test.

Figure 3-15. Goals for a command handler

Once you have some data read in, the code will need to figure out which function to
call. A small interpreter with a command table will make the lives of those around
you easier. By separating the interface from the actual test code, you will be able to
extend it more easily in unforeseen directions.

Creating a command
Let’s start with a small list of commands you want to implement:
Version of the code
    Outputs the version information
Test the flash
     Runs the flash unit test, printing out the number of errors upon completion

Blink LED
    Sets an LED to blink at a given frequency
Help
    Lists available commands with one-line descriptions
Once you have a few commands implemented, adding commands as you go along
should be pretty easy.
I’m going to show how to do this in C because it is probably the scariest way you’d
implement it. Object-oriented languages such as C++ and Java offer friendlier ways to
implement this functionality using objects. However, the C method will often be
smaller and generally faster, so factor that in when you are choosing how to imple‐
ment this pattern. For readers unfamiliar with C’s function pointers, the sidebar
“Function Pointers Aren’t So Scary” on page 78 provides an introduction.
Each command we can call will be made up of a name, a function to call, and a help
string:
    typedef void(*functionPointerType)(void);
    struct commandStruct {
       char const *name;
       functionPointerType execute;
       char const *help;
    };
An array of these will provide our list of commands:
    const struct commandStruct commands[] ={
      {"ver", CmdVersion,
         "Display firmware version"},
      {"flashTest", CmdFlashTest,
         "Runs the flash unit test, prints number of errors upon completion"},
      {"blinkLed", CmdBlinkLed,
         "Sets the LED to blink at a desired rate (parameter: frequency (Hz))"},
       {"help", CmdHelp,
         "Prints out help messages"},
       {"",0,""} //End of table indicator. MUST BE LAST!!!
    };

The command execution functions CmdVersion, CmdFlashTest, CmdBlinkLed, and
CmdHelp are implemented elsewhere. The commands that take parameters will have
to work with the parser to get their parameters from the character stream. Not only
does this simplify this piece of code, but it also gives greater flexibility, allowing each
command to set the terms of its use, such as the number and type of parameters.
Note that the list in the help command is a special command that prints out the
name and help strings of all items in the table.

                                Function Pointers Aren’t So Scary
     Can you imagine a situation where you don’t know what function you want to run
     until your program is already running? For example, say you want to run one of sev‐
     eral signal-processing algorithms on some data coming from your sensors. You can
     start off with a switch statement controlled by a variable:
            switch (algorithm) {
              case kFIRFilter:
                return fir(data, dataLen);
              case kIIRFilter:
                return iir(data, dataLen);
              ...
            }
     Now, when you want to change your algorithm, you send a command or push a but‐
     ton to make the algorithm variable change. If the data gets processed continually, the
     system still has to run the switch statement, even if you didn’t change the algorithm.
     In object-oriented languages, you can use a reference to an interface. Each algorithm
     object would implement a function of the same name (for this signal-processing
     example, we’d call it filter). Then, when the algorithm needed to change, the caller
     object would change. Depending on the language, the interface implementation could
     be indicated with a keyword or through inheritance.
     C doesn’t have those features (and using inheritance in C++ may be verboten in your
     system due to compiler constraints). So we come to function pointers, which can do
     the same thing.
     To declare a function pointer, you need the prototype of a function that will go in it.
     For our switch statement, that would be a function that took a data pointer and data
     length and didn’t return anything. However, it could return results by modifying its
     first argument. The prototype for one of the functions would look like this:
         void fir(uint16_t* data, uint16_t dataLen);
     Now take out the name of the function and replace it with a star and a generic name
     surrounded by parentheses:
         void (*filter)(uint16_t* data, uint16_t dataLen);

     Instead of changing your algorithm variable and calling the switch statement to
     select a function, you can change the algorithm only when needed and call the func‐
     tion pointer. There are two ways to do this, the implicit method (on the left here) and
     the explicit method (right). They are equivalent, just different forms of syntax:
            filter = fir;                   // or filter = &fir;
            filter(data, dataLen);          // or (*filter)(data,dataLen);
     Once you are comfortable with the idea of function pointers, they can be a powerful
     asset when the code needs to adapt to its environment. Some common uses for func‐

  tion pointers include the command structure described in this chapter, callbacks to
  indicate a completed event, and mapping button presses to context-sensitive actions.
  One caution: egregiously excessive use of function pointers can cause your processor
  to be slow. Some processors try to predict where your code is going and load the
  appropriate instructions before execution. Function pointers inhibit branch predic‐
  tion because the processor can’t guess where you’ll be after the call. On the other
  hand, if you are trying to optimize your code to this extent, perhaps skip to
  Chapter 11.
  However, other methods of selecting on-the-fly function calls also interrupt branch
  prediction (such as the switch statement we started with). Unless you have reached
  the stage of hand tuning the assembly code, it generally isn’t worth worrying about
  the slight slowdown caused by the awesome powers of the function pointer.

Invoking a command
Once the client on the command line indicates which command to run by sending a
string, you need to choose the command and run it. To do that, go through the table,
looking for a string that matches. Once you find it, call the function pointer to exe‐
cute that function.
Compared to the previous section, this part seems almost too easy. That is the goal.
Embedded systems are complex, sometimes hideously so, given their tight constraints
and hidden dependencies. The goal of this (and many other patterns) is to isolate the
complexity. You can’t get rid of the complexity; a system that does nothing isn’t very
complex, but it isn’t very useful either. There is still a fair amount of complexity in
setting up the table and the parsing code to use it, but those details can be confined to
their own spaces.

Command Pattern
What we’ve been looking at is a formal, classic design pattern. Where the command
handler I’ve described is a tactical solution to a specific problem, the command pat‐
tern is the strategy that guides it and other designs like it.
The overarching goal of this pattern is to decouple the command processing from the
actual action to be taken. The command pattern shows an interface for executing
operations. Anytime you see a situation where one piece of a system needs to make
requests of another piece without the intermediaries knowing the content of those
requests, consider the command pattern. As Figure 3-16 shows, there are four pieces:
Client
    A table that maps the receivers onto commands. Clients create concrete com‐
    mand objects and create the association between receivers and command objects.

     A client may run at initialization (as was done in our example by creating an
     array) or create the associations on the fly.
Invoker
    Parser code that determines when the command needs to run and executes it. It
    doesn’t know anything about the receiver. It treats every command the same.
Command
   An item from the client table that is an interface for executing an operation. This
   is a C++ class, a Java interface, or a C structure with a function pointer. An
   instantiation of the command interface is called a concrete command.
Receiver
    A function that knows how to service the request. Running the receiver code is
    the goal of the person (or other device) that sent the command.

Figure 3-16. How the command handler works

Figure 3-17 shows the purpose of each element of the command pattern.

Figure 3-17. Command pattern and the knowledge barrier

               Consider the client as protecting the secrets of the system by dis‐
               guising all of the commands to look alike. This decouples the com‐
               mands from your code, making it much easier to expand later
               (which you will need to do).

Dealing with Errors
The longevity of code shocks me. For all that it sometimes seems like we are rewriting
the same old things in different ways, one day you may discover that a piece of code
you wrote at a start-up over a decade ago is being used by a Fortune 500 company.
Once it works well enough, why fix the depths of code?
It only makes it scarier to know that at some point your code will fail. An error will
occur, either from something you wrote or from an unexpected condition in the envi‐
ronment. There are two ways to handle errors. First, the system can enter a state of
graceful degradation, where the software does the best it can. Alternatively, the system
could fail loudly and immediately. Long-term, sensor-type systems require the for‐
mer, whereas medical systems require the latter. Either way, a system should fail
safely.
But how to implement either one? More importantly, what criteria should be used to
determine which subsystems implement which error-handling method? What you do
depends on your product; my goal is to get you to think about error handling during
design.

Consistent Methodology
Functions should handle errors as best they can. For example, if a variable can be out
of range, the range should be fixed and the error logged as appropriate. Functions can
return errors to allow a caller to deal with the problems. The caller should check and
deal with the error, which may mean passing it further upstream in a multilayered
application. In many cases, if the error is not important enough to check, it is not
important enough to return. On the other hand, there are cases where you want to
return a diagnostic code that is used only in testing. It can be noted in the comments
that the returned error code is not for normal usage or should be used only in
assert() calls.
assert() is not always implemented in embedded systems, but it is straightforward
to implement in a manner appropriate to the system. This might be a message printed
out on the debugger console, a print to a system console or log, a breakpoint instruc‐
tion such as BKPT, or even an I/O line or LED that toggles on an error condition.
Printing changes the embedded system’s timing, so it is often beneficial to separate
the functions for error communications to allow other methods of output (e.g., an
LED).

                                                                     Dealing with Errors   |   81
                      A breakpoint instruction tells the processor to stop running if the
                      debugger is attached. A programmatic breakpoint can be compiled
                      into your code. Usually it is an assembly function, often hidden by
                      a macro:
                           #define BKPT() __asm__(“BKPT”)
                           #define BKPT() __asm__(“bkpt #0”)
                           #define BKPT() __asm__(“break”)
                      These breakpoints get compiled into your code (they don’t count
                      against your limited hardware breakpoint budget!). This can make
                      it easier to walk through code, particularly if you are seeing errors
                      only upon certain conditions.

Error return codes for an application or system should be standardized over the
codebase. A single high-level errorCodes.h file (or some such) can be created to pro‐
vide consistent errors in an enumerated format. Some suggested error codes are:

     • No error (should always be 0)
     • Unknown error (or unrecognized error)
     • Bad parameter
     • Bad index (pointer outside range or null)
     • Uninitialized variable or subsystem
     • Catastrophic failure (this may cause a processor reset unless it is in development
       mode, in which case it probably causes a breakpoint or spin loop)

There should be a minimum number of errors (generic errors) so that the application
can interpret them. While you could use something like UART_FAILED_TO_INIT_SEC
OND_PARAM_TOO_HIGH, generalization makes error handling easier. If the error PARAME
TER_BAD occurs in a subsystem, you have a good place to start to look for it.
Essentially, by keeping it simple, you make sure to hand the developer the important
information (the existence of a bug), and additional debugging can dig into where
and why.

Error Checking Flow
Returning errors doesn’t do anyone any good if the errors aren’t handled. Too often
we code for the working case, ignoring the other paths. Are we hoping that the errors
just never occur? That’s silly.
On the other hand, it gets pretty tedious to handle individual errors when the func‐
tion should skip to the end and return its own error, bubbling up the problem to a
higher level. While some folks use a nested if/else statement, I usually prefer to flow

through the function, trying to keep the error redundant enough that it is generally
ignorable in the good path flow:
     error = FunctionSay();
     if (error == NO_ERROR) {
       error = FunctionHello();
     }
     if (error == NO_ERROR) {
       error = FunctionWorld();
     }
     if (error != NO_ERROR) {
       // handle error state
     }
     return error;
This allows you to call several functions at a time, checking the error at the end
instead of at each call.

Error-Handling Library
An error-handling library is another option:
     ErrorSet(&globalErrorCode, error);
or
     ErrorSet(&globalErrorCode, FunctionFoo());

The ErrorSet function would not overwrite a previous error condition if this func‐
tion returned without a failure. As before, this allows you to call several functions at a
time, checking the error at the end instead of at each call.
In such an error-handling library, there would be four functions, implemented and
used as makes sense for the application: ErrorSet, ErrorGet, ErrorPrint, and Error
Clear. The library should be designed for debugging and testing, though the mecha‐
nism should be left in place, even when development is complete. For example,
ErrorPrint may change from writing out a log of information on a serial port to a
small function that just toggles an I/O line. This is not an error for the final user to
deal with; it is for a developer confronted with production units that do not perform
properly.

                If this sounds vaguely familiar, it may be because this is what stan‐
                dard C/C++ libraries do. If your file fails to open with fopen, not
                only does it return NULL to tell you that an error occurred, fopen
                also puts an error code into errno with more information about
                what went wrong. Even for most embedded systems, you can use
                perror and strerror to get text versions of the error codes. Of
                course, as with my version above, if you don’t clear errno, you may
                be looking at old errors.

                                                                        Dealing with Errors   |   83
Debugging Timing Errors
When debugging hardware/software interactions (or any software that is time criti‐
cal), serial output such as logging or printf can change the timing of the code. In
many cases, a timing problem will appear (or disappear) depending on where your
output statements and/or breakpoints are located. Debugging becomes difficult when
your tools interfere with the problem.
One of the advantages to using an error library (or a logging library, as described in
Chapter 2) is that you don’t have to output the data; you can store it locally in RAM,
which is usually a much faster proposition. In fact, if you are having trouble with tim‐
ing, consider making a small buffer (4–16 bytes, depending on your RAM availabil‐
ity) to contain signals from the software (one or two bytes). In your code, fill the
buffer at interesting trigger points (e.g., an ASSERT or ErrorSet). You can dump this
buffer when the code exits the time-sensitive area. If you are most interested in the
last error, use a circular buffer to continually capture the last few events (circular buf‐
fers are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7).
Alternatively, if you have some input into the board design, I highly recommend
pushing for spare processor I/Os to be available on the board and easily accessible
with a header. They will come in handy for debugging (especially tricky timing issues,
where serial output breaks the timing), showing the status of the system in testing
and profiling processor cycles. These are called test points. The best EEs will ask you
how many you need as they work on the schematic. There will be more on their usage
in Chapter 11.

Further Reading
If you want to learn more about handling hardware safely, reading schematics, and
soldering, I suggest getting the latest edition of Make: Electronics by Charles Platt
(O’Reilly). This step-by-step introduction is an easy read, though better if you follow
along with components in hand.
For more information about getting from prototype to shipping units, I recommend
Alan Cohen’s Prototype to Product: A Practical Guide for Getting to Market (O’Reilly).
It goes through all of the steps needed to go from a napkin sketch to a product.
Along those lines, but more focused on your personal career, is Camille Fournier’s
The Manager’s Path: A Guide for Tech Leaders Navigating Growth & Change (O’Reilly).
Even if you aren’t a manager, this book talks about the things managers need to know,
which will give you insight into how to present your work. This is the sort of book I
read for a few chapters then put on my shelf until I receive a promotion, then read the
next few chapters.

Adafruit and SparkFun are amazing resources, filled with well-documented tutorials
combining hardware and software. Even better, their extensive GitHub repositories
have good code. If they have code for a part similar to the one you’re using, their code
may hold the key to getting your driver to work.

                   Interview Question: Talking About Failure
  Tell me about a project that you worked on that was successful. Then, tell me about a
  project that you worked on that was not so successful. What happened? How did you
  work through it? (Thanks to Kristin Anderson for this question.)
  The goal of this question is not really about judging an applicant’s previous successes
  and failures. The question starts there because the processes that lead to success (or
  failure) depend on knowledge, information, and communication. By talking about
  success or failure, the applicant reveals what they learn from available information,
  how they seek out information, and how they communicate important information to
  others on the team. If they can understand the big picture and analyze the project’s
  progress, they’re more likely to be an asset to the team.
  The successful half of the question is interesting to listen to, particularly when the
  interviewee is excited and passionate about their project. I want to hear about their
  part in making it successful and the process they used. However, like many of the
  more technical questions, the first half of the question is really about getting to the
  second half of the question: failure.
  Did they understand all the requirements before jumping into the project, or were
  there perhaps communication gaps between the requirements set by the marketing
  group and the plans developed by the engineers? Did the applicant consider all the
  tasks and even perhaps Murphy’s Law before developing a schedule and then add
  some time for risk?
  Did they bring up anything relative to any risks or issues they faced and any mitiga‐
  tion strategies they considered? Some of these terms are program management terms,
  and I don’t really expect the engineers to use all the right buzzwords. But I do expect
  them to go beyond talking about the technical aspects and be able to tell me other
  factors in successful projects.
  Often, in talking about successful projects, an applicant will say they understood the
  requirements and knew how to develop the right project and make people happy.
  That is enough to go on to the next question.
  Then, when I ask what went wrong, I really want to hear how the applicant evaluated
  the factors involved in trying for a successful project and whether they can tell me
  why they thought the project failed (poor communication, lack of clear goals, lack of
  clear requirements, no management support, etc.). There is no right or wrong answer;
  what I’m interested in is how they analyze the project to tell me what went wrong.
  (Though if they only take the time to blame everyone around them, I do get worried.)

                                                                        Further Reading   |   85
     I am disappointed by the interviewees who cannot think of an unsuccessful project,
     because no project goes perfectly, so I tend to think they weren’t paying attention to
     the project as a whole. Understanding more than just what technical work they have
     to do makes an engineer a much better engineer.

