                                                                                               CHAPTER 5
                                                                                       Interrupts

Interrupts can be scary. They are one of the things that make embedded systems dif‐
ferent from traditional application software. Interrupts swoop in from out of
nowhere to change the flow of the code. They can safely call only certain functions
(and usually not the debug functions). Interrupts need to be fast, so fast that they are
a piece of code that is still occasionally written in assembly language. And bugs in
interrupts are often quite difficult to find because, by definition, they occur asynchro‐
nously (outside the normal flow of execution).
However, interrupts are not the bogeymen they’ve been made out to be. If you under‐
stand what happens when an interrupt occurs, you’ll find where they can be a useful
part of your software design.

A Chicken Presses a Button
Consider interrupts as a Rube Goldberg machine1 with the goal of telling your soft‐
ware that something happened outside the normal flow of code. Let us consider the
chicken in Figure 5-1.

1 A Rube Goldberg machine is an overly complex contraption used to do something relatively simple. Such
  machines (real and metaphorical) often consist of a series of simple, unrelated elements, with the action of
  each element triggering the start of the next until the goal action occurs.

Figure 5-1. A chicken presses a button leading to a cascade of actions ending with the
code in the event loop taking an action

The chicken presses a button. The interrupt signal goes to the processor. The pro‐
cessor saves where it is and then looks up what code to call. It calls that code, which
does something (maybe sets a variable). The interrupt ends, the processor returns to
where it was before all this happened. The normal code continues but now there is a
variable change or other signal that seemingly appeared from nowhere.
Let me put it another way. First, I want you to remember that processors and inter‐
faces are like software APIs (see “Reading a Datasheet” on page 46) and that function
pointers aren’t scary (see the sidebar “Function Pointers Aren’t So Scary” on page 78).
You’ll need both of those ideas in your head as we walk through what happens when
an interrupt occurs:

 1. An interrupt request (IRQ) happens inside the processor, triggered by an external
    component, the software, or a fault in the system.
 2. The processor saves the context, which includes where it was and the local vari‐
    ables.
 3. The processor finds the function associated with the interrupt in the vector table.
 4. The callback function runs (aka interrupt service routine or ISR or interrupt han‐
    dler).
 5. The processor restores the saved context, returning to the point before the inter‐
    rupt occurred, and the program continues to run.

Let’s go through the process of interrupt handling in more detail. Then we’ll talk
about how to set up these interrupts to work the way you want.

An IRQ Happens
Some interrupts are like small high-priority tasks. Once their ISR is complete, the
processor restores the context it saved and continues on its way as though nothing
had happened. Most peripheral interrupts are like that: input lines, communication
pathway, timers, peripherals, ADCs (analog-to-digital converters), etc.
Other interrupts are more like exceptions, handling system faults and never returning
to normal execution. For example, an interrupt can occur when there is a memory
error, a divide-by-zero error, the processor tries to execute an invalid instruction, or
the power level is not quite sufficient to run the processor properly (brownout detec‐
tion). These errors mean something is seriously wrong and the processor can’t run
properly. Usually when this happens the interrupt puts the system into an infinite
loop or resets the processor.
Most interrupts you need to handle will be more like tasks than exceptions. They will
let your processor run multiple tasks, seemingly in parallel.
Usually an interrupt request happens because you’ve configured the interrupt. If it
wasn’t you, then your vendor’s startup code probably did the work. While often invis‐
ible to high-level language programmers, the startup code configures some hardware-
oriented things (such as setting up the default interrupts, usually the fault interrupts,
and configuring system clocks).
For task-like interrupts, your initialization code can configure them to occur under
the conditions you specify. What exactly those conditions are depend on your pro‐
cessor. Your processor’s user manual will be critical to setting up interrupts. (More on
configuration in “Configuring Interrupts” on page 140 later in this chapter, after we
go through the parts of the interrupt itself.)

                                                                     An IRQ Happens   |   127
Because processors are different, I’ll focus on the STM32F103xx processor, which is
middle-of-the-road in its interrupt-handling complexity (Microchip’s ATtiny AVR is
much simpler, and the TI MSP430x2xx is more complex).

Nonmaskable Interrupts
Some processors define certain interrupts as so important that they can’t be disabled;
these are called nonmaskable interrupts (NMIs). (I suppose not-disable-able inter‐
rupts was a little unwieldy to say.)
The processor faults noted earlier are one form of NMI. Often there is one I/O pin
that can be linked to an NMI, which usually leads to an “on” button on the device.
These interrupts cannot be ignored at any time and must be handled immediately,
even in critical sections of code.

Interrupt Priority
Getting back to our “chicken presses a button” example, we haven’t really talked about
why a chicken has a button. Say the button is for when a fox has been spotted and the
farmer needs to be informed. Say that there is also a timer interrupt that automati‐
cally feeds the chicken.
If the feed-timer and fox-button occur at precisely the same time (as improbable as
that is), which one should the processor handle? Obviously, reducing the danger from
predators outranks feeding the chicken. Interrupts can have different priorities.
Some processors handle interrupt priority by virtue of the peripherals themselves (so
timer 1 has a higher priority than timer 2, which in turn is more important than
timer 3). Other processors allow you to configure the priority on a per-interrupt
basis.

Nested Interrupts
Some processors allow interrupts to be interrupted by another interrupt. Instead of
priority being important only when an ISR is called, the priority is used to determine
whether a new interrupt can preempt the one currently running.
This is a powerful tool that is likely to cause unnecessary complexity. Unless nested
interrupts solve a clear problem particular to your system, it is customary to disable
other interrupts while in an ISR. Most processors that allow nested interrupts give
you a method for disabling them at system initialization.

                                 Stacks (and Heaps)
A stack is a data structure that holds information in a LIFO (last in, first out) manner,
as shown in Figure 5-2. You push data onto the stack (adding it to the stack’s memory
and increasing the pointer to where the next set of data will go). To get the last piece
of data out, you pop the stack (which decreases the pointer).

Figure 5-2. Stack basics

A stack is a simple data structure any developer can implement, but the stack (note
the definite article “the”) refers to the system call stack that lies behind every running
program in a designated section of RAM. For each function called, the compiler cre‐
ates a stack frame that contains the local variables, parameters, and the address to
return to when the function is finished. There is a stack frame for every function call,
starting with the reset vector, then the call to main, and then whatever you call after
that. (Or if you have multiple threads, each one will have its own stack.)
A heap is a tree data structure. The heap is where dynamically allocated memory
comes from (so named because it can be implemented as a heap data structure).
Usually the heap grows up (see Figure 5-3), whereas the stack grows down. When
they meet, your system crashes. Well, actually your system will probably crash before
they meet because there may be other things between them (global and static vari‐
ables and possibly code). (More about this in Chapter 11.)
If the stack gets too large, it can grow into other areas of memory, for example, where
a global array is located. If the stack overwrites the memory of the array, the corrupt
data in the array is likely to give you incorrect results. This is called a stack overflow.
On the other hand, if the global array overwrites the stack, the function return
address may be corrupted. When the function returns, the program will return to a
bogus address and crash (usually due to an inappropriate instruction).

                                                                        An IRQ Happens   |   129
Figure 5-3. RAM memory map of a system showing heap and stack pointers

Save the Context
After the interrupt request happens, the processor saves where it was before it finds
the appropriate function handler. Like a bookmark saving your spot, the processor
saves the context to the stack; see “Stacks (and Heaps)” on page 129. The context
includes the program counter (which points to the next instruction to execute) and a
subset of the processor registers (which are like the processor’s own cached local
RAM). The register contents are saved so that the interrupt code can use them in its
execution without corrupting the state of the primary code path.
These steps don’t come for free. The amount of time it takes between the IRQ and the
ISR is the processor’s interrupt latency, usually advertised in the user manual as taking
a certain number of processor cycles.

The system latency is the worst-case amount of time it takes from when an interrupt
event happens to the start of the ISR. It includes the processor’s interrupt latency and
the maximum amount of time interrupts are ever disabled.

                If interrupt nesting is disallowed, then new interrupts are disabled
                while an interrupt is being handled. The largest contributor to sys‐
                tem latency may be the time spent in the longest interrupt. Keep
                interrupts short!

The interrupt latency processor cycles are lost. If you had a processor that could do a
hundred instructions a second (100 Hz) with an interrupt latency of 10 cycles, and
you set up a timer that interrupted every second, you’d lose 10% of your cycles to
context switching. Actually, since you have to restore the context, it could be worse
than that. Even though 10 cycles is a decent interrupt latency (not great, but not bad),
100 Hz systems are rare. However, doing this math with a 30 MHz processor, han‐
dling audio in an interrupt at 44,100 Hz with a 10-cycle latency uses 1.47% of the pro‐
cessor’s cycles simply calling the interrupt handler. That doesn’t even include the time
spent executing the ISR or returning from it.
Processor designers work to keep the interrupt latency low. One way to do that is to
store the minimum amount of context. This means that instead of saving all of the
processor registers, the processor will save only a subset, requiring the software to
store the other ones it needs. This is usually handled by the compiler, increasing the
effective system latency.

                            Calculating System Latency
  Calling lots of functions while in an interrupt is discouraged. Each function call has
  some overhead (discussed more fully in Chapter 11), so function calls make your
  interrupt take longer. If you have other interrupts disabled during your interrupt,
  your system latency increases with each function call.
  As your system latency increases, its ability to handle events in real time decreases.
  Consider the aforementioned 30 MHz processor with a 44,100 Hz interrupt. If each
  interrupt uses 10 cycles for interrupt overhead and 10 cycles calling five short func‐
  tions (each) that collectively use 275 cycles actually processing information, no other
  interrupt can be handled for at least 335 cycles (10 + 5 × 10 + 275). The time
  consumed by this is 11 μs (335/30 MHz). Also note that the system spends nearly 50%
  of its time in the interrupt (44,100 Hz × 11 micros = 0.492 s). Reducing the overhead
  of the interrupt will free up processor cycles for other tasks.

                                                                        Save the Context   |   131
Retrieve the ISR from the Vector Table
After the IRQ happens and the context is saved, the third step for handling an inter‐
rupt is to determine which ISR to call by looking in the interrupt vector table (IVT).
This table is located at a specific area of memory on your processor. When an inter‐
rupt occurs, the processor looks in the table to call the function associated with the
interrupt.
The IVT is a list of callback functions, one for each type of interrupt. Secretly, the vec‐
tor table is a list of function pointers, though the code for it is often implemented in
assembly.

Initializing the Vector Table
The startup code (which probably came with your compiler or processor vendor
HAL) sets up the vector table for you, usually with placeholder interrupt handlers.
When debugging, you probably want your unhandled interrupts to go into an infinite
loop so that you find them and turn off the interrupt or handle it properly.
When the product hits the market, having an unhandled interrupt handler go into an
endless loop will cause your system to become unresponsive. You may want unhan‐
dled interrupts to simply return to normal execution. It wastes processor cycles and is
still a bug, but at least the bug’s effect on the customer is a slight slowdown instead of
a system that needs a reboot.
In some cases, if you name your handler function the same as the one in the table,
some tools’ magic will make the linker use yours in the IVT. With other processors
and compilers, though, you will need to insert your ISR into the function table at the
correct slot for your interrupt.
In the STM32F103xx processor, using the STM32Cube HAL, we’d only need to name
the ISR TIM2_IRQHandler, and the linker will put the correct function address in the
vector table. In some processors, such as Microchip’s AT91SAM7S, you have to create
a function and put it in the table manually:
      interrupt void Timer1ISR(){
        …
      }

      void FoodTimerInit(){
        …
        AT91C_BASE_AIC->AIC_SVR[AT91C_ID_TC1] = // Set TC1 IRQ handler
                                                // address in the IVT
            (unsigned long)Timer1ISR; // Source Vector Register,
                                       // slot AT91C_ID_TC1 (12)
        …
      }

This has to occur when the interrupt is initialized and before the interrupt is enabled.

Looking Up the ISR
The vector table is located at a particular address in memory, set by the linker script.
Since this is probably done for you in the startup code, you usually don’t need to
know how to do it. However, in case you are curious, let’s dig into the startup code for
the STM32F103xx for a moment:
    __attribute__ ((section(".isr_vector")))
    void (* const g_pfnVectors[])(void) = {
      // Core Level - CM3
      &_estack,           // The initial stack pointer
      Reset_Handler,      // This is the very beginning of running
      NMI_Handler,        // Nonmaskable fault handler

    …
        TIM2_IRQHandler,   // 28, TIM2 global interrupt
        TIM3_IRQHandler,   // 29,
        TIM4_IRQHandler,   // 30,
    …
    }
First in the listing is a nonstandard line that communicates to the compiler that the
following variable needs to go someplace special and that the linker script will indi‐
cate where this is (at the location specified by .isr_vector). We’ll talk more about
linker scripts later (see “Intro to Linker Scripts” on page 257), but right now it is safe
to say that the .isr_vector linker variable is located where the user manual says the
vector table should be (0x00000000).
Inside the array of void * elements, there is the location for the stack, also set in the
linker script. After that is the reset vector, which is the address of the code that is
called when your system boots up or resets for another reason. It is one of the excep‐
tion interrupts mentioned earlier. Most people don’t think of turning on the power or
pushing the reset button as an interrupt to their code. However, the processor
responds to a reset by loading a vector from the table, in the same way that it
responds to an interrupt by loading a vector. Later in the table, there are the periph‐
eral interrupts, such as our timer. Figure 5-4 shows how this would look in the pro‐
cessor’s memory.
Each interrupt has an interrupt number. For our timer 3 interrupt, it is 50. When the
interrupt happens, it is signaled by just this number, and the part of the processor that
generates the IRQ sends it to the part of the processor that looks up the handler in the
vector table as the number. The processor uses the interrupt number and the struc‐
ture of the vector table to look up the address to call when the interrupt arrives.

                                                      Retrieve the ISR from the Vector Table   |   133
Figure 5-4. Vector table in memory

                                 Reentrant Functions
  A reentrant function is one that can be safely called multiple times while it is running.
  The following garden-variety swap function, for instance, is nonreentrant because it
  has a temporary variable t whose value must not change before it is used to set the
  final y variable:
       int t;

       void swap(int* x, int* y) {
         t = *x;
         *x = *y;
         // hardware interrupt might invoke isr() here while
         // the function has been called from main or other
         // non-interrupt code
         *y = t;
       }

       void isr {
         int x=1, y=2;
         swap(&x, &y);
       }
  Functions that use static or global variables are nonreentrant. Many C++ objects are
  nonreentrant by virtue of their private data. Worse, some standard library calls are
  nonreentrant, including malloc (or new) and printf (any I/O or file function).
  When the system saves the context, it does the bare minimum. The compiler can do
  more, but even that does not give you an entirely clean slate to work with. That is
  actually a good thing, because you usually want a global variable or two to signal the
  noninterrupt code that the interrupt occurred. However, when writing an ISR, you
  should be extremely wary about functions that use global variables without protecting
  them against interrupts.

               Count on interrupts to occur at the worst time. That way, you can
               design your system to minimize the havoc they can cause.

Call the ISR
So far we’ve gone through what you need to know about the workings of an ISR and
how to set it up. Now we’ll get to the meaty part of actual ISR, the part that you’ll
need to implement. We’ve already seen the most important rules surrounding ISRs:

  • Keep ISRs short because longer ones increase your system latency. Generally
    avoid function calls, which may have hidden depths and increase overhead.
  • Don’t call nonreentrant functions (such as printf), because global variables can
    be corrupted by interrupts.

This gives us the design guidelines to implement an ISR. Our timer interrupt is easy
to implement because all we need to do is set a flag indicating it is time to feed the
chicken:
    volatile tBoolean gFeedChicken= FALSE; // global variable set by the interrupt
                                           // handler, which is cleared by normal
                                           // code when event handled
    void TIM2_IRQHandler(void){
      __disable_irq();        // disallow nesting of interrupts
      gFeedChicken = TRUE;
      __enable_irq();
    }
The interrupt doesn’t print out a debug message or drive the feed mechanism. As
much as it seems to make sense to do that, keeping it short means we need to let
other parts of the system take care of these things. This keeps system latency to a
minimum.
Interrupts can do more than set flags and unblock communications drivers. Adding
longer code to make the system safer is a worthy trade-off. Otherwise, keep interrupts
short!
Many processors require that you acknowledge (or clear) the interrupt. Usually this is
accomplished by reading a status register. As noted in “Writing an Indirect Register”
on page 136, this may have the side effect of clearing the bit.

                                                                        Call the ISR   |   135
                                   Writing an Indirect Register
  Memory-mapped registers can have some interesting properties. Registers don’t
  always act like variables.
  If you want to modify a normal variable, the steps hidden in your memoryReg
  |= 0x01 line of code are:

      1. Read the current value of the memory into a processor register.
      2. Modify the value.
      3. Write the variable back into memory.

  However, for a register that sets interrupt handling, this multistep process can cause
  problems if an interrupt occurs between any two of these steps. To prevent this race
  condition—where an interrupt occurs during an inconsistent state—actions on regis‐
  ters must be atomic (executing in a single instruction).
  This is accomplished by having a set of indirect registers: a register that can set bits
  and a register that can clear bits, each of which acts on a third functional register that
  may not be directly writable (nor memory mapped). To indirectly set a bit, you have
  to write the bit in the set register. To indirectly clear a bit, you write that bit in the
  clear register. In either register (set or clear), the unset bits don’t do anything to the
  functional register. (Part B of Figure 5-5 gives an example of setting and clearing bits
  and the contents of the functional register at each step.)
  Sometimes the functional register is reflected in the set and clear registers, so if you
  read either one of those, you can see the currently set bits. It can be confusing,
  though, to read something that is not what you have written to the same register.
  A functional register also can be write-only without any way to be read. Some pro‐
  cessors save memory space by having a register act as a functional register when it is
  written but a status register when it is read. In that case, you’ll need to keep track of
  the bit set in the functional register using a shadow variable, a global variable in your
  code that you modify whenever you change the register. Instead of setting and clear‐
  ing intermediate registers, you’ll need to modify your shadow and then write the reg‐
  ister with the shadow’s value.
  There are also registers where the act of reading the register modifies its contents.
  This is commonly used for status registers, where the pending status is cleared by the
  processor once your code reads the register (see part C of Figure 5-5). This can pre‐
  vent a race condition from occurring in the time between the user reading the register
  and clearing the relevant bit.
  Your user manual will tell you which types of registers exhibit special behaviors.

Figure 5-5. Methods for setting register values

Multiple Sources for One Interrupt
Some processors have only one interrupt. The machinery necessary to stop the pro‐
cessor takes up space in the silicon, and a single interrupt saves on cost (and power).
When this interrupt happens, the ISR starts by determining which of the peripherals
activated the interrupt. This information is usually stored in a cause or status register,
where the ISR looks at each bit to separate out the source of the interrupt (“Timer 1,
did you trigger an interrupt? No? What about you, timer 2?”).
Having an interrupt for each possible peripheral is a luxury of many larger process‐
ors. When there are many possible sources, it is inefficient to poll all of the options.
However, even when you have identified a peripheral, there is still a good chance
you’ll need to unravel the real source of the interrupt. For example, if your timer 3 is
used for multiple purposes, the chicken feeder timeout may be indicated when timer
3 matches the first match register. To generate the appropriate event when the inter‐
rupt happens, you’ll need to look at the peripheral’s interrupt register to determine
why the timer 3 interrupt occurred:
    if (TIM3->SR & 0x1) { // interrupt occurs when timer’s counter
                          // is updated
Most peripherals require this second level of checking for the interrupt. To look at
another example, in a specific communication mechanism such as SPI, you’ll

                                                                         Call the ISR   |   137
probably get a single interrupt to indicate that something interesting happened. Then
you’ll need to check the SPI status register to determine what it was: it ran out of
bytes to send, it received some bytes, the communication experienced errors, etc.

                     For GPIOs, there may be one interrupt for a bank of pins, and
                     you’ll need to determine the specific pin that caused the interrupt.

Whether you have one interrupt with many sources or many interrupts with even
more sources, don’t stop looking at the cause register when you find the first hit.
There could be multiple causes. That leads us back to the question of priorities: which
interrupt source will you handle first?

Disabling Interrupts
Nested interrupts are allowed on the STM32F103xx, but we don’t want to deal with
the complexity of interrupts within interrupts. The __disable_irq() and
__enable_irq() macros come from the compiler vendor HAL and insert a single
instruction, so the overhead to prevent nesting is minimal.

Critical Sections
Race conditions can happen in critical sections. To avoid that, we’ll need to turn off
interrupts there as well. We could disable a particular interrupt, but that might lead to
the priority inversion (we’ll talk more about that in Chapter 6). Unless you have a
good reason for your particular design, it is usually safer to turn off all interrupts.
There are two methods for disabling interrupts. The first method uses the macros
we’ve already seen. However, there is one problem with those: what if you have criti‐
cal code inside critical code? For example:
      HandyHelperFunction:
        disable interrupts
        do critical things
        enable interrupts

      CriticalFunction:
        disable interrupts
        call HandyHelperFunction
        do supposedly critical things        // unprotected!
        enable interrupts

Note that as soon as interrupts are enabled in HandyHelperFunction, they are also
enabled in the calling function CriticalFunction, which is a bug. Critical sections

should be short (to keep system latency at a minimum), so you could avoid this prob‐
lem by not nesting critical sections, but this is something easier said than done.

                Because some processors won’t let you nest critical pieces of code,
                you’ll need to be sure to avoid doing it accidentally. To avoid this
                issue, I recommend naming the functions in a way that indicates
                they turn off interrupts.

Alternatively, if your processor allows it, implement the global disable and enable
functions (or macros) a little differently by returning the previous status of the inter‐
rupts in the code that disables them:
    HandyHelperFunction:
      interrupt status = disable interrupts()
      do critical things
      enable interrupts(interrupt status)

    CriticalFunction:
      interrupt status = disable interrupts()
      call HandyHelperFunction
      do critical things
      enable interrupts(interrupt status)
Here the helper function gets an interrupt status indicating the interrupts are already
off. When the helper function calls the method to enable the interrupts, the interrupt
status parameter causes no action to be taken. The critical code remains safe through‐
out both functions. Also important, if the helper is called by a different function, the
helper’s critical area is still protected.

Restore the Context
After your ISR has finished, it is time to return to normal execution. Some compilers
extend C/C++ to include an interrupt keyword (or __IRQ, or _interrupt) to indi‐
cate which functions implement interrupt handlers. The processor gives these func‐
tions special treatment, both when they start (some context is saved before the ISR
starts running) and when they return.
As noted in “Save the Context” on page 130, the program counter points to the
machine instruction you are about to run. When you call a function, the address of
the next instruction (program counter + 1 instruction) is put on the stack as the
return address. When you return from the function (rts), the program counter is set
to that address.

                                                                     Restore the Context   |   139
                     It is not unusual for different assembly languages to have similar
                     opcodes. However, rts and rti tend to be pretty common. They
                     stand for “ReTurn from Subroutine” and “ReTurn from Interrupt,”
                     respectively.

However, the interrupt isn’t a standard function call; it is a jump to the interrupt han‐
dler caused by the processor. If the interrupt simply returned as though it were a
function, the things that the processor did to store the context would not get undone.
So interrupts have a special assembly instruction (rti) to indicate that they are
returning from an interrupt. This lets the processor know that it must restore the
context to its state prior to the function call before continuing on its way.
If your C/C++ compiler doesn’t require you to indicate that a function is an interrupt,
you can rest assured it is finding some other way to make the return from interrupt
happen. That is, the compiler is probably wrapping the interrupt function in assem‐
bly code that merely calls your function. Once your handler returns from the func‐
tion call, the assembly wrapper returns from the interrupt. The processor resets the
stack the way it was, and program execution continues from exactly the point it left
off.
Until the chicken presses the button again.

Configuring Interrupts
Handling interrupts is a matter of an ISR called from the vector table when the pro‐
cessor gets an appropriate IRQ. While there are exceptions automatically set up in
case of fault conditions, most interrupts from buttons and peripherals need to be
configured before the interrupt can happen.
The first step to setting up an interrupt is often, somewhat oddly, disabling the inter‐
rupt. Even though part of the power-on sequence is to disable and clear all interrupts,
it is sensible to take the precaution anyway. If the interrupt is enabled, it might fire
before the initialization code finishes setting it up properly, possibly leading to a
crash.
Setting up interrupts uses registers that are memory mapped, similar to those we saw
in “Function Pointers Aren’t So Scary” on page 78. As noted in that sidebar, accessing
the memory address directly will make for illegible code. Most processor and com‐
piler vendors will give you a header file of #define statements, often allowing you to
access individual registers as members of structures. Let’s take apart a typical line of
code:
      NVIC->ICER[0] = (1<<2); // disable timer 2 interrupt

Many things are going on in that one line. First, NVIC is a pointer to a structure loca‐
ted at a particular address. The header file from the compiler vendor unravels the
hard-coded memory-mapped address:
    #define SCS_BASE (0xE000E000UL)         /*!< System Control Space Base Addr */
    #define NVIC_BASE (SCS_BASE + 0x0100UL) /*!< NVIC Base Address */
    #define NVIC   ((NVIC_Type *)NVIC_BASE) /*!< NVIC configuration struct */
The same header file defines the structure that holds the registers and where they are
in the address space, so we can identify the next element in our line of code, ICER[0]:
    typedef struct{
      __IO uint32_t ISER[8]; /*!< Offset: 0x000 Interrupt Set Enable Register */
           uint32_t RESERVED0[24];
      __IO uint32_t ICER[8];/*!< Offset: 0x080 Interrupt Clear Enable Register*/
    …
    } NVIC_Type;

                This header file structure can be built by reading the user manual if
                you can’t find where someone else has done it for you.

This processor has separate clear and set registers, as described in “Writing an Indi‐
rect Register” on page 136, so what our code does is set a bit in the clear (ICER) regis‐
ter that disables the timer interrupt. This is known as masking the interrupt. Once the
interrupt is disabled, we can configure it to cause an IRQ when the timer has expired.
(Timer configuration was covered in Chapter 4). All operations use the structure that
points to the memory map of the processor registers for this peripheral (TIM2). The
user manual says that the match control register describes whether an interrupt
should happen (yes) and whether the timer should reset and start again (no):
    TIM2->DIER |= 0x01;           // interrupt definition reg, on update
    TIM2->CR1 |= TIM_OPMODE_SINGLE; // stop incrementing after it expires
Even though the first line of this snippet sets the timer interrupt to occur when it
modified the register, it didn’t really turn on the interrupt. Many processors require
two steps to turn on the interrupt: a peripheral-specific interrupt-enable like the one
just shown, plus a global interrupt-enable like the following:
    NVIC->ISER[0] = (1<<2);         // enable timer 2 interrupt
    TIM2->CR1 |= TIM_CR1_CEN;       // start the timer counting
Note that the peripheral interrupt configuration is in the peripheral part of the user
manual, but the other register is in the interrupts section. You need to set both so that
an interrupt can happen. Before putting that line in our code, we might want to con‐
figure a few more things for our timer interrupt.

                                                                    Configuring Interrupts   |   141
When and When Not to Use Interrupts
Now that we’ve set up our chicken’s feed timer to use an interrupt and created the
code to handle the interrupt, we need to backtrack. We forgot a design step: should
the feed timeout be an interrupt?
There are many circumstances in which the simplest solution is an interrupt. Com‐
munication pathways often have buffers that need to be filled (or emptied). An inter‐
rupt can act as a background task to feed the buffers, while the foreground task
generates (or uses) the data. Changes to input lines may need interrupts if they need
to be handled quickly. The more real-time the requirement to handle a change on the
line, the more likely an interrupt is appropriate for a solution. Also, if checking to see
whether an interrupt-type event has occurred takes time from other activities, it is
better to have an interrupt.
We’ve also seen that interrupts have some serious downsides. I already mentioned the
overhead of each interrupt, which can add up if you have a lot of them. Interrupts
also make your system less deterministic. One of the great things about not having an
operating system2 is being able to say that once instruction x happens, y will happen.
If you have interrupts, you lose the predictability of your system. And because the
code is no longer linear in flow, debugging is harder. Worse, some catastrophic bugs
will be very difficult to track down if they depend on an interrupt happening at a very
specific time in the code (i.e., a race condition). Plus, the configuration is largely
compiler- and processor-dependent (and the implementation may be as well), so
interrupts tend to make your code less portable.
In the end, the development cost of implementing (and maintaining) interrupts is
pretty high, sometimes higher than figuring out how to solve the problem at hand
without them. Save interrupts for when you need their special power: when a system
is time-critical, when an event is expensive to check for and happens very rarely, and
when a short background task will let the system run more smoothly.

How to Avoid Using Interrupts
So if you don’t need their special power, how can you avoid interrupts? Some things
can be solved in hardware, such as using a faster processor to keep up with time-
critical events. Other things require more software finesse.
Returning to our chicken example, we’ve considered the fox button and feed timer as
interrupts. The interrupts cause events to be communicated to the main loop code.
Do these events need to be caused by interrupts?

2 Some real-time operating systems (RTOSs) are deterministic, usually the more expensive ones.

Let’s assume the system doesn’t do anything besides handle the events. It just waits for
these events to happen. The implementation of the system could be much simpler to
maintain if we can always see what the code is waiting for.

                When you get to Chapter 13, interrupts become a way to wake the
                processor from sleep, so you have to use them.

Polling
Asking a human “are you done yet?” is generally considered impolite after the fourth
or fifth query, but the processor doesn’t care if the code incessantly asks whether an
event is ready. Polling adds processor overhead, even when there are no events to
process. However, if you are going to be in a while loop anyway (i.e., an idle loop),
there is no reason not to check for events.
Polling is straightforward to code. There’s one subtlety worth mentioning: if you are
polling and waiting for the hardware to complete something, you might want a time‐
out, just in case you happen to miss the event or the hardware didn’t get your com‐
mand properly.
For feeding the chicken, all we need to do is wait for a certain amount of time to pass.
Even though embedded systems have a reputation for being fast, many systems spend
an inordinate amount of their clock cycles waiting for time to pass.

System Tick
Like the sound you hear when the clock’s second hand moves, many systems have a
tick that indicates time is passing. The amount of time in that tick varies, but one mil‐
lisecond tends to be a popular choice.

                Ticks don’t have to be one millisecond. If you have a time that is
                important to your system for other reasons (e.g., you have an audio
                recording system that is running at 44,100 Hz), you might want to
                use that instead.

The tick is implemented with a timer interrupt that counts time passing. Yes, if we
implemented the chicken feed timeout this way, we are still basing the solution on an
interrupt, but it is a much less specific interrupt. The system tick solves a much
broader range of problems. In particular, it lets us define this function:
    void DelayMs(tTime delay);

                                                       When and When Not to Use Interrupts   |   143
This will wait for the amount of time indicated—well, for approximately the amount
of time indicated (see the sidebar, “Fenceposts and Jitter”). Note that because of fen‐
ceposting and jitter, DelayMs isn’t a good measure of a single millisecond. However, if
you want to delay 10 or 100 milliseconds, the error becomes small enough not to
matter. If your system depends on one-millisecond accuracy, you could use a shorter
tick, though you’ll need to balance the overhead of the timer interrupt with the pro‐
cessing needs of the rest of the system.

                                      Fenceposts and Jitter
  A fencepost error is an example of an off-by-one error, often illustrated with building
  materials:
          If you build a straight fence 100 m long with posts 10 m apart, how many posts do you
          need?

  The quick and wrong answer is that you need 10 posts, but you actually need 11 posts
  to enclose the 100 meters, as shown in Figure 5-6. The same is true of a system tick.
  To cover at least the number of milliseconds in question, you need to add one to the
  delay.

Figure 5-6. Fencepost example: looking at the spaces between system ticks

  However, this calculation is complicated by jitter: your call to DelayMs is very unlikely
  to happen on a tick boundary. Instead, the delay will always start after a tick, so that
  DelayMs will always be longer than the number of ticks indicated.
  You can choose whether you want to wait no more than the delay indicated (in which
  case, with a one millisecond delay, you may wait less than a processor cycle) or no less
  than the delay indicated (with a one millisecond delay, you may wait two milliseconds
  minus a processor cycle). You can make whatever choice leaves your application most
  robust, as long as the code is clear.

While waiting for the next feed time, we could call DelayMs and dispense food when
it finishes. However, then we couldn’t respond to any other commands.
If you want to keep track of time passing and do other things, add a few more func‐
tions to your system tick:
    tTime TimeNow();
    tTime TimePassed(tTime since);

The TimeNow function should return the tick counter. The code never looks at this
directly, instead using the TimePassed function to determine whether enough time
has passed. In fact, DelayMs can be implemented as a combination of these functions
(getting the initial time and then waiting for the time passed to be greater than the
delay). In between these functions, your system can do other things. In effect, this is a
kind of polling.
Note that the TimeNow function gives the number of ticks since the system was boo‐
ted. At some point this variable holding the number of ticks will run out of space and
roll over to zero. If you used an unsigned 16-bit integer, a 1 ms tick would make the
clock roll over every 65.5 seconds. If you need to use these functions to try to mea‐
sure something that takes 70 seconds, you may never get there.
However, if you use an unsigned 32-bit integer, your system will roll over to zero in
4,294,967,296 ms, or about 49.7 days. If you use an unsigned 64-bit integer, your 1 ms
tick won’t roll over for half an eon (0.58 billion years). I’m impressed by this long-
term thinking, but are you sure there won’t be a power outage or system reboot
before then?
So the size of your timekeeping variable determines the length of time you can mea‐
sure. In many systems, instability can occur when the rollover happens. Protect
against this by taking the rollover into account when you write the time-measuring
function, to ensure the discontinuity does not cause a problem:
    tTime TimePassed(tTime since) {
      tTime now = gSystemTicks;

        if (now >= since) {return (now - since);}

        // rollover has occurred
        return (now + (1 + TIME_MAX - since));
    }

Time-Based Events
In our chicken example, the feed timer can use the system tick to create its time-
based event. When the code finishes dispensing food, it sets a state variable:
    lastFoodTime = TimeNow();

                                                     When and When Not to Use Interrupts   |   145
Then, when doing housekeeping, it checks for the completion of the event:
      if (TimeSince(lastFoodTime) > CHICKEN_FEED_TIMEOUT)
        // dispense some food
Between those two times, the system can do whatever it needs to: listen for com‐
mands, check the chicken’s panic button, play Tetris, and so on.

A Very Small Scheduler
For things that recur or need attention on a regular basis, you can use a timer as a
mini-scheduler to fire off a callback function (a task).

                     At this point, you are starting to re-create the functions of an oper‐
                     ating system. If your mini-scheduler becomes more and more com‐
                     plicated, consider investing in an operating system. More about
                     that in Chapter 6.

Feeding the chicken is a good example of something the scheduler can accomplish.
But to make it interesting, let’s add an egg check that causes a slowly blinking red light
if there is an egg.
Although we could use the time-based event to check for eggs and then blink the red
light, it might be a little simpler to make this a background task, something that the
scheduler can accomplish.
So, before looking at the gory details, let’s consider what the main loop needs to do to
make all this work for a scheduler that runs about once a second, appropriate for our
red light blinking state (but too sluggish for handling other events):
      Run the scheduler after initialization is complete
      LastScheduleTime = TimeNow()

      Loop forever:
        if TimePassed(LastScheduleTime) > ONE_SECOND
         Run the scheduler, it will call the functions (tasks) when they are due
         LastScheduleTime = TimeNow()
We already worked out the time-based functionality in the previous section; now let’s
look at the scheduler in more detail.
When a task is allocated, it has some associated overhead, including the callback
function that is the heart of the task. It also contains the next time the task should be
run, the period (if it is a periodic task), and whether or not the task is currently
enabled:
      struct Task;               // forward declaration of the struct
      typedef void (*TaskCallback)(struct Task *); // type of the callback function

    typedef struct Task {
      tTime runNextAt;       // next timer tick at which to run this task
      tTime timeBetweenRuns;    // for periodic tasks
       TaskCallback callback;
       int enabled;             // current status
    };
The calling code should not know about the internals of the task management, so
each task has an interface to hide those details:
    void TaskResetPeriodic(struct Task *t);
    void TaskSetNextTime(struct Task *t, tTime timeFromNow, tTime now);
    void TaskDisable(struct Task *t);
(Yes, these could be methods in a class instead of functions; both ways work fine.)
The scheduler is straightforward and has only one main interface:
    void SchedulerRun(tTime now);
When the scheduler runs, it looks through its list of tasks. Upon finding an enabled
task, it looks to see whether the current time is later than runNextAt. If so, it runs the
task by calling the callback function. The SchedulerRun function sits in the main
loop, running whenever nothing else is.
These tasks are not interrupt-level, so they should not be used for activities with real-
time constraints. Also, the tasks have to be polite and give up control relatively
quickly, because they will not be preempted as they would be in typical operating
systems.
There is one final piece to the scheduler: attaching the tasks to the scheduler so that
they run. First, you’ll need to allocate a task. Next, configure it with your callback
function, the time at which the function should run, and the time between each sub‐
sequent run (for periodic functions). Finally, send it to the scheduler to put in its list:
    void SchedulerAddTask(struct Task* t);

                             Publish/Subscribe Pattern
  With the scheduler, we’ve built what is known as a publish/subscribe pattern (also
  called an observer pattern or pub/sub model). The scheduler publishes the amount of
  time that has passed, and several tasks subscribe to that information (at varying inter‐
  vals). This pattern can be even more flexible, often publishing several different kinds
  of information.
  The name of the pattern comes from newspapers, which is probably the easiest way to
  remember it. One part of your code publishes information, and other parts of your
  code subscribe to it. Sometimes the subscribers request only a subset of the informa‐
  tion (like getting the Sunday edition only). The publisher is only loosely coupled to

                                                       When and When Not to Use Interrupts   |   147
  the subscribers. It doesn’t need to know about the individual subscribers; it just sends
  the information in a generic method.
  Our scheduler has only one type of data (how much time has passed), but the pub‐
  lish/subscribe pattern is even more powerful when you have multiple types of data.
  This pattern is particularly useful for passing messages, allowing parts of your system
  to receive messages they are interested in but not others. When you have one object
  with access to information that many others want to know about, consider the pub‐
  lish/subscribe pattern as a good solution.

Further Reading
If you are using an Arm Cortex processor, look into the series The Definitive Guide to
ARM Cortex-M by Joseph Yiu (Newnes). The series includes volumes for the different
processors, and each one looks deeply into the internals of the Cortex-M processors.
The interrupts section is particularly good, though there is usually some example
assembly code so you can see what the processor is really doing.

                            Interview Question: What Not to Do
  Know any good jokes?
  I love a terrible joke. But this is an awful interview question. It isn’t as bad as asking
  about race, religion, gender, age, national origin, marital situation, disabilities, and so
  on. Many of the qualities above are illegal to ask about in the US. Worse than illegal,
  questions of these sorts are unprofessional.
  The goal of an interview is to determine whether interviewees can do the job and you
  can work with them.
  So many times, our goal in hiring is to hire another one of me so I have less work to
  do. It makes things faster if you can just hire a me-clone: someone who speaks the
  same language, has the same cultural background so the idioms and in-jokes are
  understood, and uses the same frame of reference.
  This is shortsighted. While you may be completely awesome, in the long term, diver‐
  sity pays huge dividends by providing more points of view to a problem.
  We need the arguers and the mediators, we need the ones who think in a straight line
  and the ones who go in circles or jump around, we need people who grew up with a
  different idea of inexpensive, the person who travels at light speed, and the people
  who can make sure they are going in the right direction.
  It isn’t diversity of skin color, age, gender, or anything like that; it is diversity of
  thought that is critical. Funny thing though: the bodies get different experiences based

simply on the bodies, so to get diversity of thought, you need diversity of everything
else.
This is very hard in a small company. There is the need to move fast, and lacking
diversity means maybe going faster (by not having to explain why something is
important). But faster is not success. You can shoot yourself in the foot mighty
quickly.
Back to bad questions. Many of the verboten topics can be boiled down to this: don’t
discriminate on things that aren’t important to the job and/or things people can’t con‐
trol. If this was not a person sitting across from you but an intelligent mystery device,
would you ask them the same question?
OK—I ask a lot of electronic devices to tell me jokes. But don’t be a jerk. Even
unintentionally.
When you are sitting in an interview room, it is pretty easy not to ask these questions.
But when you head out to lunch as a group and ask, “So, do you have any kids?”, well,
don’t.
Let them bring up things they want to talk about. “Do you have any interesting hob‐
bies?” is fine. Or you can just talk about what makes you and your place of business
so nifty.

Figure 5-7. Sequence diagram of interrupting cow knock-knock joke

                                                                      Further Reading   |   149
