                                                                            CHAPTER 6
                            Managing the Flow of Activity

In Chapter 2, we looked at different ways to break up a system into manageable
chunks. That chapter described the what and why of design; this chapter covers the
how. Once you’ve identified the pieces, getting them all to work together as a system
can be daunting.

Scheduling and Operating System Basics
Structuring an embedded system without an operating system requires an under‐
standing of some of the things that an operating system can do for you. I’m only
going to give brief highlights; if any of this first section is brand new to you, you may
want to review a book about operating systems (see “Further Reading” on page 177).

Tasks
When you turn on your computer, if you are like me, you load up an email client,
web browser, and compiler. Several other programs start automatically (such as my
calendar). Each of these programs runs on the computer, seemingly in parallel, even
if you have only one processor.

                Three words that mean slightly different things, but that overlap
                extensively, are sometimes used interchangeably. While these defi‐
                nitions are the ones I was taught, some RTOSs may switch them
                around. A task is something the processor does. A thread is a task
                plus some overhead, such as memory. A process typically is a com‐
                plete unit of execution with its own memory space, usually com‐
                piled separately from other processes. I’m focusing on tasks;
                threads and processes generally imply an operating system.

The operating system you are running has a scheduler that does the switching
between active processes (or threads), allowing each to run in its proper turn. There
are many ways to implement schedulers, a topic far beyond the scope of this book (let
alone this small section). The key point is that a scheduler knows about all of the
tasks/threads/processes/things your system should do and chooses which one to do
right now.
Without an operating system, you are going to need to manage the scheduling your‐
self. The simplest scheduler has only one task. As with the blinking LED project in
Chapter 4, you can do the same thing every time (on, wait, off, wait, repeat). How‐
ever, things become more complex as the system reacts to changes in its environment
(e.g., the button presses that change the LED timing).

Communication Between Tasks
The button-press interrupt and the LED-blinking loop are two tasks in the tiny sys‐
tem we have been examining. When we used a global variable to indicate that the
button state changed, the two tasks communicated with each other. However, sharing
memory between tasks is dangerous; you have to be careful about how you do it.
Figure 6-1 shows the normal course of events, where the interrupt sets the shared
memory when a button is pressed. Then the main loop reads and clears the variable.
The user presses the button again, which causes the interrupt to set the memory
again.
Suppose that just as the main loop is clearing the variable, the interrupt fires again. At
the very instant that the variable is being cleared, an interrupt stops the processing,
swooping in to set the variable. Does it end up as set or cleared?
The answer depends on the precise timing of what happens. This uncertainty is a big
problem. If it can be this complicated with a simple Boolean value, consider what
could happen if the code needs to set two variables or a whole array of data.
This uncertainty about what will actually happen is called a race condition. Any mem‐
ory shared between tasks can exhibit this uncertainty, leading to unstable and incon‐
sistent behavior.

Figure 6-1. Race condition in shared memory

In this example, given the way the interrupt and button work together, it is likely that
the system will miss a button press (if the interrupt wins the race to set the variable,
the main function will clear it, even though it should be set). Though only a slight
annoyance to a user in this particular system, race conditions can lead to unsafe con‐
ditions in more critical systems.

                                                   Scheduling and Operating System Basics   |   153
Avoiding Race Conditions
We need a way to prohibit multiple tasks from writing to the same memory. It isn’t
only writing that can be an issue; the main loop reads both the variable that says the
button is changed and the value of the button. If an interrupt occurs between those
two reads, it may change the value of the button between them.
Any time memory shared between tasks is read or written, it creates a critical section
of code, meaning code that accesses a shared resource (memory or device). The
shared resource must be protected so only one task can modify it at a time. This is
called mutual exclusion, often shortened to mutex. Mutexes are sometimes imple‐
mented with semaphores, mailboxes, or message queues.
In a system with an OS, when two tasks are running but neither is an interrupt, you
can use a mutex to indicate which task owns a resource. This can be as simple as a
variable indicating whether the resource (or global variable) is available for use. How‐
ever, when one of the two tasks is an interrupt, we have already seen that not even a
Boolean value is safe, so this resource ownership change has to be atomic. An atomic
action is one that cannot be interrupted by anything else in the system.
From here on, we are going to focus on systems where a task is interruptible but
otherwise runs until it gives up control. In that case, race conditions are avoided by
disallowing interrupts while accessing the shared global variables. This has a down‐
side, though: when you turn off interrupts, the system can’t respond as quickly to but‐
ton presses, because it has to wait to get out of a critical section. Turning off
interrupts increases the system latency (time it takes to respond).
Latency is important as we talk about real-time systems. A real-time system must
respond to an event within a fixed amount of time. Although the required response
time depends on the system, usually it is measured in microseconds or milliseconds.
As latency increases, the time it takes before an event can be noticed by the system
increases, and so the total time between an event and its response increases.

Priority Inversion
Some processors allow interrupts to have different priorities (like operating systems
do for processes and threads). Although this flexibility can be very useful, it is possi‐
ble to create a lot of trouble for yourself. Figure 6-2 shows a typical operating system’s
definition of priority inversion. It is OK for a high-priority process to stop because it
needs access to something a low-priority process has. However, if a medium-priority
process starts, it can block the low-priority process from completing its use of the
resource needed by the high-priority task. The medium-priority task blocks the high-
priority task.

Figure 6-2. Priority inversion with an operating system and interrupts, competing for
resource R

For example, say we have the high-priority, button-press interrupt and our low-
priority main loop. When the main function accesses the button-press variable, it
turns off the button-press interrupt to avoid a race condition. Later, we add another
interrupt to output debug data through a communication port. This should be a
background task of medium priority, something that should get done but shouldn’t
block the system from handling a button press. However, if the debug task interrupts
the main loop, it is doing exactly that.
What is the most important thing for the processor to be doing? That should be the
highest priority. If someone had asked whether debug output is more important than
button presses, we would have said no. If that is true, why is the processor running
the debug interrupt and not the button handler? The simple fix in this case is to dis‐
able all interrupts (or all interrupts that are lower in priority than the button handler)
when the button interrupt occurs.
As we look at different ways of task management without an operating system, be
alert for situations that cause the processor to inadvertently run a task that isn’t the
highest priority.

                                                    Scheduling and Operating System Basics   |   155
State Machines
One way to keep your system organized while you have more than one thing going
on is to use a state machine. This is a standard software pattern, one that embedded
systems use a lot. According to Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented
Software, the intent of the state pattern is to “allow an object to alter its behavior when
its internal state changes. The object will appear to change its class.”
Put more simply, when you call a state machine, it will do whatever it thinks it should
do based on its current state. It will not do the same thing each time, but will base the
change of behavior on its context, which consists of the environment and the state
machine’s history (internal state). If this all sounds clinical and theoretical, there is an
easier way to think about state machines: flowcharts.
Almost any state machine can be represented as a flowchart. (Conversely, a problem
you solve with a flowchart is probably destined to be a state machine.) State machines
can also be represented as finite state automata (as shown in Figure 6-3), where each
state is a circle and a change between states (a state transition) is an arrow.

Figure 6-3. Stoplight system

We’ll look at each element of this figure in the following section. The arrows in the
diagram are as important as the circles. State machines are not only about the states
that a system can occupy, but also about the events that the system handles.

State Machine Example: Stoplight Controller
To talk about state machines properly, we need an example that is a bit more compli‐
cated than a blinking LED and a button. Figure 6-3 shows a stoplight controller.
When the light is red and the controller gets a message to go, it turns the light green.
When the controller gets a message to stop, it turns the light yellow for a time and

then red. We’ve implemented this stoplight so it stays green as long as no one needs it
to change. Presumably, a command to stop will be generated when a car arrives on
the cross street.
One state transition—which is the formal term for what each arrow shows—is a bit
subtle. When the light is yellow and the controller receives a message to go, it should
not change the light back to green. Yellow lights should change to red, not green, so
the message to go just leaves the light in the yellow stage. This subtlety is an example
of the gotchas that state machines create for you. You have to be prepared for every
event that can happen in every state, including very rare cases—even cases that
shouldn’t take place but that may happen because of errors.
To work with a state machine, the first thing to do is to figure out the states and the
events that can change states. With a system as simple as this, drawing a diagram is
the best thing to do. Once you’ve identified the states (red, yellow, green), look at its
connections. The stop and go commands should happen only in the green and red
states, respectively. Even so, the commands are asynchronous, coming from outside
the system, so each state should be able to handle them, even if they occur improp‐
erly. The easiest way of handling improper commands here is to ignore them, putting
a loop back to the associated state.

                If an improper event occurs, it may be better to generate an error of
                some sort. Use your judgment.

State-Centric State Machine
Most people think of a state machine as a big if-else statement, or switch statement:
    while (1) {
      look for event

      switch (state) {
      case (green light):
        if (event is stop command)
          turn off green light
          turn on yellow light
          set state to yellow light
          start timer
        break;
      case (yellow light):
        if (event is timer expired)
          turn off yellow light
          turn on red light
          set state to red light
        break;

          case (red light):
            if (event is go command)
              turn off red light
              turn on green light
              set state to green light
            break;
          default (unhandled state)
            error!
          }
      }
The form of the state machine here is:
      case (current state):
        if event valid for this state
          handle event
          prepare for new state
          set new state
The state machine can change its context (move to a new state). This means that each
state needs to know about its sibling states.

State-Centric State Machine with Hidden Transitions
Another way to implement the state machine is to separate the state transition infor‐
mation from the state machine. This is theoretically better than the model in the pre‐
vious section because it has more encapsulation and fewer dependencies. The
previous model forced each state to know how and when to trigger each of the other
states that can be reached from it. In the model I’ll show in this section, some higher-
level system keeps track of which state reaches which other state. I’ll call this the “next
state” function. It handles every state and puts the system into the next state that it
should be in. By creating this function, you can separate the actions taken in each
state from the state transitions.
The generic form of this would look like this:
      case (state):
        make sure current state is actively doing what it needs
        if event valid for this state
          call next state function
In the stoplight example, this model would create simpler code for each state, and it
would also be similar for almost all states. For instance, the green light state would
look like this:
      case (green light):
        turn on green light (even if it is already on)
        if (event is stop)
          turn off green light
          call next state function
        break;

The next state function should be called when a change occurs. The code will be
familiar from the previous section because it is a simple switch statement as well:
    next state function:
        switch (state) {
        case (green light):
          set state to yellow light
          break;
        case (yellow light):
          set state to red light
          break;
        case (red light):
          set state to green light
          break;
Now you have one place to look for the state and one for the transitions, but each one
is pretty simple. In this example, the state transitions are independent of the event,
one clue that this is a good implementation method.
This model is not always the best. For example, if a go command in the yellow state
led back to green, the next state function would depend on both the current state and
event. The goal of this method is to hide transitions, not to obfuscate your code.
Sometimes it is better to leave it all together (as described in “State-Centric State
Machine” on page 157).

Event-Centric State Machine
Another way to implement a state machine is to turn it on its side by having the
events control the flow. With this approach, each event has an associated set of
conditionals:
    case (event):
      if state transition for this event
        go to new state
For example:
    switch (event)
    case (stop):
      if (state is green light)
        turn off green light
        go to next state
      // else do nothing
      break;
Most state machines create a comfortable fit between switch statements and states,
but in some cases it may be cleaner to associate the state machines with events, as
shown here. The functions still might need a switch statement to handle the depend‐
ency on the current state:

      function to handle stop event
        if (state == green light)
          turn off green light
          go to next state
Unlike the state-centric options, the event-centric state machine implementation can
make it difficult to do housekeeping activities (such as checking for a timeout in the
yellow state). You could make housekeeping an event if your system needs regular
maintenance, or you could stick with the state-centric implementation shown in the
previous section.

State Pattern
An object-oriented way to implement a state machine is to treat each state as an
object and create methods in the object to handle each event. Each state object in our
example would have these member functions:
Enter
      Called when the state is entered (turns on its light)
Exit
      Called when leaving the state (turns off its light)
EventGo
      Handles the go event as appropriate for the state
EventStop
      Handles the stop event
Housekeeping
      Called periodically to let the state check for changes (such as timeouts)
A higher-level object, the context, keeps track of the states and calls the appropriate
function. It must provide a way for the states to indicate state transitions. As before,
the states might know about each other and choose appropriately, or the transitions
may be hidden, so the state might only indicate a need to go to the next state. Our
system is straightforward, so a simple next-state function will be enough. In pseudo‐
code, the class looks like this:
      class Context {
        class State Red, Yellow, Green;
        class State Current;

      constructor:
        Current = Red;
        Current.Enter();

      destructor:
        Current.Exit();

    Go:
      if (Current.Go() indicates a state change)
        NextState();

    Stop:
      if (Current.Stop() indicates a state change)
        NextState();

    Housekeeping:
      if (Current.Housekeeping() indicates a state change)
        NextState();

    NextState:
      Current.Exit();
      if (Current is Red)    Current = Green;
      if (Current is Yellow) Current = Red;
      if (Current is Green) Current = Yellow;
      Current.Enter();
    }
Allowing each state to be treated exactly the same frees the system from the switch
statement, letting the objects do the work the conditionals used to do.

Table-Driven State Machine
Although flowcharts and state diagrams are handy for conceiving of a state machine,
an easier way to document and fully define a state machine is to use a table.
In the example table in Figure 6-4, each state has a row with an action and multiple
events. The action column describes what should occur in that state (which particular
light should be on). The other columns show the transition that needs to occur when
the system is in a state and an event occurs. Often the transition is simply to move to
a new state (and perform the new associated action).

Figure 6-4. The state machine as a data table

                     When I worked on children’s toys, they often offered 30 or more
                     buttons (ABCs, volume, control, etc.). A table like this helped us
                     figure out which events didn’t get handled in the flowchart. Even
                     though a button may be invalid for a state, someone somewhere
                     will still inexplicably press it. So tables like these not only aided
                     implementation and documentation, they were critical to designing
                     the game play.

Defining the system as a table here hints toward defining it as a data table in the code.
Instead of one large, complex piece of code, you end up with smaller, simpler pieces:

  • A data table showing the action that occurs in a state and what state to go to
    when an event happens
  • An engine that reads the data table and does what it says

The best part is that the engine is reusable, so if you are going to implement many
complex state machines, this is a great solution.
The stoplight problem is a little too simple to make this method worthwhile for
implementation, but it is a straightforward example. Let’s start with the information
in each table:
      struct sStateTableEntry {
        tLight light;       // all states have associated lights
        tState goEvent;     // state to enter when go event occurs
        tState stopEvent;   // ... when stop event occurs
        tState timeoutEvent;// ... when timeout occurs
      };
In addition to the next event for each table, I put in the light associated with the cur‐
rent state so that each state can be handled exactly the same way. (This state machine
method really shines when there are lots of states that are all very similar.) Putting the
light in the state table means our event handlers do the same thing for each state:
      // event handler
      void HandleEventGo(struct sStateTableEntry *currentState){
        // turn off the light (unless we're just going to turn it back on)
        if (currentState->light != currentState->go.light) {
          LightOff(currentState->light);
        }
        currentState = currentState->go;
        LightOn(currentState->light);
        StartTimer();
      }
What about the actual table? It needs to start by defining an order in the data table:

    typedef enum { kRedState = 0, kYellowState = 1, kGreenState = 2 } tState;

    struct sStateTableEntry stateTable[] = {
      { kRedLight,    kGreenState, kRedState,     kRedState}, // Red
      { kYellowLight, kYellowState, kYellowState, kRedState}, // Yellow
      { kGreenLight, kGreenState, kYellowState, kGreenState}, // Green
    }
Typing in this table is a pain, and it is easy to get into trouble with an off-by-one
error. However, if your state machine is a spreadsheet table and you can save it as a
comma- or tab-separated variable file, a small script can generate the table for you. It
feels a bit like cheating to reorganize your state machine as a spreadsheet, but this is a
powerful technique when the number of states and events is large.
Making the state machine a table creates a dense view of the information, letting you
take in the whole state machine at a glance. This will not only help you see holes
(unhandled state/event combinations), it will also let you see that the product handles
events consistently.
The table can show more complex interactions as well, detailing what needs to hap‐
pen. However, as complexity increases, the table loses the ability to simply become
data, and it likely needs to return to one of the implementation mechanisms shown
earlier, one oriented around control flow statements. For example, if we add some
detail and error-finding to the stoplight, we get a more complex picture:

State/events   Command: go                                  Command: stop               Timeout
Red            Move to green                                Do nothing                  Invalid (log error), do nothing
Yellow         Do not clear event (defer handling to red)   Do nothing                  Move to red
Green          Do nothing                                   Move to yellow, set timer   Invalid (log error), do nothing

Even when the state machine can’t be implemented as a data-table-driven system,
representing it as a table provides better documentation than a flowchart.

Choosing a State Machine Implementation
Each option I showed for a state machine offers the same functionality, even though
the implementations are different. I prefer table-driven state machines. Not only can I
reuse the code that drives the generic state machine engine, I find the encapsulated
states make for easier testing.
If you keep the context separate from the state, unit tests can call each state function.
If the context is needed in the state, the unit test can pass in a structure of context
information and verify any changes to the context after the state-related code has run.
Verifying the functionality of each state with a unit test leads to more robust code.
You can do that with any of the implementations, as long as you keep the states

encapsulated so test code can call the states, ideally without needing to know the con‐
text (or have the context passed into the state as a structure).
When you consider your implementation, be lazy. Choose the option that leads to the
least amount of code. If they are all about the same, choose the one with the least
amount of replicated code. If one implementation lets you reuse a section of code
without copying it, that’s a better implementation for your system. If that still doesn’t
help you choose, consider which form of code will be the most easily read by some‐
one else.
State machines are powerful because they let your code act according to its history
(state) and the environment (event). However, because they react differently depend‐
ing on those things, they can be very difficult to maintain, leading to spaghetti code
and dependencies between states that are not obvious to the casual observer. On the
other hand, there is no better way to implement a reactive system, no way that makes
the inherent complexity easier to maintain. Documentation is key, which is why I
focused in these sections on the human-readable representation of the state machine
before showing a code implementation.

Watchdog
We started the scheduler section mentioning the blink-red state. Its goal is to put the
system in a safe mode when a system failure occurs. But how do we know a system
failure has occurred?
Our software can monitor how long it has been since the last communication. If it
doesn’t see a stop or go command in an unreasonably long time, it can respond
accordingly. Metaphorically speaking, it acts as a watchdog to prevent catastrophic
failure. Actually, the term watchdog means something far more specific in the embed‐
ded world.
Most processors or reset circuits have a watchdog timer capability that will reset the
processor if the processor fails to perform an action (such as toggle an I/O line or
write to a particular register). The watchdog system waits for the processor to send a
signal that things are going well. If such a signal fails to occur in a reasonable (often
configurable) amount of time, the watchdog will cause the processor to reset.
The goal is that when the system fails, it fails in a safe manner (fail-safe). No one
wants the system to fail, but we have to be realistic. Software crashes. Even safety-
critical software crashes. As we design and develop our systems, we work to avoid
crashes. But unless you are omniscient, your software will fail in an unexpected way.
Cosmic rays and loose wires happen, and many embedded systems need to be self-
reliant. They can’t wait for someone to reboot the system when the software hangs.
They might not even be monitored by a human. If the system can’t recover from cer‐
tain kinds of errors, it is generally better to restart and put the system in a good state.

Using a watchdog does not free you from handling normal errors; it exists only for
restarting an otherwise unrecoverable system. There are ways to use a watchdog that
make it more effective. But first, let’s look at some suboptimal techniques, based on
models earlier in this chapter, that would make the watchdog less effective:
Setting up a timer interrupt that goes off slightly more often than the watchdog would
take to expire
     If you service the watchdog in the timer interrupt, your system will never reset,
     even when your system is stuck in an infinite loop. This defeats the purpose of
     the watchdog. Never do this.
Setting the delay function (DelayMs) to service the watchdog, with the idea that the pro‐
cessor isn’t doing anything else then
     You’ll have delay functions scattered around the code, so the watchdog will get
     serviced often. Even then, if the processor gets stuck in an area of code that hap‐
     pens to have a delay, the system won’t reset as it should.
Putting the watchdog servicing in places that take a while for the processor to perform,
maybe the five or six longest-running functions
    By scattering the watchdog code around, it waters down the power of the watch‐
    dog and offers the possibility that your code could crash in one of those areas and
    hang the system.
The goal of the watchdog is to provide a way to determine whether any part of the
system has crashed. Ideally, watchdog servicing is in only one place—a place that the
code has to pass through that shows all of its subsystems are running as expected.
Generally, this is the main loop. Even if it means that your watchdog needs to have a
longer timeout, having it watch the whole system is better than giving it a shorter
recovery time while trying to watch only part of the system.
Sadly, for some systems, the watchdog cannot be segregated so neatly. When the sig‐
nal to the watchdog must be sent in some lower level of code, recognize that the code
is dangerous, an area where an unrecoverable error might occur, causing the system
to hang. That code will need extra attention to determine whether anything could go
wrong (and hopefully prevent it).
Generally, you don’t want the watchdog active during board bring-up or while using a
debugger. Otherwise, the system will reset after a breakpoint. Having a straightfor‐
ward way to turn off the watchdog will facilitate debugging. If you have a logging
method, be sure to print out a message on boot if the watchdog is on. It is one of
those things you don’t want to forget to enable as you do production testing. Alterna‐
tively, you can toggle an LED when the watchdog is serviced to give your system a
heartbeat that is easy to see from the outside, letting the user know that everything is
working as expected.

                                                                         Watchdog   |   165
                                        Watchdog Terminology
  Servicing the watchdog so it doesn’t trigger a reset has traditionally been called “kick‐
  ing the dog.”
  This caused consternation when I worked at a small, pet-friendly company. It was
  great to see the dogs play at lunch, and kind of calming. However, one day as we were
  preparing for a big client to review our code, our CEO went off the rails when he saw
  the function KickTheDog() in the main loop. He adamantly explained that no dog,
  real or virtual, would be kicked at our company. Ever.
  We refactored the function name to PetTheDog(). On the day of the big meeting, the
  clients snickered when they saw our politically correct safety net. I’m not sure when
  the terminology changed, but in the years since then, I’ve seen less kicking and more
  petting, feeding, or walking the watchdog. What you choose to do is up to you, but
  you’d never actually kick a dog, right?
  There are three takeaways here: (1) terminology for standard things changes, (2) lan‐
  guage matters, and (3) never let your CEO see your code.

Main Loops
This chapter started with a few important notes about RTOS terms (even though I’m
not supposing you have an RTOS on your system, the concepts transfer to bare
metal). Then there were a bunch of ways to put together state machines. This is all
well and good, but how do we really get started?
We usually start in the main loop. As with state machines, there are many ways to set
up a main loop. They all have advantages and disadvantages, so you’ll need to figure
out what is best for you.

Polling and Waiting
I like Arduino’s simple and clear program structure:
      setup:
        init
      loop:
        toggle LED
        delay
Behind the scenes, the Arduino development environment puts in a main function
that calls the setup function to do initialization. The hidden main function does other
board and processor initialization that it needs. Once your setup and the hidden initi‐
alization is complete, it starts a forever loop, calling your loop function on each pass
(but also possibly calling its own set functions as needed). Figure 6-5 shows how the

pieces of the system interact. The development environment hides the details from
you, but somewhere, there is a main function.
We don’t need someone else to do this for us; we can make main ourselves:
    main:
      init
      while (1)
        toggle LED
        delay

Figure 6-5. Simplest main loop: toggles an LED

This is how main loops begin their lives, as something simple. Of course, this blink‐
ing light is extremely boring, so I’m going to need to add something:
    main:
      init
      while (1)
        read inputs
        write outputs
        toggle LED
        delay
Note that the “read inputs” and “write outputs” could be something else in your code:
a function to check on your command handler interface; where you update your state
machine based on the current time or polled buttons; or the code transforms the
inputs you have into the outputs you need. See Figure 6-6 for the sequence of how
things happen in this loop.
Everything happens as expected in this loop but there is a big problem: it is blocking.
If inputs come in while the system is running the delay, they won’t get handled until
the next pass of the loop. If the inputs need to be dealt with quickly, this may not
work.

Figure 6-6. Blocking main loop

Timer Interrupt
Blocking the processor with a delay is silly when a timer interrupt could do the work
toggling of the LED:
      timer interrupt: toggle LED
      main:
        init
        while (1)
          read inputs
          write outputs
          pet watchdog
Toggling an I/O pin takes very little time; it is safe to put it in an interrupt.
One downside is that the LED is no longer connected to reading and writing; it tells
us only that the timer interrupt is firing off at regular intervals. However, I added a
watchdog to make sure the loop stays running as expected. The sequence diagram for
this (Figure 6-7) shows the LED code separated from the other pieces of code. The
increased system complexity is balanced by decreased local complexity (main doesn’t
need to pay attention to the LED).
This method assumes that the read inputs and write outputs are not blocking each
other and that they each happen quickly enough not to interfere with the timing of
the other.

Figure 6-7. Main loop with timer interrupt controlling LED

Interrupts Do Everything
But what if they can’t? What if sometimes the input needs to run immediately and
can’t wait for the output to finish doing its thing?
Assuming there is a way to set an interrupt when the input data is available, we can
have an interrupt handle copying the data in. This may be a sensor that sends an
interrupt to start sending data or a communication pathway that lets you set up an
interrupt when its buffer is half full. On the output side, perhaps there is a communi‐
cations pathway that takes time but will interrupt to tell you when it is ready for the
next message. So what if the interrupts do all the work?
    timer interrupt: toggle LED
    data available interrupt: copy data in
    output ready interrupt: copy data out

    main:
      init
      set up interrupts
      while (1)
        pet watchdog
        sleep

There is a lot of goodness to this. The decoupling of the subsystems is good as it leads
to a separation of concerns with every interrupt doing its own thing, not depending
on the others. Also, with the interrupts indicating when things happen, the main loop
can go to sleep until it’s awoken by the interrupts. This behavior is great for power
reasons (more about that in Chapter 13).
As the sequence diagram in Figure 6-8 shows, each of these pieces of code is asyn‐
chronous, happening whenever it happens, not dependent on each other. Well,
mostly not dependent. If an interrupt wakes the processor, the ISR runs, then returns
to the main loop directly after the sleep call. In my case, it pets the watchdog and goes
back to sleep. The downside of the asynchronous approach is that understanding the
flow of execution is much harder (which makes debugging much more difficult).

Figure 6-8. Main loop where the interrupts do all the work

Because the interrupts happen when they need to, their response time (system
latency) should be fast, as long as another interrupt isn’t blocking them from running.
Priority and missed interrupts can become issues if interrupts take too long.
Of course, interrupts are supposed to be short. Copying a bunch of data is usually not
a short process; in fact, it is the sort of thing we want to avoid doing in an interrupt
service routine.

Interrupts Cause Events
Instead, we can set a variable that tells main what to do, keeping our interrupts short,
allowing the processor to sleep, and keeping the system responsive to the current
needs:
    timer interrupt: set global led_change variable
    data available interrupt: set global data_available
    output ready interrupt: set global output_ready

    main:
      init
      while (1)
        if led_change: toggle led; led_change = false
        if data_available: copy input; data_available = false
        if output_ready: copy output; output_ready = false
        pet watchdog
        sleep
This adds a bunch of global variables to the code, often a good way to create spaghetti
code. However, the ordering of events is less uncertain as we can use the global vari‐
ables to control ordering (only run output_ready after data_available). The inter‐
rupts are still asynchronous, but as the logic is in normal execution, we can add a few
logging calls which will make debugging much easier.
Plus, the processor can still sleep because the interrupts will wake it up.
Not shown in the pseudocode are two important points I’ve already mentioned earlier
in the book. First, the global variables are volatile, so they don’t get removed by the
compiler’s optimizer (because, according to the compiler’s view of the main loop,
nothing ever changes about event variables). Second, the global variables are only
modified with the interrupts disabled to prevent race conditions.
And if that code with all of its if statements looks like a state machine to you, well,
thank you for paying attention.

Figure 6-9 shows the events being created by the interrupts and handled in the main
loop. Note that the interrupts are asynchronous, so main will handle whatever event
happens next, not in any particular order.

Figure 6-9. Interrupts signal events that are handled in the main loop

Very Small Scheduler
What about the very small scheduler from Chapter 5? How does that look in this
form? As noted above, it looks through a list of tasks, calling their associated callback
function when it is time for that task to run. It is entirely time-based:
    system tick interrupt: increment current time

    main:
      init
      while (1)
        for each task
           if time to run task
             call task callback function
             set new time to run task
        pet watchdog
With this method, each task runs to completion. It is a function call so it may be inter‐
rupted by an interrupt like the system timer tick (aka systick) but not by any other
task. It will finish before the next task can run. That also means that if it takes a long
time, functions scheduled after it can be delayed and that all tasks might run back-to-
back before the watchdog is petted. Though it is rare that all tasks run in one iteration
of the scheduler, you must configure your watchdog timer with a long enough time‐
out to allow for such a possibility.
If this seems totally normal to you, I agree; but an RTOS can be preemptive, which
means that a more important task can interrupt a less important task to use the pro‐
cessor. The RTOS’s scheduler usually looks for the opportunity to do this anytime an
RTOS-related function is called.
But the small scheduler runs in main and doesn’t do anything fancy. When a task is
done, it returns from its function. Then the processor can do other things like go on
to the next task that is ready to run.
The processor can also sleep, as long as it can schedule a wake-up interrupt when the
next task is ready to run. Most timers allow this sort of thing but not all. If not, the
system will have to wake up on each new systick interrupt.
The sequence diagram in Figure 6-10 shows this in action. Note that the tasks are
asynchronous with respect to each other (they don’t need to go in the order shown in
the diagram). Instead, each task depends on how often it needs to run.

Figure 6-10. Very small scheduler drives all tasks, running them at given times

Not everything has to go through the scheduler; you can have other interrupts. For
example, a data available interrupt may change the list of tasks so that the input call‐
back happens immediately (well, the next time the scheduler checks if that task is
ready to run).
Additionally, the LED could still be toggled by a separate timer interrupt. There is no
hard and fast rule for any of these main loop styles; mash-ups are allowed.

Active Objects
There is one more style of main loop that I’d like to share. If you combine the syn‐
chronous (non-interrupt-y) simplicity of the very small scheduler with the lovely sep‐
aration of concerns when everything is done in interrupts, you get active objects. This
one needs an RTOS to be effective because it needs truly separate tasks. However, I
see it a lot in embedded systems from vendor demo code that uses Bluetooth or a

state machine. This is framework code, where you need to add your functions and
tasks to an existing system.
The goal is to spend very little time in interrupts, let everything be completely asyn‐
chronous, and make each piece of code as separate as possible. That way, your code
won’t interfere with whatever system you are integrating into.
A key characteristic of active objects is inversion of control. Instead of your code con‐
trolling the system, the framework is in charge and will call you when it needs you:
    timer interrupt: send event to timer task
    timer task:
      while (1)
        wait for event message
        if message is toggle LED, toggle LED

    data available interrupt: send event to data task
    data task:
      while (1)
        wait for event message
        if message is data available,
          handle data
          send output ready to output task

    output task:
     while (1)
        wait for message
        if message is output ready,
          output data

    main:
      init
      while (1)
        pet watchdog
        sleep
While more complicated on the surface, each task is completely devoted to what it
does. Each task keeps its data private: tasks only communicate via message queues
that are filled asynchronously. They try to remain autonomous from each other. The
first few times I saw active objects, it seemed like a lot of repetition, having to dig
deeply through vendor code to trace how event messages travel through multiple
tasks to be handled by the correct ones. However, looking at it from the vendor’s per‐
spective, the events are a sort of contract, telling you what is going on without know‐
ing anything about your code.

                Inversion of control is often referred to as the Hollywood Principle:
                Don’t call us, we’ll call you.

One good way to identify an active object is to see if the task is organized around a
message pump. Usually this is implemented by a wait for message area followed by a
large switch statement that depends on the message event received. Once the event is
handled, the task goes back to waiting. The task should not do any blocking calls, the
only place it waits is in that one spot (wait for message). (Not all code follows this
rule, some systems allow delays or other RTOS calls to give up control. But it is good
practice to have the message pump be the single blocking point.)
Figure 6-11 shows how separate each component of the system is, minimizing depen‐
dencies and only allowing specific methods of communication between tasks.

Figure 6-11. Active objects run as true tasks in an operating system, using a message
pump to separate dependencies between tasks

Another name for an active object is the actor design pattern. These active objects are
usually implemented as event-driven state machines. And if you recall dependency
injection from Chapter 4, it shares a lot of the same philosophy as inversion of con‐
trol. I want to say the terminology doesn’t matter; the principles are the important
part, but the jargon makes it easier to discuss the principles.
You might think all this technobabble is overwhelming and not that important, but
you never know when you might find yourself in a Star Trek episode where the Enter‐
prise must be saved by a carefully designed active object.

Further Reading
Running an embedded system without an operating system (running on bare metal)
doesn’t mean you can be ignorant of operating system principles. If anything, because
you are doing the work yourself, you need to know more about how OSs function so
you can re-create the parts you need. There are many good OS books, but my favorite
is the classic text book Operating Systems: Design and Implementation by Andrew
Tannenbaum (Pearson). For a free resource, check out the OSDev Wiki.
I also recommend finding an old book about programming a small processor, some‐
thing published in 1980 or before. For example, I have Programming the 6502, third
edition, by Rodnay Zaks (Sybex). You can find one in a library or used bookstore.
This sort of book takes out the modern fluff surrounding processors (the fluff that
makes them easier to use) and provides insight into how the processors worked when
they were simpler. Also, they make for pretty entertaining reading because the
assumed knowledge is much different from current user manuals (mine starts with a
section called “What is programming?”).
Embedded software engineers sometimes focus more on the hardware details that we
need to learn or the algorithms associated with application of the device. Good soft‐
ware techniques aren’t new. One of the best introductions to good software practices
is a paper from 1988: “Designing Reusable Classes” by Ralph Johnson and Brian
Foote. It is free online if you want to take a look.
Miro Samek of Quantum Leaps is an enthusiastic advocate for the active object pat‐
tern and good software in embedded systems (see the “Resources” section of the
Quantum Leaps website). His books and blog postings are filled with excellent infor‐
mation, but his YouTube videos are particularly instructive because he codes the sys‐
tems as he talks.

                                                                   Further Reading   |   177
             Interview Question: Stoplight Control of an Intersection
  A small city has decided its intersection is too busy for a stop sign and needs to be upgra‐
  ded to a light. The city managers asked you to write the code for the light. There are four
  lights, each with a red, yellow, and green bulb. There are also four car sensors that can
  tell when a vehicle is stopped at the light. Where do you start? Tell me about your design,
  and then write some pseudocode. (During this time, I’ve drawn an intersection like the
  one shown in Figure 6-12. I tend to draw this intersection on the interviewee’s piece
  of paper if I can.)

Figure 6-12. Intersection in a small city

  This is a problem that lets the interviewee drive the interaction. If they want to talk
  about design patterns, there are plenty. If they want to skip design and talk about
  timers or the hardware of the sensing, that works too.

                 An interviewee should clarify the problem if it isn’t clear. In
                 this question, they should ask whether there is a left turn light
                 (no, the intersection is small, and the city doesn’t need that
                 yet). Some people also ask about a crosswalk (also not to be
                 handled in the initial development).

Very good interviewees notice that the problem is only half of what it appears to be
on the surface. The goal is not to control four stoplights, since two lights are always in
sync.
As with all of my interview questions, naming is very important. The reason I draw
on their paper is to encourage the interviewee to add their own information to the
diagram. Some good names include identifying the intersection by compass direc‐
tions (north/south and east/west), and some moniker that makes sense for the situa‐
tion (First and Main) or place on the page (right/left and up/down). Until they have
put names on the elements in the drawing, any pseudocode will be gibberish.
Once they start digging into the problem, I like to hear about the state machine (or
automata, or flowchart). I want to see diagrams or flowcharts. Some people get stuck
on the initial state because we all tend to want to start with “what happens first.” How‐
ever, the initial state is relatively uninteresting in this case (though, if asked, I’ll sug‐
gest they start with an all-red state).
Once they’ve laid out the basics, I tend to add a few curveballs (though great inter‐
viewees tend to handle these before I ask).
First, what if a sensor is broken? Or what if the city wants to be friendly to bikes
(which don’t activate the car sensor)? This adds a timer to the state machine so that
the intersection doesn’t get trapped in any state forever.
Second, the intersection has been getting a lot of accidents with folks running the yel‐
low light. Can they do something to improve the safety of the system? (Hint: Add a
short all-red state to allow traffic to clear the intersection before going to the next
green.)
Because this interview question is simply a logic problem, I often spring it on other
engineers, particularly those who work in quality departments (“How would you
write a test plan for this controller?”).

                                                                         Further Reading   |   179
