                                                                                           CHAPTER 7
                          Communicating with Peripherals

A peripheral is anything outside your processor core that the processor communi‐
cates with. Peripherals come in all shapes and sizes. Because your processor core has
direct access to memory inside the processor, it barely counts as a peripheral (though
memory can also be outside your chip).
So which is the best way to communicate with peripherals: UART, SPI, I2C, or some‐
thing else? I get asked this question a lot. So let’s talk about why there isn’t an answer.
I need a whole chapter to explain.
We’ve investigated what goes on inside your processor during the course of this book.
Before you can build a system, we need to consider what goes on in other compo‐
nents. Communicating with the other components is a start to this. I want to show
you what to look for when deciding what kind of communication method to use or
writing a communications driver.
For the most part, you’ll end up using a driver from your processor’s hardware
abstraction layer (HAL). You’ll need to configure it according to the external device’s
datasheet and your processor’s manual. However, that breaks when you meet a new
way of communicating, one without an easy driver. So let’s look at protocols and
methods we’ll often use as a way of identifying the important pieces to look for in a
new protocol.

Serial Communication
At its broadest definition, serial communication is the process of sending data one bit
at a time over a communication pathway (usually a wire, a physical wire).1 Under this

1 This is in contrast to parallel communication where each bit has a dedicated communication pathway.

definition, even Ethernet is a serial form of communication. Let’s narrow the defini‐
tion down a bit and say a serial protocol is something that can be implemented with a
universal synchronous/asynchronous receiver/transmitter (USART, pronounced
“use-art”). That probably doesn’t help you much, does it? Let me define some terms,
and then we’ll look at the most common serial communication methods.
A UART (pronounced “you-art”) implements the default protocol for when you want
to hook up a serial cable between your device and your computer.

                    Even high-end internet routers often have a serial port for configu‐
                    ration or debugging. Not only is it cheap to implement, a serial port
                    is also like a Torx screwdriver: most people don’t know what they
                    are looking at.

UART (universal asynchronous received/transmitter) is missing the S in USART so
before going on, let me take a step back and talk about terms. The S is for synchro‐
nous, which means the clock is a separate signal from the data. An asynchronous path‐
way has an implicit clock, usually using start and stop bits to indicate when
communication is occurring (thereby decreasing its bandwidth). Because the implicit
clock needs to allow for some timing errors, a synchronous bus can operate at a faster
speed than an asynchronous bus. Often the generator of the clock also controls the
bus, making it an asymmetric pathway. Usually only the bus controller can initiate
data transfers.
Another important factor when considering serial ports is whether you have two
wires to communicate on (transmit and receive) or only one wire (which switches
direction depending on whose turn it is to talk). Having two wires is called full
duplex; sharing a single wire is called half duplex. I2C and 1-wire bus are two of the
most popular half-duplex protocols. Of course, half-duplex communication is a little
more complicated to debug because you can’t be sure on your oscilloscope (or logic
analyzer) which chip is the source of the bytes.

                    The timing diagrams from the peripheral’s datasheet are often criti‐
                    cal for getting a communications driver working. As you bring up a
                    driver for the first time, expect to spend some time setting up an
                    oscilloscope and trying to re-create those diagrams (to verify your
                    driver). Look in Chapter 3 for tips on datasheets and O-scopes.

When encountering a new communication bus, the things to pay attention to include:

  • How is the communication clock generated? Is it asynchronous (all parties agree
    upon it ahead of time) or synchronous (explicitly carried on a wire on the bus)?
    If it is synchronous, does the clock generator have any other special responsibili‐
    ties?
  • Is the communication symmetric (anyone can talk) or asymmetric (only the bus
    controller initiates communication)?
  • Is it full duplex (enough I/Os so everyone can send data) or half duplex (they
    take turns sending data over shared I/Os)?
  • How many hardware lines does it need?
  • Is it point-to-point or is there point-to-multipoint? Is addressing done in the pro‐
    tocol or via chip select?
  • What is the maximum throughput of the system? How many data bits can be
    transferred every second? How much of that is overhead?
  • How far can the signals travel?

The goal with these questions is to figure out how long it will take you to implement a
driver using the communication bus in question.

               Many processors come with example code, particularly for their
               communication drivers. Sometimes this code is excellent, but
               sometimes it is only an example to get it running (but not working
               robustly). Be sure to review this code if you incorporate it into your
               project.

Moving on from the higher-level terminology and general questions, let’s look at how
some popular buses behave. Remember that this is still just an introduction. In the
end, you’ll need to look at your datasheet to see what the peripheral needs and at your
processor manual to see how to provide it.
Figure 7-1 compares the number of lines needed for some of the most popular buses
and peripherals.

Figure 7-1. Comparing peripheral communication methods

TTL Serial
As we’ve seen, the word “serial” is overloaded to mean many protocols. Even the most
common serial interface (the one between your system and your computer) has sev‐
eral names. I already mentioned UART, which is the part of your processor that
implements this interface. However, it sends out TTL-level serial signals. By defini‐
tion, TTL (transistor-transistor logic) means 0–5 V. However, in practice it means
whatever voltage level your processor’s digital I/O is at: 0–5 V, 0–3 V, 0–1.8 V, etc.
While there can be other signals (see “RS-232 Serial” on page 185), the most impor‐
tant signals are transmit (TX) and receive (RX). You can interface your embedded
system with your computer using those alone. Note that both systems have a TX and
an RX, so they need to be swapped to connect each TX to the RX on the other side.

                    Not swapping TX and RX is the most common hardware issue I’ve
                    seen. If a component isn’t responding over the communication bus,
                    check that the TX and RX (or clock and data) lines are correct.

To connect from your board to your computer, you will need a USB-to-serial cable
(sometimes called an FTDI cable, after the company that makes it). Make sure to get a
cable that is the correct voltage for your processor for the TTL side.
This form of serial communication resides at the physical and data link layers of the
OSI model (more about this soon in “Layered Model of Communication (OSI)” on

page 186). There is no built-in addressing scheme, so it can be established only
between two parties (symmetric point-to-point communication).
It uses an implicit clock (asynchronous!) so both parties must agree upon the baud
rate (bits per second), parity, number of start and stop bits, and flow control. While it
is commonly not used at all, flow control can be done in the hardware using some of
the other UART lines or in software using the Xon/Xoff protocol. “Further Reading”
on page 209 provides resources that explain these conventions.

                To talk to a processor’s debug serial port, usually you should choose
                8 data bits, no parity, one stop bit, and no flow control. This is
                often abbreviated as 8N1, no flow.

The baud rates are usually between 2,400 and 115,200 (though they can go as high as
921,600). Certain baud rates are very popular: 9,600; 19,200; and 115,200. Due to the
implicit clock, you will need to configure the same baud rate on both devices (i.e.,
your processor and your computer).
Because of the start and stop bits sent for each data byte, most serial connections have
a throughput in bytes about equal to their baud rate divided by 10. If you have a baud
rate of 19,200 bits per second, your system is going to be able to send and receive
about 1,920 bytes per second. Compare this with standard 100-megabit Ethernet
(though 1-gigabit is pretty common too), which gives a throughput of around 11
megabytes per second, depending on the protocol. Serial is slow.

RS-232 Serial
RS-232 is similar to TTL serial with only electrical changes and no software ramifica‐
tions. A serial port used to mean an RS-232 port with a DB-9 connector. The signals
were (+/– 12 V) . Figure 7-2 shows a common use of serial cabling in embedded
development. Although RS-232 defines eight signals (and ground), the most impor‐
tant are the transmit and receive lines that come from your processor as TTL signals.

Figure 7-2. Serial connection from the embedded system to a PC

However, if you are hooking up to a cellular data modem or a serial-to-Ethernet con‐
verter, you may also need some of the other UART lines to indicate when each device
is ready to receive data (specifically RTS/CTS handshaking for hardware flow con‐
trol). Even though the clock is implicit, you’ll need to designate which side is the bus
controller, because the signals are not exactly symmetric. In RS-232, the bus control‐
ler (usually your computer) is the data terminal equipment (DTE) and the other side
is the data communication equipment (DCE). Yes, pretty much every protocol has
different names for similar things.
The relatively high voltage of RS-232 (12 V!) means it can travel pretty far before the
signals deteriorate—up to 50 feet (15 meters) with a normal serial (or null modem)
cable. A special cable (low capacitance) can increase the distance by about a factor
of 20.
RS-232 has been around seemingly forever and continues to be widely used. Even
though its demise is often heralded as new protocols take its place (Ethernet, USB,
etc.), RS-232 keeps coming back because it is easy to implement in software and
cheap to implement in hardware.

                          Layered Model of Communication (OSI)
  Communication protocols are often layered so we can talk about the pieces separately.
  The layers in embedded systems are often limited to:
  Electrical
       TTL and RS-232 have different voltages, though the same number of wires
  How bits and bytes flow
     Those terms from above: synchronous, symmetric, duplex, and so on
  Packets and networks
      How clumps of data get to their destination: more about that in a bit
  The standard Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model is a way to talk about com‐
  munication protocols as a series of layers (see Table 7-1). Each layer provides some
  feature to the one above it to build up a communication pathway.
  You don’t need to memorize this. This model is far more complex than you’ll need for
  most embedded systems, but by having an idea of how a big, complicated communi‐
  cation pathway works, you’ll get some ideas about how little ones work.

Table 7-1. OSI model
   Layer           Function                                Questions for this layer                          On a PC’s
                                                                                                             Ethernet
   1. Physical     Provides the electrical and physical    How many wires connect your processor to a        Ethernet
                   specification                           peripheral? At what voltage? At what speed?       cable
   2. Data link    Describes how bytes flow over the       Do the bytes have parity checking? How many       Ethernet
                   physical wires                          bits are sent and received in each frame?         (802.xx)
   3. Network      Gets a variable length of information   How is each system addressed? How does the        IP
                   (packets) from one place to another     layer break up (and re-form) big blocks of data
                                                           into amounts that can go over the
                                                           communication pathway?
   4. Transport    Moves blocks of data in a reliable      How do you count on data being received even      TCP
                   manner, even if those blocks are        when there is a glitch in the wires? How are
                   larger than the lower levels can        errors recovered from?
                   handle
   5. Session      Manages a connection between the        How is this data sent from here to there?         Sockets
                   local and remote application
   6. Presentation Provides structure to the data,         How is the data organized when it is sent?        TLS and SSL
                   possibly encryption
   7. Application Takes user interaction with the          What command should be sent when a button         HTTP
                   software and formulates a               is pressed?
                   communication request

SPI
RS-232 and TTL serial work have some deficiencies: about 20% of the bitstream is
overhead; both sides have to know the setup (e.g., baud rate and parity); and the
RX/TX crossing requirement is a pain because which wire is RX (or TX) depends on
your point of view.
Instead we can use SPI, which uses four wires to connect your processor to a SPI
peripheral:
MISO (Micro-In Sensor-Out, formerly Master-In Slave-Out2) or SDI (Serial Data In)
   Receive for the bus controller, usually your microprocessor.
MOSI (Micro-Out Sensor-In, formerly Master-Out Slave-In) or SDO (Serial Data Out)
  Transmit for the bus controller, usually your microprocessor.

2 Terms matter. For controllers: principal, host, primary. For peripherals: agent, worker, subordinate, secondary.

SCK, CLK, or SCLK (Clock)
   Generated by the controller; this is the clock for both sides of communication.
CS (Chip Select) or SS (Sensor Select, formerly Slave Select)
    One line per peripheral. This is generated by the bus controller and is usually
    active low.
SPI is a synchronous, asymmetric protocol, with the clock provided by the controller.
One oddity with SPI is that both controller and peripheral have to send data when the
clock is going, always trading data, even when one of them doesn’t have anything
important to say.
Sometimes the controller will not have a command that it needs to send, but it will
need to transmit a byte in order to receive one. The value 0xFF is the traditional byte
to transmit when you want to force the peripheral to send data. This is called “clock‐
ing out” the data.
With RS-232’s implicit clock, both sides of the communication need to have a rela‐
tively precise oscillator; otherwise, they may lose synchronization. Since the control‐
ler provides the clock, SPI doesn’t require either side to have a precision oscillator.
The controller probably still has an oscillator of some sort, but it doesn’t need to be as
precise, so it can be cheaper.
The clock speed can be slow (tens of Hz) or fast (up to 100 MHz). The clock speed is
the baud rate, and there isn’t any overhead, so a clock of 8 MHz leads to 1 MB/
second, much faster than RS-232 and, at high clock speeds, even comparable to
Ethernet. Finally, the clock speed can be whatever your processor can clock and the
particular peripheral can receive. There is no need to try to run at precisely 8 MHz; it
is acceptable to run at 8.1234 MHz or 7.9876 MHz. The flip side of running a clock so
fast is that it doesn’t travel very far. SPI signals usually don’t leave the board.
The protocol defines a chip select, so multiple peripherals can often share a single SPI
bus as long as there is one CS line per peripheral.

                   Check your peripheral datasheets; not all peripherals play nicely on
                   a shared bus.

A SPI driver is even easier to implement than an RS-232 driver. The only tricky part
is to figure out whether you want the data on the line to be valid when the clock edge
rises or falls (clock polarity and phase). Your peripheral datasheet will tell you what it
wants, and the processor manual will give you some registers to configure it.

                If your datasheet isn’t sufficient, look at the Wikipedia page on SPI.
                Many protocols are best described on Wikipedia, often in more
                detail than terse datasheets.

                                    Bit-Bang Drivers
 The SPI interface is so orderly and methodical that it is often implemented as a bit-
 bang interface. A bit-bang driver uses I/O lines directly to do the work of the commu‐
 nication interface instead of a processor’s built-in registers. Honestly, you can create a
 bit-bang driver for any of the serial interfaces, but it consumes far more processing
 power than a built-in processor interface. However, sometimes your processor doesn’t
 have the hardware interface to implement the communication method you need, so
 you make your own.
 To make your own SPI interface:

   1. Start with three unused I/O lines and a built-in timer. The chip select line works
      the same as it does in a processor-provided interface, so I’m not counting it here.
   2. Set up a timer to interrupt at four times the clock speed (so 8 MHz for a 2 MHz
      communication rate). Each of the four interrupts has a purpose:
      • Toggle the I/O line
      • Write an output bit to MOSI
      • Toggle the I/O line
      • Read an input bit from MISO
   3. Every eight bits (or 32 interrupts), start a new byte.

 Note, that you need to write a bit and read a bit for each full clock cycle. However, the
 peripheral datasheet will probably show you that the safe-to-read time is half a clock
 cycle away from the safe-to-write time, which is why we need the timer to interrupt at
 four times the intended communication clock frequency.
 Overall, you don’t have to do all that much for each interrupt, but you have a lot of
 interrupts, which means tons of context switching.

I2C and TWI
I2C stands for inter-integrated circuit, and is pronounced “eye-squared-see” or “eye-
two-see.” I2C is sometimes called TWI, for “two-wire interface.” Like SPI, the I2C bus
has a controller that provides the clock and starts the interaction. However, unlike
SPI, the I2C bus can have multiple controllers. A controller can even switch sides,
allowing a peripheral to drive the interaction.

I2C is the result of trying to figure out how few wires can be used to connect a whole
bunch of things together. It uses two connections: SCL (serial clock line) for the clock
and SDA (serial data line) for the data (going both ways on the same wire, making
this a half-duplex protocol).
The simplicity of hardware design is paid for in software complexity. Not only that,
but because this is a multipoint protocol, allowing multiple peripherals (and multiple
controllers), it specifies an address scheme, which moves it beyond OSI layers 1
(physical) and 2 (data link) to layer 3 (network). On the other hand, I2C is fairly
widely used, so you should be able to find some example code to help you implement
your driver.
I2C drivers (or processor hardware) invariably include a state machine to deal with
the complexity of switching the direction of the bus between the controller transmit‐
ting and the peripheral transmitting. The controller starts communication by sending
a 7-bit address and indicating whether it wants to read from or write to the periph‐
eral. The peripheral with that address then sends an acknowledgment (ACK). Next,
the controller sends a command to (or reads from) the peripheral, and the interaction
proceeds. When the communication is complete, the controller sends a stop bit.
The number of components attached to the bus is limited by the address space (and
by the capacitance of the bus). Many components let you set the last few bits of the
address using pull-ups, so you can put several instances of the same part on the bus.
Alternatively, some components have slightly different part numbers that result in
different I2C addresses.
Common I2C bus speeds are 100 Kb/second (standard mode) and 10 Kb/second
(low-speed mode). It is synchronous, so the controller sends the clock, and these fre‐
quencies don’t need to be precise. Some peripherals implement faster speeds: 400
Kb/s, 1 Mb/s, and even 3.4 Mb/s.3
Although some overhead is built into the I2C bus—the bus arbitration and start/stop
bits—if you are moving large amounts of data around (e.g., reading from an ADC
[analog-to-digital converter] or an EEPROM), the overhead becomes a negligible
percentage of the traffic. So standard mode can achieve 12.5 KB/s throughput on the
I2C bus.
I2C generally isn’t used to communicate to distant peripherals, but it can go a few
meters before the cable degrades the signal too much (though you can get transceiv‐
ers and special cables to increase the distance). As the protocol needs only two wires
to go to many peripherals, the cable can be only four wires: SDA, SCL, power, and
ground.

3 Remember, “b” is for bit and “B” is for byte (almost always), so to convert from Mb to MB, divide by 8.

1-Wire
I2C doesn’t actually win the award for having as few serial wires as possible; there is
still the aptly named 1-wire bus. It provides low-speed data communication and
power over a single wire. (Well, you need ground, too.) It is similar in concept to I2C
(controller, arbitration, a software driver with a state machine), but it has an implicit
clock of 16.3 Kb/s. Although this is a fairly low data rate, it can be used for longer
ranges, up to 10 m (100 m with special cables).
Like I2C, the bus can be used with a wide variety of peripherals, including memory,
sensors, ADCs, and DACs. After simple temperature sensors, the most common
1-wire implementations are in authentication chips. These are used to authenticate
the origin of pieces of the system that can be replaced. For example, if you are making
a printer cartridge (or any form of consumable) and you want to deter competitors
from making a drop-in replacement, a 1-wire secure authentication chip will force
your consumable to send the correct password to your firmware before it can be
used.
And while you can’t really only have one wire to communicate to a device, some devi‐
ces use parasitic power, using the communication line as a power source so the cable
only needs two wires (data/power and ground).

Parallel
Parallel communication just means having several I/O lines so that you can send mul‐
tiple bits to and from a peripheral at the same time. By putting 8 or 16 bits on the bus
at once, you can communicate very quickly. The data bits of the parallel bus are
almost always combined on a single bank of I/O pins. This lets you set all of the bits
by writing the data byte to the I/O register. Instead of setting a single bit, as shown in
Chapter 4:
    P1OUT |= BIT2;         // IO1_2 high
you can modify several I/O lines at once:
    P1OUT |= data & 0xFF; // put 8 bits on parallel bus: IO1_0 to IO_7
A parallel interface tends to make a chip more expensive. I/O lines take up space in
the silicon, and the size of the silicon is proportional to the cost of making the chip
(though for many chips, RAM is a larger consumer of silicon than the I/O lines).
Parallel interfaces tend to be reserved for things that have high data throughput
requirements: displays and external memory, components we’ll talk about soon. A
small color LCD with a 320×480 pixel display needs 450 KB per screen (if you update
the whole screen, though you won’t usually do that).

With an update rate of at least 30 Hz, you’d need to move about 13 MB/s (105.5
Mb/s), which is faster than SPI can manage. However, with an 8-bit-wide parallel bus,
the bit rate per line goes down to 13 Mb/s. The data gets spread over the whole bus,
so the more lines in parallel, the higher the throughput.
Purely parallel buses tend to be half duplex, with control lines to indicate which
direction the data is going (read and write lines) and whether the bus is connected to
a chip (chip select line). The control lines also tend to be the clocks for the system, so
a write interaction would look like the following:

 1. De-assert the write control line.
 2. Select the chip.
 3. Set the parallel bus to the data intended.
 4. Assert the write control line.
 5. Go to step 2 until all data has been transferred.

Check the timing of your peripheral datasheet to figure out whether you need some
delay between these steps. All in all, implementing a parallel bus is pretty easy, on the
order of a SPI driver, although debugging is a bit harder because there are so many
lines to look at.
Note that parallel buses can be combined with other protocols (usually SPI) so that
you can send more data by having two or four MOSI data pins acting in parallel.

                    If you have spare I/O lines available during design, bring them out
                    to a header or test points. You can write error or event codes to the
                    I/O lines to make a parallel bus for debugging (and profiling!).
                    Hook the lines up to a logic analyzer to get a peek into what your
                    system is doing (without the timing changes that a serial output
                    would give you).

Dual and Quad SPI
What do you get if you cross a parallel bus with a SPI bus? Something that transmits
data even faster.
Where a normal SPI has MISO and MOSI for communication, a component that
supports a dual SPI bus will shift those lines to be both input (or both output) for
certain operations, allowing double the amount of data to go through. When the
operation is complete, the bus will return to normal full-duplex operation.
With a quad SPI bus there are four pins to send data. Two of the pins will start out as
MISO and MOSI, then with certain operations will become a four-wire parallel bus to
transfer data four times faster than normal SPI.

USB
All of the serial protocols previously mentioned can be bit-banged if you don’t have
the hardware (and you have enough processing power). I wouldn’t try that with USB,
because it is pretty complicated, with more going on electrically. It is an asynchronous
system, with an implicit clock and up to 127 devices. Depending on the version, it can
be full or half duplex. It is always asymmetric, though usually the terms here are host
and device instead of controller and peripheral.
It is also fast (1.5, 12, 480, or 4,000 Mb/s, depending on the version). The cable can be
of medium length (five meters) and still maintain signal integrity. USB manages high
throughput over a longish cable by having differential signals (which requires twice as
many wires, so they can travel farther).
USB provides not only communication, but also power (the amount of power
depends on the version of USB). That’s why consumers can power up their cell
phones or cameras by plugging them into a USB port on their computers.
Like Ethernet, the USB interaction usually is complicated enough to warrant an oper‐
ating system (or a USB protocol stack that goes far beyond a simple driver). Further,
USB applications usually implement all or most of the OSI layers (see the sidebar
“Layered Model of Communication (OSI)” on page 186).

Considering Other Protocols
I hope you are seeing the commonality of the different serial protocols. There is no
need to memorize what is what. When you get a datasheet for a peripheral, it will tell
you what it needs, and your processor will tell you how to implement that (or if it
doesn’t, Wikipedia will probably give you pseudocode for a bit-bang driver). The goal
is to think about what makes a protocol easy or hard to implement. Some takeaways:

  • The more layers you need, the more complicated the implementation. Many pro‐
    tocols don’t fit neatly in the OSI model, but it is still useful to know the frame‐
    work for estimation.
  • Point-to-point is easier than a network, which requires addresses.
  • Half duplex is harder than full duplex because you have to switch the direction of
    communication.
  • Synchronous is easier than asynchronous because you know exactly when you’ll
    get a byte.
  • Having a controller on the bus (asymmetric) is generally easier than trying to fig‐
    ure out who gets to talk when no one has control.
  • Explicit clocks are easier than implicit.

Say you need to implement a contact interface to a smart card. Smart cards use
ISO-7816, which is a half-duplex, point-to-point, asymmetric protocol, where the
controller provides the clock (in the 1–5 MHz range). How hard will it be to imple‐
ment a driver?
Given that information, it looks more complex than SPI but simpler than I2C. Add a
little to your planning estimate because the protocol is relatively rare and you proba‐
bly won’t be able to find good example code. Now what if I tell you that it implements
four or more of the OSI layers, though somewhat simplified? That should raise your
implementation estimation by a factor of three (at least).
How about something more industrial, like RS-485? Designed to travel long distan‐
ces, it can be full or half duplex. When it is full duplex, it is asynchronous. The clock
is implicit (100 kHz–10 MHz), and only the physical and data link layers are speci‐
fied. Usually there is a bus controller, but that isn’t required. With only that informa‐
tion, the difficulty of implementing the protocol sounds like a cross between RS-232
and I2C.
If you can find the commonalities between different protocols, then once you’ve writ‐
ten something similar, you’ll know what to expect when implementing something
new.

                                             ASCII Characters
  If your test code for a new serial driver sends “Hello” as its first word, you can’t expect
  to see an electronic hand waving on the oscilloscope during debugging. The letters get
  translated into numbers, usually 8-bit numbers according to the ASCII character
  encoding scheme.

      Letter: H   e    l    l    o
      ASCII: 0x48 0x65 0x6C 0x6C 0x6F

  So when you see “Hello” starting on your transmit line, it will start with H, which is
  0x48, which looks like 01001000. Because ASCII uses only seven bits (it has 128 char‐
  acters), the first bit is always 0, which makes it easy to find ASCII characters on an
  oscilloscope. In Figure 7-3, I’ve shown how to make it a little easier to know where
  you are in the data stream by starting the transmission high, to show the falling edge
  of the data. You might be able to see the start of the signal by triggering on chip select
  (if your protocol has one).
  Or, you can select some letters that will be easier to pick out on the O-scope. I like
  “UU3.” Each U is 0x55, which means every other bit is set so it looks like a clock sig‐
  nal. And 3 is serendipitously 0x33, or binary 00110011, so it looks like a clock at half
  the speed.

Figure 7-3. Comparing ASCII “Hello” with UU3

 Learning the ASCII chart is a lot like learning Morse code. It is very handy if you use
 it, but if you are just learning it for fun, don’t expect long-term retention. On the
 other hand, if you end up writing about one serial driver a year, you may start
 remembering the highlights. The ASCII chart is set up in a logical way, so it is easier
 to remember only the important stuff:
     '0' -> 0x30
     'A' -> 0x41
     'a' -> 0x61

 The numbers and letters increment from those starting points (hence 0x33 for the
 digit 3). My shorthand doesn’t help you to know where the punctuation and the con‐
 trol characters are, but it does summarize the table well enough to talk to another
 embedded engineer in case you get trapped somewhere with only a single LED for
 communication.

               Although ASCII is the most prevalent encoding scheme in embed‐
               ded systems, it can’t fit characters from other languages into 8-bit
               words. Unicode uses 16 bits (sometimes more). If your product will
               be internationalized, figure out whether Unicode is the right choice
               for you.

Communications in Practice
One of your primary concerns in reading the datasheet for the digital sensor is how
to communicate with it. Does your processor have the type of communication
method needed by the sensor? That helps with implementation and probably the
driver if your processor has a HAL.
Consider an external ADC attached to a processor via SPI. (An ADC is an analog-to-
digital converter; more about what this actually does in Chapter 8.) With the ADC’s
part number, that seems like enough information to get started.

And it is enough to get started. However, to be efficient with your communications,
there are a few more things to consider. Looking at an external ADC will let me show
you some of the intricacies of dealing with the driver and FIFO. Many digital sensors
will have very similar communication patterns. Also, while I’ll use SPI in my exam‐
ples, the other communication methods have similar considerations.

External ADC Example: Data Ready with SPI
You’ll need to start with the configuration. First, set up the I/Os as the reference man‐
ual says for the SPI subsystem to work. Then, set up the SPI subsystem to work as the
ADC demands. Here are the configuration steps:

 1. Set I/O pins to have chip select, clock, and MOSI as an output. MISO will be an
    input.
 2. Set I/O pins to belong to the SPI function.
 3. Set SPI configuration according to ADC datasheet: serial clock rate, clock polar‐
    ity (CPOL) and clock phase (CPHA), length of data frame, etc.
      Initially, during board bring-up or prototype testing, you’ll probably poll the sen‐
      sor, asking it for information to make sure everything is connected. However,
      waiting for SPI communication to finish is inefficient, so you might need an
      interrupt to take care of sending (and receiving) the SPI bytes.
 4. Set SPI interrupt to happen when the transmit buffer is empty.

Even with a SPI interrupt to facilitate communication, the data you get from the ADC
will be on demand. You’ll need to set up the SPI buffer to send a command to the
ADC to start conversion (aka gathering data). Then you’ll keep sending ADC com‐
mands, asking if it is done yet. When it is done, you finally set up the SPI command
to read out the data. It is a lot of back and forth; we’d rather simply get data when the
ADC is ready to send it.
But how will we know when the data is ready? An ADC (or other digital sensor) will
often have an interrupt line to indicate when data is ready for you to read. Once con‐
figured, this I/O line will cause an interrupt on the processor. While it will probably
be implemented as a generic I/O interrupt, we’ll call it the data ready interrupt when
talking about sensors.
The data ready interrupt will start the SPI interaction, asking the ADC to send data.
In the interrupt (or based on an event flag in main), the code will:

 1. Fill a transmit buffer with information to send to the ADC. This may include
    commands to the ADC, including requesting data and starting the next
    conversion.

 2. On SPI, configure which buffers are used for transmit and receive and how many
    bytes to send.
 3. Enable the SPI transmit-empty interrupt.

That last will cause the TX empty interrupt to occur and the transmit and receive buf‐
fers to be sent and filled (respectively). When the number of bytes to send has been
sent, the main loop should receive a flag to indicate the transfer is complete (so it can
do something with the data). See Figure 7-4 for how the transfer would occur.

Figure 7-4. Example communication sequence diagram of an ADC data ready interrupt
starting SPI communication to receive data

Use a FIFO If Available
The slowest possible way to communicate with a digital sensor is usually with a bit-
bang driver. It is an only-in-desperate-times option. The next fastest is to use the pro‐
cessor’s communication mechanism, like the integrated SPI or I2C peripheral bus,
transferring or receiving a byte on each interrupt.

The system can go faster if the hardware supports a FIFO (first in, first out) queue.
This provides a small buffer that allows the data to build up a bit before you have to
deal with it. The FIFO queue may be part of your processor or it may be part of the
digital sensor (or both, but don’t use both at the same time).
Using a FIFO is pretty simple. To send data, write to the transmit holding register
(THR). Writing to this address sends data to the transmit FIFO. The data will get sent
when it reaches the end of the FIFO queue and the transmitter is available. Unlike the
circular buffer, there is no dealing with pointers; you write to the THR to fill the
FIFO, and the data eventually reaches the pins. While the peripheral is streaming out
the data stored in its FIFO, the processor can do other things.
These systems usually have both transmit and receive FIFOs. To get data from the
receive FIFO, check to make sure something is available (using a status register), and
then read the receive buffer register (RBR) to get the oldest data in the FIFO.

                    The transmit and receive registers (THR and RBR) can be the same
                    register, changing roles depending on whether you write to it or
                    read from it.

Processor FIFOs use a set of flags to signal the software. The status flags generally
include full, empty, half full, and half empty. (If you are thinking that the FIFO has
optimist/pessimist issues, usually a receive buffer signals half full and a transmit
buffer signals half empty.) These levels can be used to interrupt the processor.
Some processors will let you set specific levels at which to interrupt. For maximum
throughput, determine how long it will take your processor to get to the interrupt (its
latency) and how much data can be sent in that amount of time. For example, sup‐
pose you want to keep a steady stream of data flowing on the SPI bus. If you are run‐
ning SPI at 10 MHz and it takes you a maximum of 3 microseconds to respond to an
interrupt, you need to get an interrupt when the FIFO has 4 bytes remaining (10
MHz clock→1.25 MB/s→0.8 μs/byte, 3 microsecond latency / 0.8 μs/byte→3.75
bytes).
A transmit interrupt usually fills the FIFO with available data. A receive FIFO inter‐
rupt drains all of the data, putting it where the software can use it (often in a circular
buffer). The goal is to balance the trigger levels so that you maintain a constant
stream of data with the fewest interrupts.

Your processor manual (or component datasheet) will describe how to configure your
FIFOs in more detail. FIFOs are usually 8 or 16 bytes deep. But what if your FIFO
depth wasn’t so limited? What if your FIFO was more like your circular buffer, using
as much RAM as you need?

Direct Memory Access (DMA) Is Faster
A processor that supports direct memory access (DMA) can transfer far more data
than one that implements only a FIFO.
Without DMA, the processor has to read each piece of data and store it to memory.
For each byte transferred, there is software overhead when reading the data from the
peripheral and storing it to your buffer. DMA bypasses the processor, transferring
data without running software.
To use DMA, you give the processor a pointer and a number of bytes to read (or
write). When receiving, the processor reads data from the peripheral into the speci‐
fied memory until it reaches the byte count, at which point it interrupts the software.
Similarly, when transmitting, the processor moves data from the buffer to the periph‐
eral, interrupting when the count is complete.
DMA is a lot like having another thread do the data handling for you. It is very con‐
venient while running, though setting it up can be a pain. Look in your processor
manual for the DMA registers: transmit pointer register (the buffer to write to on the
device), transmit count, receive pointer register, and receive count. If your data comes
in chunks instead of a constant stream, you can use a DMA controller with one chan‐
nel. If your data is a constant stream, you may need to copy the data from the DMA
controller to another location so your software has time to work with it.
To avoid the need to copy (which is an inefficient use of your processing cycles and
RAM resources), many DMA implementations can alternate between two buffers.
This allows the software to use one buffer while the processor transfers peripheral
data into (or out of) the other. This two-buffer, back-and-forth movement is called a
ping-pong buffer.
DMA is used with peripherals that have very high throughput. It is also used in multi‐
core processors to communicate between cores. If you know how many bytes you’ll
be receiving (or you are transmitting a block of data and not just a dribble), DMA is a
great way to reduce processor overhead, making your processor seem faster than it is.

External ADC Example: SPI and DMA
The initialization will start as before, with the I/Os set as inputs and outputs that
belong to the SPI functionality on the processor. The next step is to configure the
DMA to work with the SPI subsystem:

 1. Find the correct DMA channel and communication method (peripheral) address
    (SPI for this example).
 2. Set the transfer direction (peripheral-to-memory for input; memory-to-
    peripheral for output).
 3. Configure when DMA should cause an interrupt (usually when the DMA buffer
    is empty, half full, or full, depending on input or output).

Once the system is running, you’ll need to set up the SPI transfer. For an ADC, it will
probably contain information such as:

  • Number of bytes you want to send or receive
  • Transmit buffer address
  • Whether to increment the transfer buffer address or send the same data over and
    over
  • Receive buffer address
  • Whether to increment the receive buffer or ignore the incoming data

When the ADC data ready interrupt occurs, the ISR will enable the DMA channel to
act. When the DMA complete interrupt occurs, it will signal the running code that
the transfer is complete. See Figure 7-5.
When you handle the transfer complete message, you probably want to set up the
DMA again with a different receive buffer. Then you have time to process the last
received buffer. And if you finish that, you can sleep or do other things while you wait
for it all to happen again.

Figure 7-5. Example communication sequence diagram of ADC interrupt starting SPI
DMA communication

DMA adds at least one layer of complexity for configuration, but reduces the pro‐
cessor cycles that deal with memory. You’ll need to decide if the trade-off is worth the
effort.

             Comparison of Digital Communication Buffering Schemes
  How much do FIFOs and DMA really matter? Well, let’s compare how much pro‐
  cessor time would be needed to implement a SPI interface running at 1 MHz with
  8-bit (single byte) transfers.
  The slowest implementation would be a bit-bang SPI driver. The next-fastest imple‐
  mentation would be a hardware-supported interface. When your processor datasheet
  says something like:
          One Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) – 8- to 16-bit Programmable Data Length, Four
          External Peripheral Chip Selects

  you have built-in SPI. You can configure it to run at 1 MHz (sometimes not precisely,
  as this will depend on your processor clock and how you can use dividers, but usually
  you can get close enough). Then you’ll need to configure it to interrupt when a byte
  has been exchanged, every 8 µs or at 125 kHz (1 MHz/8 bits).
  In that interrupt, you’ll need to get the byte from the receive register and put it into
  some sort of buffer. You’ll also need to put the next byte in the transmit register. Not
  only is the interrupt shorter than the bit-bang solution, but there are also many fewer
  interrupts.
  Of course, if your FIFO is 16 bytes deep, you only have to interrupt at 7.8 kHz (125
  kHz/16). Well, you could if you interrupt when the FIFO is completely full. But that
  means your communication will fall behind if your interrupt doesn’t start emptying
  the FIFO in 8 µs (before the next byte comes in).
  To give you more latitude, interrupt when the FIFO is half full. That will give you a
  more frequent interrupt rate of 15.6 kHz, but there will be more time available before
  communication falls behind (64 µs).
  At every interrupt, you need to move the bytes in the receive FIFO into another piece
  of RAM and move the transmit bytes into that FIFO.
  Now for DMA. If your goal is to maximize throughput, divide your RAM into a small
  piece for local variables and a large piece for a ping-pong buffer. If you have 32 KB of
  RAM, you could save 2 KB for variables and have two ping-pong buffers that are 15
  KB each. That means you’ll get an interrupt eight times per second, leaving you with
  plenty of time to actually do the processing.
  Table 7-2 compares the processing difference of the interrupt overhead alone (assum‐
  ing each interrupt has only 10 cycles of overhead, a very small amount). Instead of
  making a massive DMA buffer, I gave it a reasonable 512 bytes to work with. Note
  that to implement a bit-bang solution, you would need a processor that is more than
  16,000 times faster than a comparable DMA solution. That’s just for the overhead! A
  bit-bang driver is more complex than the DMA interrupt, which just needs to switch
  pointers and set a flag for the processing to occur on the already full buffer.

Table 7-2. How much faster is DMA?
  Buffering methodology                   Bit-bang     Hardware       16-byte FIFO          DMA with 512-
                                          interface    peripheral     (interrupt on half)   byte buffer
                                                       interface
  Processor cycles with interrupt context 40 million   1.25 million   156 thousand          2.44 thousand
  switching each second (10-cycle
  interrupt overhead)
  Times faster than the bit-bang interface 1           32             256                   16,384

Circular Buffers
I mentioned that FIFOs are like circular buffers because I hope you’ve heard of circu‐
lar buffers before. However, in embedded systems you might need to actually imple‐
ment one, designed for your specific needs. Let me explain a bit more about what a
circular buffer is.
The circular buffer is a key implementation tactic among data-driven systems. Unlike
the LIFO stacks mentioned in Chapter 5, circular buffers are FIFO.
A data producer puts data in the circular buffer at some rate. The consumer takes it
out of the buffer at the same average rate. However, the consumer can take it out in
chunks while the producer puts it in in dribbles. This lets the processor do other
things while the data accumulates to the size needed for the algorithm. (Or it could go
the other way, with the producer putting a large chunk of data into the circular buffer
to be read out at a steady rate to feed another part of the system.)
A circular buffer needs to keep track of a chunk of memory, its length, where to put
the next element that comes in (write or start), and where to get the next element
(read or end). See Figure 7-6. Note that understanding a circular buffer is easier when
the read pointer is before the write pointer. This is true for everyone; most of the
common circular buffer bugs happen when the read and write pointers cross, even
though the software will spend half of its existence like that.
When the buffer is empty, the read pointer is equal to the write pointer. This is easy
enough to check. However, the problem is that when the buffer is full, the read
pointer is also equal to the write pointer.
One option is to call the buffer full when the write pointer is one away from the read
pointer. This is easy to understand and implement, though it wastes an element’s
worth of memory. Another possible solution is to add a variable to keep track of the
length by having an enqueue function increment the length and a dequeue function
decrement it. Now you’ve traded a variable for a position in your circular buffer.
Depending on the size of the elements in the buffer, that may be worthwhile.

                                                                                       Circular Buffers   |   203
Figure 7-6. Example of pointers in a circular buffer

Usually one user of the circular buffer is an interrupt (either the producer or the con‐
sumer) while the other is not. We saw in Chapter 5 that all sorts of interesting things
occur when you have interrupt code and non-interrupt code trying to modify the
same variable. If you use the blank element to know when your buffer is full, you can
isolate the producer’s variables from the consumer’s, making the circular buffer inter‐
rupt safe, as long as the read and write pointers update atomically. (Otherwise, a
request for the length of available data will give an invalid response.) However, since
the pointers wrap around when they get to the end of the buffer, an atomic operation
may be unfeasible.
Most common implementations in embedded systems constrain the circular buffer
length to be a power of two to avoid this issue. So let’s start with an implementation
using a structure like this:
      struct sCircularBuffer {
        tElement *buf;    // block of memory
        uint16_t size;    // must be a power of two
        uint16_t read;    // holds current read position: 0 to (size-1)
        uint16_t write;   // holds current write position: 0 to (size-1)
      };
In the initialization function, we’ll set the buffer pointer to a block of memory (one
that holds a power-of-two number of elements). We will also need to set the size to
the length of memory and the read and write offsets to zero. From there, we need to
implement only a few other functions. The first is probably the most difficult to fol‐
low. It does a wrapped subtraction to determine the length of the data available in the
circular buffer:
      uint16_t CBLengthData(struct sCircularBuffer *cb){

        /*          **********
             |-----|----------|-------|
                  read      write
        */

        int32_t length = cb->write - cb->read;
        if (length >= 0) {return length;}
        /*
           bbbbbb           aaaaaaaa
           |-----|----------|-------|
               write      read
        */
        return (cb->size – cb->write) +    /* aaaa */
                  (cb->read);              /* bbbbb */
    }
Actually, that doesn’t use the constraint that says the buffer size has to be a power of
two. A more efficient implementation looks like this:
    uint16_t CBLengthData(struct sCircularBuffer *cb){

         return ((cb->write – cb->read) & (cb->size - 1));
    }
Even though the read and write variables are unsigned, the length is correct thanks to
that bitwise AND; the following sidebar explains why.

                            Representing Signed Numbers
  You know about unsigned binary numbers (take a look at “Binary and Hexadecimal
  Math” on page 87 for a refresher). “How Many Bits in That Number?” on page 114
  showed the highest number you could fit in an 8-bit or 16-bit variable, where signed
  numbers were always half as much as unsigned numbers because the sign takes up a
  bit. There are several ways to encode the sign in one bit; consider how we do it in
  decimal with a sign to the left of the value. One way to do it in binary is to have the
  sign be the leftmost bit (most significant bit) while the other bits encode the number:
        snnn nnnn = <1-bit sign> <7-bit number>
        0000 0000 = +0
        0000 0001 = +1
        …
        0111 1111 = +127
        1000 0000 = -0
        1000 0001 = -1
        1111 1111 = -127
  Note that there is both a 0 and –0. Many encodings have that. It is a little odd and a
  little inefficient.
  However, that sign and value encoding isn’t how your computer normally stores
  numbers, because there is a way to make processing faster using a different encoding.

                                                                       Circular Buffers   |   205
  This ingenious method is called two’s complement. In this representation, the leftmost
  bit still holds the sign of the number, and a positive number is encoded just as you’d
  expect. However, a negative is encoded by inverting all the bits and then adding one
  to the result:
       snnn nnnn = <1-bit sign> <7-bit number>
       0000 0000 = 0
       0000 0001 = +1
       …
       0111 1111 = +127
       1000 0000 = -128
       1000 0001 = -127
       …
       1111 1110 = -2
       1111 1111 = -1
  I find the “invert and add one” instructions difficult to remember. However, the neat
  part of two’s complement is that when you add a number and its opposite in sign, the
  numbers obliterate each other:
         0000 0001 = 1
         1111 1111 = -1
         --------------
       1 0000 0000 = 0 (and a carry bit)
  Being able to always add numbers (and not perform a different operation for subtrac‐
  tion) makes this number encoding very powerful.
  Remember that –1 is equivalent to the highest unsigned value. If you write code:
       uint8_t value = -1; // set to highest value this
                           // unsigned type can hold

  your value will be 255 (0xFF). To figure out other unsigned numbers, subtract nor‐
  mally from –1:
       -1 = 0xFF = 1111 1111
       -2 = 0xFE = 1111 1110
       -3 = 0xFD = 1111 1101
       -4 = 0xFC = 1111 1100
       …
  Let’s see how this encoding works on the modulo math from this chapter. For exam‐
  ple, here are the steps to do the wrapped subtraction of cb->write (5), cb->read (6),
  and cb->size (8):
         (cb->write – cb->read) & (cb->size - 1)
       = (    5     –     6   ) & (    8    - 1)
       = (          -1        ) & (      7     )
       = (      1111 1111     ) & ( 0000 0111 )
       = 0000 0111 = 7

  The power-of-two length makes the bitwise AND eliminate the sign information,
  leaving us with the correct result.

An empty buffer would return a length of zero. A full buffer would have a length of
(cb->size-1). Keeping that in mind, writing the enqueue function is pretty simple:
    enum eError CBWrite(struct sCircularBuffer *cb, tElement data){

        if (CBLengthData(cb) == (cb->size-1)) { return eErrorBufferFull;}
        cb->buf[cb->write] = data;
        cb->write = (cb->write + 1) & (cb->size - 1); // must be atomic
        return eSuccess;
    }

The modification of the write variable needs to be a single instruction. But setting
only the write variable needs to be atomic; the preparation ((write+1) and (size-1))
can be multiple instructions. These variables are declared as uint16_t, so if this code
runs on a 16-bit processor, the setting of the write variable will be atomic (but for an
8-bit processor, it won’t be; in a 32-bit processor, usually the uint16_t write instruc‐
tion is a single operation, but not always).
Also note that the circular buffer rejects data that would overflow the buffer. This
goes back to the question of how you want your system to fail. Do you want to reject
new data, as this code does? Or do you want to drop some old data to make room for
the new data? What is your strategy for falling behind? I’ll stick with the error for
now, but you do have options to consider.
Taking things out of the buffer is similar, but deals with the read offset instead of the
write offset:
    enum eError CBRead(struct sCircularBuffer *cb, tElement *data){

        if (CBLengthData(cb) == 0) { return eErrorBufferEmpty;}
        *data = cb->buf[cb->read];
        cb->read = (cb->read + 1) & ( cb->size - 1);
        return eSuccess;
    }

                 If you don’t constrain the buffer size to a power of two, you need to
                 use extra checking or modulo arithmetic to wrap the pointers.
                 Modulo arithmetic (like division) is a relatively slow operation, and
                 not the sort of thing you want to do in an interrupt. Chapter 12
                 talks more about what forms of math are fast and slow on an
                 embedded processor.

Note that the data element is copied out of the buffer to another location. In general,
copying memory is not a good use of your embedded system because the act of

                                                                           Circular Buffers   |   207
copying uses up limited processing cycles, and having two copies of the same infor‐
mation uses up limited memory. Why don’t you just leave the data where it is?
You can add another pointer to your circular buffer to indicate when data is free for
use by the write pointer. However, this is where buffers start to get complicated. This
is also where you might want to pull out a paper and pencil or get to a whiteboard.
For many circular buffer problems, the solution is far easier to see when you can
sketch out the options (see Figure 7-7).

Figure 7-7. Circular buffer with multiple pointers

Once you get it straight in your head, the code will be pretty simple. First, add a free
variable to the structure and initialize it to zero. Next, you’ll probably need to know
the lengths of the different sections of data:
How much is free and ready to be written?
   Wrapped subtraction of write from free
How much data can be read?
   Wrapped subtraction of read from write
How much data is currently checked out for reading?
   Wrapped subtraction of free from read
Handling the free pointer is straightforward. When the code is done with the element
it took, simply increment it past the element, so the write pointer can use it again:
      enum eError CBFree(struct sCircularBuffer *cb){

          if (CBLengthReadData(cb) == 0) { return eErrorBufferEmpty;}
          cb->free = (cb->free + 1) & (cb->size-1);
          return eSuccess;
      }
Note that the element wasn’t passed in to this function, because you always free ele‐
ments in order. Also, this looks an awful lot like both the CBRead and CBWrite func‐
tions; they all follow the same principles.
You may want to do more than read parts of the buffer. Many data processing steps
lend themselves to in-place modification. Once you get the hang of handling multiple

pointers into the circular buffer, you may want to keep using them to avoid copies.
Such streamlining will make your system faster.
Figure 7-8 shows how the processing might work. The analog data is sampled by the
ADC. The digital data is written to a circular buffer at a constant rate. The data may
be obtained from the buffer at a different rate because the processing is done in
chunks (you do something to several samples at once) or because the processor does
something else while the data queues up. The processing module reads and modifies
the data. It could put the data in another circular buffer for output to the DAC or
return it to the same circular buffer (or modify it in place). Once the DAC outputs
the processed data, the circular buffer element is free to be used again.

Figure 7-8. ADC to DAC data-driven system with multiple pointers into a single circular
buffer

To implement a system like this, you’d need to add one more pointer to the system,
called processed. As the pointers move independently of one another, adding
another is fairly straightforward. The code is nearly the same as we added for CBRead
or CBWrite. Don’t forget to add a new length function, too.

Further Reading
For an example implementation of FIFO versus DMA, look for James Lynch’s write-
up on Atmel’s AT91SAM7 serial communications.
Embedded Artistry has an excellent and lengthy blog post about circular buffers that
includes a GitHub repository of working code.
When coming across any new serial interface, I tend to hit Wikipedia first. There are
so many variants of different protocols, and the datasheet for a device may be filled
with acronyms and complex timing diagrams. Wikipedia gives me an overview that
puts it all in perspective.

                                                                    Further Reading   |   209
                         Interview Question: Choosing a Processor
  How would you go about choosing a processor for our next-generation platform?
  This question is multifaceted, starting out with a basic check of the interviewee’s lis‐
  tening skills. Do they know what we build? Are they interested enough in the com‐
  pany to spend some time doing research? Have they been awake while I blathered on
  about the current system?
  From there, it moves into checking their design skills and experience level. I want the
  candidate to know which questions to ask (what are the bottlenecks on the current
  platform, and how have we identified them?). They should have specific questions
  about the types of processing and the bandwidth requirements of the system to help
  them understand the problem better.
  Most companies don’t want to go backward in their feature set, so it is relatively safe
  to start with the assumption of more processing power, more RAM, and more code
  space than the previous design. However, I want the candidate to check these assump‐
  tions. Ideally, as we talk about these, the candidate should describe ways to unburden
  the processor (peripherals often take up an unreasonable amount of processor
  overhead).
  A good candidate will also consider the underlying goals of a new platform (i.e., why
  are we looking for a new platform?). A candidate with a product view is often a better
  fit than someone whose scope is more limited. To that end, I hope they ask about the
  goals for volume and cost. An excellent candidate will also ask whether the require‐
  ments are expected to change significantly over the development cycle, helping them
  determine whether they want a general-purpose processor or can choose something
  very specific.
  I hope the candidate discusses the advantages of using a popular part (one that is
  widely supported with compilers, debuggers, toolchains, and even RTOSs). It is also
  good to hear them consider lead times and end-of-life expectations (hint: don’t start a
  new platform on a dying chip). Good candidates also mention the goal of having a
  new processor be in the middle of a family of processors, allowing for future plat‐
  forms (and possible cost reductions using less fully featured parts).
  Processor selection is difficult because many factors enter into a decision. I don’t
  expect someone to come in for a day’s worth of interviews and produce a suggestion
  for a new processor. Most people don’t keep the processor lines from the various
  microprocessor vendors in their head. If they immediately suggest something con‐
  crete, I take it as an indication of what they’ve been working on. At that point, I tend
  to ask why they think that is a good path for our particular product. The goal is to get
  them to tell me how they would choose, not the actual choice. In interviewing, the
  methods people use to confront problems are far more interesting than the solutions
  they generate.

