                                                                         CHAPTER 8
                                  Putting Together a System

During the course of this book, we’ve investigated what goes on inside your processor.
Now, before you can build a system, we need to consider what goes on in other com‐
ponents of your system. Communicating with the other components is a start to this.
The next step is to get a feel for common peripherals, data handling methods, and
design patterns for adapting your system to different needs.
Ultimately, the information you need for using peripherals is in their datasheets, but
there are enough commonalities that you can get a feel for what to look for.
However, putting together a system goes beyond connecting each piece; you have to
start looking at the system as a collection of parts working together. The last part of
this chapter gives some tips on data handling and putting together algorithms.

Key Matrices
You’ve already seen buttons with a simple I/O interface in Chapter 4. However, if you
have a bunch of buttons (maybe a keyboard), you don’t need one I/O line per button.
You can create a matrix of input lines to get a lot more out of your I/O than you
expect. There are two ways to implement a key matrix: a row/column scan is useful
when you need the peripheral to be cheap, whereas Charlieplexing (aka tri-state multi‐
plexing) is more expensive but minimizes the number of I/O lines needed.
With a row/column scan, you can implement an M × N matrix with M + N lines. So
if you want to implement a 12-digit number pad, you could do a 3 × 4 matrix and use
7 lines (far fewer than the 12 lines it would take to do direct I/O). Of course, matrix
input requires more complicated software.
In the electronics, each button is connected to one row and one column (and not an
input pin to ground, as would be the direct I/O interface). On initialization, configure

all of the row connections as outputs and set them to be high. Then, configure all of
the column connections as inputs with internal pull-up resistors.
Note that matrixing the buttons means that they need to be polled. Although you can
set up a timer interrupt to do that, you can’t use a processor interrupt to tell you when
an input has changed. The software needs to keep cycling through the rows.
As you are scanning (reading) for button presses, set a row low, read the column’s
inputs, set the row high, and move on to the next row. A button that is pressed will be
low when you read its column. You will need to map the row/column value to the
button’s actual meaning. Figure 8-1 shows a snippet of a schematic with the row/
column scan. Each circle is a button.

Figure 8-1. Row/column-scan-style key matrix

The software scanning requirement is also true of Charlieplexing. Named after the
originating engineer (Charles Allen) and immortalized in an application note, Char‐
lieplexing requires more electronics (diodes) than the row/column matrix method.
Instead of using N pins to receive N inputs in direct drive, or M + N pins to receive
M × N inputs in a row/column matrix, Charlieplexing lets you use N pins to get
(N2 – N) inputs.
For the 12 buttons in a number pad, you can use a mere four I/O lines and 12 diodes
(maybe fewer if you don’t care about detecting multiple buttons pressed simultane‐
ously). Although the software is more complicated than the row/column matrix, it is
just a matter of taking it step by step, usually as a state machine. Start with all of the
associated pins as inputs. For each pin, set that one pin to be an output and high, read
the other pins (as inputs). Then set that output to be low, and read the other pins
again. Then set the pin to be an input. After each pin has had a turn to be the output,
you can look up (or calculate) what button was pressed.
While Wikipedia has related code, the repository for this book links to some websites
that show both types of key matrices as animations, along with proper schematics for
each.

               Both of these methods may give strange and incorrect results when
               multiple buttons are pressed simultaneously.

Row/column matrix and Charlieplexing can be used on outputs (LEDs) as well as
inputs (buttons). The methodology is the same in each case, so once you wrap your
head around matrices, you’ll find plenty of places to implement them.

Segmented Displays
We’ve already spent a lot of time on individual LEDs in Chapter 4, even making them
dim using PWM control. A seven-segment display is probably the next most basic
display that you’ll see. Most seven-segment displays are ordered as shown in
Figure 8-2.

Figure 8-2. Seven-segment display with canonical segment ordering (clockwise ABCDEF,
then G across the center)

Each LED in the segment can be represented as a bit in a byte (the extra one bit is
sometimes used for the decimal-place segment found on some displays). The seg‐
ments are accessed in order, usually from most significant to least significant bit: abc
defg (or sometimes gfedcba). So if you want to put a 3 on the display, you need to
turn on the LEDs at abcdg and turn off the LEDs at fe. In hex, using abcdefg, you’ll
want to write 0x79 to the display to represent the number 3.
The actual implementation here is not that important. The critical idea is the decou‐
pling between human-readable data on the display and the representation in the
code. Get used to having to map between the display’s context and other parts of the
software.

                                                                  Segmented Displays   |   213
Taking a step back, do you remember solar-powered calculators? The LCD display
with eight digits (each one a seven-segment display)? The ones that were amazing
technology in the 1960s but were handed out for free by the 1980s? They also had at
least 17 buttons. They could total up to 81 different settings (17 (buttons) + 8
(places) × 7 (segments in each character) + 8 (decimal points)), but the processors
that ran inside those calculators didn’t have 81 I/O lines.
As noted in “Key Matrices” on page 211, you can matrix the button inputs: 17 buttons
can use 9 lines (4 × 5), and you can get three more buttons for “free.” The same
method can be used to matrix the display outputs.
Using row/column scanning, for eight characters on the screen with decimals (64 seg‐
ments), we can use an 8 × 8 matrix, so only 16 I/O lines are needed.
With buttons, the response time depends on the number of rows because you cut the
time spent looking at each column into that many slices. With outputs, the time slice
determines how long each segment can be on. So, if you use an 8 × 8 LED array, the
LEDs will be on only 1/8 of the time. Most LEDs are so bright that this doesn’t matter.
With LCDs (such as those found in our solar calculator), the limited amount of on-
time can make segments look washed out and difficult to see, particularly when the
power is low.

                     LCD segments don’t run with a constant “on” setting like LEDs do.
                     Although LCDs can be driven through a matrix, it is more difficult
                     because they need a changing AC signal. Usually you’ll use an LCD
                     controller, but if you want to try matrixing it (or just want to
                     understand it better), check out STMicroelectronics Application
                     Note AN1447.

The 8 × 8 matrix is very convenient because it lines up well with our character map‐
ping. We can either power all of one character at one time, or power all of the a-
segments, then all of the b-segments, and so on. Either method works. As long as you
refresh the display fast enough (get through all of the segments faster than 30 Hz), the
user will never know.

                     If you update too slowly, the display will flicker. I find 30 Hz to be a
                     good rate. To test your system, look past it, as motion is more
                     noticeable in your peripheral vision.

Pixel Displays
Unfortunately, seven segments per character isn’t enough to represent much. You can
choose a 14-segment display to get decent looking letters for English applications (or
a 16-segment display to incorporate Latin letters and Arabic digits). At some point,
you might as well use a dot matrix display and build your digits, characters, and
graphics out of dots. Well, dots sound so plebeian. Let’s call them “picture elements.”
Naw, that takes too long, let’s call them pixels.
Now the mapping between the number 3 and what appears on your display may be
even further apart than 3 and 0x79. Each thing you want to put on the screen needs a
bitmap to describe what bits are on and what bits are off. Anything that goes on the
screen is a glyph, whether it comes from a bitmap or is generated by the code (such as
a graph).
All of your bitmaps together are called your graphic assets. Graphic assets are usually
split into fonts and other graphics (pictures, logos, etc.). A font is a set of glyphs rep‐
resenting a set of characters (typically the ASCII character set). As before, the goal of
designing a display subsystem is to keep images of the data loosely coupled to the
data itself. This allows you much greater flexibility to change screens, give your sys‐
tem a new look, and reuse your display subsystem in a different product.

Display Assets
Figure 8-3 shows one way to set up graphic assets. First, there is a table of data, usu‐
ally with a header file that tells you where the logo is or perhaps the offset to the ani‐
mations. It is important to version the file (and the asset list) because if they change
without your software knowing it, you could display garbage to the screen.

Figure 8-3. Graphic subsystem organization

                                                                         Pixel Displays   |   215
To put the number 3 up on the screen, first you need to know what representation of
3 to display: is the bitmap going to be small or fill the whole screen? Is it going to be
bold or italicized? Each of these options will lead to a different font set in your assets.
Once you know the font, you’ll need to map from the character to the bitmap, usually
by searching through the character map to get an offset into the bitmap glyphs.
Bitmaps can be stored in monochrome (1 bit per pixel), as shown in Figure 8-3. Look
at all the wasted data, though, that can be compressed. Compressing it may speed up
retrieval from wherever the asset is stored (often off-chip flash). However, uncom‐
pressing the data becomes one more thing for the processor to do, which may slow
down the display of new glyphs.
One form of compression that might not slow down the processor at all is run-length
encoding (RLE). Sections of data that are the same are stored as a single data value
and a count, rather than each pixel being replicated. This is great when you have a lot
of the same color on the screen. For example, you might get a stream of white pixels
(W) and black pixels (B) that look like WWWWBBWWW. This would encode to
W4B2W3. If the data is stored as one bit per pixel (so the whole image is only black
and white), that would give you no savings. However, if the image is one byte per
pixel (or two or three bytes per pixel), RLE provides significant compression without
much processor overhead.
Display subsystems end up pushing a lot of data from one place to another. A mono‐
chrome bitmap is fairly small. In Figure 8-3, the number 3 glyph will be 8 pixels wide
and 8 pixels high, so it can be represented in 8 bytes. However, it will probably look
terrible with those blocky edges. To make it look better, you’ll want to add antialias‐
ing, which softens the edges by putting grayscale pixels in. Figure 8-4 shows a little bit
of smoothing on the number 3 bitmap. It uses five levels, so it would need three bits
per pixel.

Figure 8-4. Antialiasing of a character: using more data per pixel to make it grayscale
instead of black and white

With antialiasing, the bitmap is no longer monochrome. You could use 2, 4, or even 8
bits per pixel to describe the antialiasing. An 8-bit-per-pixel encoding means the
number 3 glyph takes up 64 bytes—still a really small amount, but you’re on a slip‐
pery slope. Before, your whole A–Z, a–z, 0–9 monochrome font could fit into 500
bytes, but now it is almost 4 KB, and that is for 8-pixel-high letters. Once you have a
2.4-inch LCD display (24-bit color, 240 × 320 pixels), each screen can take up to
225 KB.
Coding a display subsystem often means optimizing your code so the parts handling
this data throughput don’t cause problems with the screen. Most LCDs automatically
refresh, which means the display hardware redraws the data on the screen. The LCD
refreshes the screen with the same image over and over again until your data changes.
Tearing is when the data changes part way through a refresh, showing half of the new
image and half of the old image. To completely eliminate tearing, you need to syn‐
chronize the image update with the screen refresh and get all of the pixels to their
intended value before the next refresh (it can be difficult to transfer all the data in
such a short time).
Note that how you pack the assets into the storage mechanism is important. In addi‐
tion to compression concerns, you need to store them in a way that makes sense for
the space available, the interface between the graphic assets storage (usually flash) and
your processor, and the interface between the LCD and the processor. Another issue
might intrude as well: what if your display has to go into the product enclosure
upside-down due to electro-mechanical requirements? It may require more frontend
processing to put the assets in a different orientation, but it is better than having the
processor turn them upside down and backward each time the asset is read.

                Being an embedded systems specialist does not excuse you from
                writing programs to pack data assets. Since you’ll be the one using
                the information, you’ll find your life is much easier if you control
                how the graphics are stored. More on that in “External Flash Mem‐
                ory” on page 220.

Finally, once you have the bitmap ready to send to the screen, you’ll need to know
where to put it. Figure 8-5 shows the number 3 glyph on the screen.

                                                                          Pixel Displays   |   217
Figure 8-5. Number 3 on a display

To sum up the steps:

 1. Determine what is going on the screen and where.
 2. Look in the assets to find the correct font.
 3. Find the character in the font.
 4. Read the bitmap, possibly uncompressing it.
 5. Copy the bitmap in the correct location in the display buffer.
 6. Send the buffer to the display, ideally right after the last refresh.

To put up a logo or other fixed graphic, combine steps 2 and 3 into one: looking up
the image glyph.

Changeable Data? Flyweight and Factory Patterns
This method to store character and image glyphs, retrieving them as needed to put on
the screen matches a design pattern: the flyweight pattern. Well, the way I described it
mashes it together with a factory pattern, so it is more correctly called a flyweight fac‐
tory pattern. Let me untangle the two so you can see them separately and be able to
use the concepts outside the LCD.

The typical example of the flyweight pattern is a document with many characters.
Each character is an object describing the character’s size and encapsulating a bitmap.
In a non-embedded world, there is some temptation to instantiate each character
object on its own. Eventually, when there are enough characters, this leads to sluggish
behavior. In an embedded device, we wouldn’t have that problem, as there is never
enough RAM to let us get into trouble this way. The solution is to point to a single
instance of the character object (which for us is in flash memory).
That is the pattern: when you have lots of things used repeatedly, create a pool of
instances (one for each object) and point to the pool instead of instantiating each
object directly. Each of the shared objects is called a flyweight (like the lightest weight
in boxing, not like the weight used to increase inertia in flywheels). Each flyweight
must be relatively interchangeable with the others, though they may describe their
state (e.g., a character may describe its width because that differs unpredictably
between characters).
The factory pattern is a bit more complicated, centering on the factory method.
Remember the Unix driver model from Chapter 2? Almost all drivers implement the
same interface (open, close, read, write, ioctl). If you are writing a program to use
a driver, you open it as though it were a file (/dev/tty0). The driver gets instantiated
and returned to you as a generic handler on the surface, but underneath it represents
a serial port. The factory method (open) knows how to create a specific widget (sub‐
class) that is of a generic type (class). All of the specific widgets implement the same
interface (the class interface).
If you found the previous paragraph a bit daunting, Figure 8-6 may help. It shows the
classic factory pattern diagram, with the Unix driver model example underneath, fol‐
lowed by the LCD graphics example. The factory pattern often is implemented in a
very object-oriented way, with specific subclasses being instantiations of a class. The
creator class (the code that calls the factory method) controls the whole thing.

                Figure 8-6 is in UML (Unified Modeling Language), a useful visual
                language for describing software, particularly object-oriented soft‐
                ware. It can be simple (like this) or far more complex, going so far
                as to become an interpretable language.

                                                                          Pixel Displays   |   219
Figure 8-6. Factory pattern and flyweight factory pattern examples

The factory pattern is all around you, decoupling instances from a generic ideal. It is
a fairly physical pattern, so its name makes sense. Imagine you have a real live factory.
It is flexible enough to make any one of several relatively similar products (the prod‐
uct class). The factory contains a machine (the creator). Today, you configure the
machine to make sprockets (a concrete product) by putting a template (factory
method) into the machine. When you push the “on” button, the factory will generate
sprockets. Tomorrow, you may switch out the template to make gadgets (a different
concrete product) ensured by a different template (factory method).
When we do this in graphics software and with flyweights, pressing the “on” button is
more like the software requesting a glyph. With a flyweight factory pattern, the fac‐
tory part manages the flyweights, making sure they are shared properly and decou‐
pling characters from the way they are displayed on the screen.

External Flash Memory
We’ve already looked a bit at memory and how it is classified into volatile memory
(lost when the system turns off) and nonvolatile memory (retained through power
cycles). RAM is the most predominant form of volatile memory.

Nonvolatile memory comes in two primary flavors: EEPROM and flash. EEPROMs
are generally smaller, and their bytes can be written individually. They are straightfor‐
ward enough that the datasheet will likely be enough to make your development go
smoothly.

                The volatile keyword in C/C++ refers to something different
                from the idea of volatile memory. This keyword tells the compiler,
                “this variable may change outside the code that is currently run‐
                ning,” whereas volatile memory loses its contents when power is
                lost.

Flash is made up of sectors (or pages) that must be erased all at one time (the larger
the flash, the larger the sector). Once a sector is erased, flash can be written one byte
at a time. This requirement adds a lot of complexity.
However, flash is incredibly useful, in part because it can be very large. You’ll proba‐
bly want to store display assets there. Flash is also useful for that little bit of data that
changes occasionally, like the reason the system reset. It can also act as a data storage
location if the system takes data over a long period, but uploads to some other source
less frequently. You can even have a file system. (We won’t talk about updating firm‐
ware until Chapter 9 but flash will come up there too.)
Flash is almost always controlled via SPI because it is the fastest of the common pro‐
tocols. Even SD cards can be accessed via SPI.

Display Assets
Initially you can compile your display asset in code, including a small font. There are
online tools and Python scripts that will turn your image into C code, an array of
constant variables that represent which pixels will be lit on the screen (or what color
those pixels will be).
However, you may have enough on-board processor flash to handle a small display
doing a few simple things. Once you hear the words “animation” or “internationaliza‐
tion,” plan on a SPI flash to store the font and image information.
While Figure 8-3 shows a good architecture for the display assets, the implementation
has a few sticking points. First, how large will the display assets need to be? This is a
matter of the display size, but also the glyphs and fonts you need.
Do you need all the letters, numbers, and symbols? There are 94 for English—more if
you want to support other languages (another 94 for French, Italian, German, and
Spanish). You’ll need one set for each size (pixel height and width) of each font. Are
they single bit-depth or are they antialiased to look better?

                                                                   External Flash Memory   |   221
Consider one font with 94 characters, 8 × 6 size, and 8 bits of grayscale color:

  • font space = characters × pixel height × pixel width × bit depth for color
  • font space = 94 × 8 × 6 × 8 = 36,096 bits = 4,512 bytes

However, even with antialiasing, that font is only going to be good for very small text.
With a medium-sized screen, we might have 30 × 40 characters. With 94 characters
and 16 bits of color, that is 220 KB. Fonts can take up a lot of space; they may take up
more space than your code.
Thus, display assets are often put on external SPI flash, loaded in the processor as
needed, then transferred to the display interface. Surprisingly, the first step is one of
the most difficult:

 1. Calculate how much space you’ll need for the display assets:
      a. How many fonts? What sizes? How many bits per pixel?
      b. How many other glyphs/icons/images? What sizes? Color or monochrome?
      c. Total these up and try to leave at least 25% extra for growth.
 2. Determine how data will be accessed:
      a. How long does it take for the communication bus to send one data bit?
      b. How long does it take for the display to receive one data bit?
      c. Using the maximum of the previous two, how long will it take to update the
         whole screen? (number of display pixels × maximum time/bit)
      d. If you have an animation or quickly changing area (think spinning “thinking”
         circle), how long will it take to update that part of the screen? (number of pix‐
         els × maximum time/bit)
 3. Obtain the asset files (the actual images of each letter and glyph you’ll put on the
    screen). Ideally these will come with some sort of device mock-up so you know
    how to group the data and where to put icons on the screen. You’ll need to make
    this data available to your program. I usually code up a Python script to:
      a. Map the filename of the image to an identifier in the code.
      b. Map the identifier in the code to the location in flash (likely from the start of
         the area allocated to display assets).
      c. Add any other metadata about where the glyph should go on the screen (if
         there is a default). Adding the width and height into the metadata can be very
         helpful.
      d. Pack the image data into a binary file with the assets in the order above.

At this point, you’ll probably have a header file with a list of identifiers that the code
uses to indicate what should be on the screen. That list of identifiers will likely lead to
their offset location in the packed binary (and any characteristics that make sense for
the application, though you can put that in the binary too). You will also have a
binary of the assets, all smushed together.
Next, program this into your display flash, another step that sounds easy, that should
be easy, but will likely cause you to write more code. Usually I end up with a debug/
manufacturing command line to take data from a serial port and put it in the SPI
flash. In manufacturing, there may be a special flash programmer that bypasses your
processor.
At this point, you may be ready to get back to the satisfying work of coding up the
display. However, I strongly recommend taking a few minutes to make your asset
packing script a little nicer. It is one of those things I often think will be temporary
but turns out to be reused many times.

Emulated EEPROMs and KV Stores
I hope your flash isn’t full of display assets, as there are a few other uses for it. I men‐
tioned EEPROMs previously as a nonvolatile memory that is smaller and more
straightforward than flash. Usually with an EEPROM, you set up a list of addresses
and what data you’ll put in each.

Address   Data                            Size
      0   Serial number                   4 bytes
      4   Last time unit was booted       4 bytes
      8   Cause of last reboot            1 byte
      9   Number of boots since initial   3 bytes
     12   …

Every time your system resets, you can update the boot status information. It won’t
change the unit serial number (“Of course!” you say, but keep reading and ignore the
scary music).
From one perspective, this is a tiny database, where you look up data based on the
address. Somewhere in your code is a header that maps the EEPROM address to the
data you want to access so you can say something like:
     uint32_t sn = readEeprom(constSerialNumberAddr, constSerialNumberSize);
or
     writeEeprom(constLastBootTimeAddr, constLastBootTimeSize, (void*) & currentTime);
However, EEPROMs are expensive, small, and slow compared to flash memory.

                                                                  External Flash Memory   |   223
On the other hand, flash must be erased before being written. And you can only erase
in blocks, which are usually several kilobytes. Also, flash can wear out if you erase or
write the same place over and over again (so can EEPROMs, though they usually
have a higher number of cycles).
The solution is a key-value store (KV store or emulated EEPROM). You choose a key
for a piece of data (usually a number) and then look up the data for that key: a tiny
database.
However, instead of a fixed address in flash, the data is part of a list that the processor
sifts through to find the matching key. So when you write new data for a key, the pre‐
vious data is found and invalidated, then new data is added to the end of the list.
KV stores take time to access for reading or writing and contain state machines to
figure out where they are in the find-erase-write cycle. Additionally, because they
keep lists of data (including invalidated data), KV stores take up a lot more room
than the data alone might: you’ll need at least two flash blocks, so that the data can be
stored in one, while the other one is being erased.
I don’t recommend writing your own KV store because many processor and RTOS
vendors provide the code for you. To find it, search for both terms: KV store is the
software engineering perspective and emulated EEPROM is the hardware engineer‐
ing perspective. Either will lead you to code that does the same thing.

Little File Systems
Putting a file system on the flash suffers from the same problem as the KV store: you
have to erase flash in blocks and not write the same addresses frequently. Some flash
has a life-span of around ten thousand erase/write cycles. If you updated data at a
particular address at once a second, the flash would last for less than twenty minutes
(10,000 writes / 60s/min = 16.7 min).
Flash doesn’t catch on fire when it fails. Instead, the bits get sticky. After writing 0x55
(“U”) to an address, it may be read back as 0x57 (“W”). When using flash extensively,
the code needs to look for sticky bits and mark the section as bad so it is not used in
the future.
Flash file systems need to be power-loss resilient so random failures during an update
cycle don’t cause file loss. They also need to handle wear leveling, using all of the
blocks allocated to them equally, and they need to identify bad blocks and work
around them. Oh, and they need to fit into our system, not taking up too much mem‐
ory or processor cycles.

One of the big advantages of an RTOS is that it can likely provide a flash file system
for you. There are many other bare-metal file systems (my favorite is littlefs one of
the many open source filesystems).1

Data Storage
Another common use for SPI flash is to store data collected by the device. This is
especially useful for systems that generate a constant stream of data that is read out in
a big burst. Consider Bluetooth-connected pedometers or earthquake sensors: while
the sensors are regularly getting data, they only transmit when they are connected.
You could use a file system for storing data, but often that causes too much overhead,
with more flash accesses than necessary and unpredictable erase cycles. I’ve already
mentioned that flash requires whole sectors to be erased. I probably should have
mentioned that erasing the flash takes seemingly forever: sometimes tens of milli‐
seconds!
Sadly, tens of milliseconds in this context is a lot. Let’s say you are recording data at 20
kHz, 20,000 samples per second. The time between samples is inversely proportional
to the frequency:

                                            1              1
    time between samples =                             =       = 0 . 05 ms
                                    sampling f requency 20 kHz

If the part has a maximum erase time of 25 ms, then the device may collect 500 sam‐
ples while waiting for the flash to finish erasing and be available for writing new sam‐
ples. Thus, the code will need enough RAM allocated to the sampling subsystem to
store 500 samples (of whatever size your samples are).

                    As with the display update questions above, these numbers are nec‐
                    essary to make sure the processor and flash can do what you need
                    them to do. While I’ll talk more about throughput calculators
                    toward the end of this chapter, please start getting comfortable with
                    the idea there will be some math involved. Spreadsheets are your
                    friend. (And the GitHub repository for this book has samples.)

1 littlefs is nice because it explains the many trade-offs it makes. It can be found in GitHub.

                                                                                    External Flash Memory   |   225
In addition to working out how the speed of the flash will affect RAM sizes, you also
need to determine how much space to allocate to the datastore. Here are some ques‐
tions to help you along:

  • What are the sample rate and sample size?
  • Do you sample continuously or in bursts? If in bursts, how long is the longest
    burst?
  • How often should the data be collected? What is the maximum time between
    transfers?
  • Do you erase after transfer or keep data for possible re-reading in the future until
    the flash fills up?
  • What should happen to the data if it is never collected? Do you want to write
    over it with fresh data or keep the old?

You may need other items related to the particular application (What time did the
sample occur? Did an algorithm identify this as interesting? What was the location
for the sample? and so on). Data that describes your data is called metadata. It is easy
to forget this as you work on the data storage calculations. Plan on some metadata
overhead to go along with your data (10% is a good starting number if you aren’t
sure).

                                          Timestamp Woes
  Timestamps are the most common form of metadata. There is a balance to having a
  good timestamp that doesn’t take up too much space and has enough accuracy and
  resolution. While it is extremely tempting to use a 32-bit counter describing the num‐
  ber of milliseconds since the last boot, you will find that 232 milliseconds is only 49
  days. A simple tick counter is not enough.
  A real-time clock (RTC) may be required. An RTC implies the need for a battery or
  battery-like capacitor. The current time will be lost when the battery dies. Oh, and
  you need to set the time initially as well as when the battery dies. For data collection, I
  recommend always using UTC because you really don’t want to deal with time zones
  and Daylight Saving Time.
  The accuracy of the RTC depends on the accuracy of the clock it uses as input. As the
  temperature gets colder, the clock will run slower. RTCs are generally accurate but
  they aren’t perfect.
  Trying to synchronize between different devices leads to all kinds of headaches. Your
  server should probably be in charge, able to make corrections to the device, but if that
  isn’t good enough, you may need a GPS to get a more accurate time source (then you
  also need a view of the sky). Many GPS modules output a pulse-per-second (PPS) sig‐
  nal that can be used to correct the RTC.

  In summary: while it’s vastly tempting to sort out the timestamps later, it is a part of
  design that should not be neglected because it has ramifications through the whole
  system. Alternatively, never work on time.

Once you’ve identified the pain of erase times and scoped out the necessary size, the
next piece of unwelcome news is that the power to the system will definitely go out at
the worst possible moment. One evil edge case is when data transfer is complete, but
the system reset before it could mark the flash as ready for erase. Can the receiver
handle duplicate data?
Having the power fail while erasing can lead to corruption in the data. This can be
difficult to determine, but one way to solve the problem is to have a modification list
in a different part of flash. In the modification list sector of flash, program the address
block that is about to be erased. Then do the erase. Then add to the modification list
that the erase completed. On boot, go through the list, scanning for any starting
marks that don’t have corresponding erase-completed marks. At some point, this list
will fill up and need to be erased itself, so allocate two sectors to this modification list.
Power can fail while writing to flash as well. You could use the same modification list,
but if you write small amounts of flash, writing to the mod list, then putting in the
data, then writing to the mod list again becomes quite cumbersome. Instead, I recom‐
mend putting in checksums to verify that a block of data has been written completely.
How often you should do this depends on your application: how much data can you
lose when the power goes out? If you need every sample to count, then use smaller
blocks. If a power cycle means data won’t be ready for a few seconds anyway, then a
larger block is probably fine.
Another consideration for the data store is retrieving the data. When connection hap‐
pens, how long does it take to read out the buffered data? Are you still acquiring new
data at the same time? Flash reads are fast, so it probably won’t cause a problem, but
you’ll need to check the numbers to be sure. (More about this in “Calculating Needs:
Speeds and Feeds” on page 236.)
But for all this talk about storing data, what kind of data is it? That is where sensors
come in.

Analog Signals
A button could be called a type of sensor. The methods used to talk to buttons are
similar to those used with sensors, and the choices are similar (e.g., interrupts versus
polling). However, buttons are either pressed down or not, whereas sensors can pro‐
vide all sorts of data—high, low, 1.45, 10,342.81, 12, 43, or out of range. What you
read depends on your sensor.

                                                                         Analog Signals   |   227
                    Your system may have its own input sensors while serving as a sen‐
                    sor to another system.

A microphone, like your ears, picks up audio in analog form. You can use an ADC
(occasionally called an A2D) to move from real-world analog to software-friendly
digital. Your software can do any number of things with the digital data: watch for
events in the analog stream, filter it, or change it back into analog with a DAC (aka
D2A). In analog form, the signal can be played through a speaker. Figure 8-7 shows a
simple system.

Figure 8-7. Analog-to-digital-to-analog system

The signal is the underlying thing you are listening to, whether it is currently digital
or analog. Noise is what makes it hard for your software to see the signal properly. A
goal of the system is to make sure there is plenty of signal compared to the noise, giv‐
ing you a high SNR (signal-to-noise ratio).
Digital signal processing is a software technique for changing data from analog to
digital, and often doing something to make sense of the data. Sometimes the data gets
transformed to look like something different. Often this change converts the data to a
combination of sine waves because these are easy to compute with. The sine waves
are frequencies (think of radio station frequencies or musical pitches). So this conver‐
sion is called conversion to the frequency domain.
In Figure 8-7, the signal is reduced by dividing each integer sample by two. The
resulting analog sound should be quieter (attenuated), but integer division isn’t a
good idea with such small numbers, so the signal morphs more than it should.
(Receiving a higher signal input at the ADC or sampling more bits in the ADC would
reduce this problem with integer math.)
This is a relatively silly example because you could get a better attenuation effect
without digitizing the input. More often, the data goes through multiple stages of
processing. Some of these might include filtering (to reduce noise or enhance a par‐
ticular signal characteristic), companding (attenuating loud sections and/or boosting
quiet ones), and convolution (finding one signal hidden inside another).

ADCs and DACs are characterized by their sample frequencies (how fast they work)
and number of bits. An 8-bit ADC has 256 levels in its digital signal; a 16-bit ADC
has 65,536 levels. What you need depends on your application, but those two num‐
bers can drive how your whole software system is organized by constraining the
speed of your processor and the amount of RAM you need. How fast your system can
process data is called its throughput or bandwidth.
Some processors are built with signal processing in mind (digital signal processors,
aka DSPs). They have special processor instructions that work with the signal much
faster than a general-purpose processor does.
Of all of the embedded systems areas, signal processing is my favorite. However, it is a
complete book unto itself. Well, two books, because you need to understand the math
(Fourier is fun) and how to apply that to real-world problems (fast Fourier
transforms!).
I don’t want you to think you are ready to go off and make a great analog system with
this tiny section. For instance, I haven’t talked about sampling and the Nyquist fre‐
quency. Either you already know about it, or you need far more than this brief orien‐
tation. I recommend my favorite signal processing books in “Further Reading” on
page 239.
I started this section with a microphone, but analog sensors come in all sorts of types:
motion sensors (accelerometers, gyroscopes, magnetometers), weather sensors (wind,
humidity, temperature), vision sensors (cameras, infrared detectors…), the list goes
on and on. You may have only five senses, but your system can have many more.

                I once heard an electrical engineer say, “All sensors are temperature
                sensors, but some are better than others.” That’s true. Sensors
                respond to ambient temperature even when they are supposed to
                be measuring something else. Expect to have to calibrate your sys‐
                tem for temperature and give a sigh of relief if you don’t need to.

Digital Sensors
If I have made you a little nervous with analog sensors and the arcane world of signal
processing, I do apologize. You’ll like digital sensors a lot more. A digital sensor will
do the analog-to-digital conversion for you, ideally giving you exactly the data you
need. As with analog sensors, the range of digital sensors is staggering. Although dig‐
ital sensors are usually a bit more expensive than their analog counterparts, the price
is often worth it because they produce meaningful samples, offload a lot of work from
the processor, and are less susceptible to external noise (see “EMI: Electromagnetic
Interference” on page 230). Digital sensors may also include integrated filters and
temperature compensation.

                                                                          Digital Sensors   |   229
                             EMI: Electromagnetic Interference
  As signals travel along wires, they pick up noise from all the things around that have
  clocks. Wait a minute, you say—my system has a clock? Probably more than one,
  actually.
  So you can’t expect your analog system to be free of noise. The wires that the analog
  signal travels along are like antennas picking up static from everything around them.
  Your electrical engineer can shield the signal and reduce its susceptibility to noise
  (usually by putting a shiny metal box connected to ground, called a Faraday cage,
  around the signal). But you still might have to worry about noise.

                      Although digital signals emit more noise to the environment,
                      they are more immune to outside sources of noise.

  Sometimes, before you can fix the issue, you need to find the culprit causing the
  noise. That can be difficult. If it is not external to your system, it could be any of your
  communication paths, any of your peripherals, or your processor itself. Even worse, it
  may be some combination of these interfering in tandem, giving you hard-to-
  reproduce errors. Radiating noise internally is not the only problem.
  Sometimes, after bring-up but before the end of your project, your electrical engineer
  will take your system off for electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) testing. Different
  countries have different regulations (and certification processes) necessary to use
  products in the country. In the US, if your system has a clock that is over 9 kHz, it
  needs to go through EMC testing to ensure that it doesn’t radiate signals that will
  interfere with communication (to comply with FCC part 15).
  This test will put the unit into an anechoic chamber and monitor it at many radio
  frequencies to see whether it emits any noise above the tolerated level. As you prepare
  the software used in hardware bring-up, you may need to put together an EMC test
  version that will transmit data through all communication pathways as fast as possi‐
  ble, to generate chatter and verify that nothing much radiates from your device.
  The same EMC test lab usually can blast your unit with different frequencies to see
  whether it is susceptible to noise in any particular range.

Your primary concern in reading the datasheet for the digital sensor is how to com‐
municate with it. Does your processor have the type of communication method
needed by the sensor? After that, the questions center on throughput: can your soft‐
ware keep up with the amount of data the sensor is going to send? What is it going to
do with the data? How long will it take? How will it know when data is ready?

Data Handling
So far, we’ve seen the data generators and the data consumers. And we’ve seen how to
send and receive data. However, there are some pieces missing between these two.
Understanding how to move the data around in your software is critical to making a
great system. Let’s start with the big picture of handling the data at a system level, and
then work down into the mechanics.
In Chapter 5, we looked at systems that were event-driven: things happened because
sensors were activated, causing events that in turn caused changes to the state of the
system. However, not all embedded systems can (or should) be set up as event loops
and state machines.
There is a class of problems where the goal is to get data, process it, do something
with the results, and repeat. In such data-driven systems, there are no events, just an
ever-increasing mountain of data for your software to process. Ideally, the system can
wade through the data just a tiny bit faster than it is generated. Some examples of
data-driven systems include:

  • An airplane’s black box, which continuously records audio and telemetry.
  • A gunshot location sensor that listens to its environment. Upon identifying an
    impulsive sound, it generates an event to send to a host.
  • A reconnaissance satellite that records image data, compresses it, and (when in
    range of a link point) sends it to Earth.
  • An MP3 player that reads data from its audio store, decompresses it, and sends
    bits out of a DAC to generate a signal that sounds like music to your ears.
  • An auto-following system that reads position and adjusts vehicle velocity.

A data-driven system can be understood by looking at the flow of data. The rate of
the data and how quickly it needs to be processed are the primary features of the
system.
Reboots and errors can cause the system to fall behind. This is one type of system
where failing gracefully is important. If the system has an error that causes it to fall
behind, should it skip some of the data and catch up? Or should it do some sort of
reduced processing until the system returns to normal? What are the consequences of
missing data?
Happily, implementing a data-driven system is pretty straightforward because the
processing of the data is repetitive. Consider the analog-to-digital system described in
Figure 8-7, where digital data comes from the ADC, gets attenuated, and goes out the
DAC. The system can usually be divided into a producer of data (the ADC) and a
consumer of data (the DAC). These must remain in Zen-like balance. As long as the

                                                                       Data Handling   |   231
processor can keep up with the ADC by running the algorithm and sending the data
to the DAC, the system can run forever.
Most systems have some elements of both an event-driven system and a data-driven
system. As you consider your system, try to figure out what aspects belong to each.
This will unravel some of the complexity of your software by allowing you to imple‐
ment them separately.

Changing Algorithms: Strategy
Sometimes the path of your code needs to change based on the environment. If you
are thinking that we saw a way to change what the code is doing based on commands
from the host in the command pattern in Chapter 3, you are correct. The command
pattern is used to make short-term command/response changes. The strategy pattern
is used to make longer-term changes, usually to data processing. According to the
official definition from Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Soft‐
ware, the strategy pattern is used to “define a family of algorithms, encapsulate each
one, and make them interchangeable. Strategy lets the algorithm vary independently
from the clients that use it.”
Consider the data-driven system in Figure 8-7, where analog data is digitized by an
ADC, attenuated by the processor, and then sent back to analog via the DAC. What if
you weren’t sure you wanted to attenuate the signal? What if you wanted to invert it?
Or amplify the signal? Or add another signal to it?
You could use a state machine, but it would be a little clunky. Once on every process‐
ing pass, the code would have to check which algorithm to use based on the state
variable.
Another way to implement this is to have a pointer to a function (or object) that pro‐
cesses data. You’ll need to define the function interface so every data-processing func‐
tion takes the same arguments and returns the same data type. But if you can do that,
you can change the pointer on command, thereby changing how your whole system
works (or possibly how a small part of your system modifies the data).

                     Some embedded systems are too constrained to be able to change
                     the algorithm on the fly. However, you probably still want to use
                     the strategy pattern concepts to switch algorithms during develop‐
                     ment. The strategy pattern helps you separate data from code and
                     enforces a relatively strict interface to different algorithms.

A related pattern is the template pattern. A template provides a skeleton of an algo‐
rithm but allows the steps to change (without changing the algorithm’s structure).
Usually these aren’t function pointers; the steps are part of the organization of the

algorithm. In our data-driven system, we could make a template that looked like the
following:
    class Template {
    private:
      struct sCircularBuffer *cb;

    public:
      enum eErrorCode sample();
      enum eErrorCode processData();
      enum eErrorCode output();
    }
Even though each of these functions has the same prototype, they aren’t interchange‐
able, unlike the strategy pattern. Instead, they provide an outline of how the system
works. An instance of this template for the system described would have the ADC
sampling the data, the data being amplified, and the DAC outputting the result. The
instantiation of a template may override certain (or all) parts of the default imple‐
mentation. For instance, if the default implementation sets up the order “ADC-
process-DAC,” a test version of the class may override the sample function to read
data from a file while leaving the other two functions in place.
You can, of course, combine patterns. Here is a strategy pattern inside the template’s
skeleton:
    class Template {
    private:
      struct sCircularBuffer *cb;
    public:
      enum eErrorCode sample();
      enum eErrorCode (*processData)();
      enum eErrorCode output();
    }
Object-oriented software has the concept of inheritance, where an instance is-a con‐
crete version of an object. Template patterns are like that (the template is a series of
these steps). An alternative approach is composition, where the software has-a con‐
crete version of an object. Strategy patterns are more like that (they offer a function to
call). Composition is more flexible than inheritance because it is easier to switch what
things have than what they are. On the other hand, building (composing) a system at
runtime might not be a good use of limited resources. Balance the trade-offs for your
system.

Algorithm Stages: Pipelines and Filters
Sometimes processing the data takes multiple steps. A pipeline is a design pattern
where the output of each processing step is the input to the next step. Usually, the
analogy is an assembly line with partially assembled items that move from station to
station or a load of laundry: something where there are multiple stages, each one

                                                                       Data Handling   |   233
needing to complete before the process goes on. These steps are called filters (though
they may not be the same thing as signal processing filters!). They may also be called
stages or processing elements.
As shown in Figure 8-8, say we have a system that collects data, maybe a heart rate
monitor:

 1. Data comes into the system from an ADC as samples.
 2. The samples are processed to remove noise.
 3. Then they go through a low-pass filter to remove different noise.
 4. An algorithm piece selects the two channels of data to keep.
 5. The reduced and filtered data is stored in the data store.
 6. The reduced and filtered data is downsampled.
 7. The downsampled data is put on a display as a rolling window rolling graph.

Figure 8-8. Pipeline view (top) and software block diagram (bottom) of an example
heart rate monitor

The noise removal and low-pass filter are part of the pipeline. These happen with
every sample from the ADC: a sample goes in, a modified sample comes out in a con‐
stant stream of data. It is important to note that the samples are processed in the
order they are received. For that to happen, with some filters the samples need to be

buffered so that as you put in a sample, you get out an older sample. Buffering leads
to data latency (which is a lot like system latency but for data). As shown in
Figure 8-9, this latency accumulates with each filter.
As the modified data is ready to go to the data store, it may be broken into chunks to
limit flash accesses. Instead of writing one sample at a time, it will write many.

                You can also think of pipelines as message queues where the filter
                stages process each message, writing the results to another message
                queue.

Figure 8-9. Space-time diagram of the pipeline: following sample 0 through a 3-point
noise filter and a 16-point low-pass filter to the data selector and data store, latency
accumulates with each buffered pipeline element

While storage could be considered part of the pipeline, it is an endpoint, a consumer,
not a filter. The data may go on to other filters:

  • Find the maximum and minimum of the filtered data
  • If max-min is large enough to be interesting, then process the lowpass filtered
    data with convolution to find the start of the interesting event
  • Report the event time and interesting characteristics (such as min and max)

These filters are different from the previous ones because they work on windowed
data: you don’t want the all-time min and max, the goal is to find the characteristics
in a shorter period of time. For example, you may not expect to see a heart rate faster
than 250 beats per minute and choose the window accordingly. The windows are
often overlapped in case the event of interest is on the border between two windows.

                                                                         Data Handling   |   235
If you were to go look for the pipeline design pattern or the pipes and filters design
pattern, you might see that it is marked as something that is primarily useful if you
have multiple processors that can handle the filter stages in parallel. The different fil‐
ters are a good way to break the processing up so it can be shared.
I promise the pipeline pattern is very useful in an embedded context. Like state
machines, most systems have aspects that can be considered pipelines. The pipeline
pattern is a good way to think about how data moves through the system: at what
speeds, whether constant throughput or windowed chunks, and with data of different
sizes. If you think about data streams this way, you can break up the filters to test
them individually, making them more readable and possibly reusable.

Calculating Needs: Speeds and Feeds
It is easy to get lost in the low-level details of a system: trying to get I2C sensor sam‐
ples into a circular buffer, then outputting them to SPI flash, before calculating a
graph and sending it to a display. Each piece requires a dedicated piece of software.
However, as you do more system design, there are system-level issues to consider. I’ve
been sprinkling in breadcrumbs throughout this chapter; now it’s time to put them
together.
The goal is to determine the specifications of your parts given the product features
(or update the product features given the parts available). Like pipelines, it is a matter
of connecting the outputs of one piece of the system to the inputs of the next.
I often use a spreadsheet to figure out if all of the pieces of my system can be linked
together.

Data Bandwidth
Going back to the heart monitor in Figure 8-8, the ADC provides data. But what kind
of data?

  • What is the sample rate? How many samples per second? Usually this is in hertz
    (Hz).
  • How many channels of data are in the sample?
  • How big is each sample? Usually this is in bits.

Say we have a SPI four-channel 16-bit ADC sampling at 44.1 kHz. How much data is
the system dealing with each second?

      bandwidth = sampleRate × channels × size of sample = 44,100 × 4 × 16 = 352,800
      bytes per second

When you look at the SPI clock, you will need to receive that much data. Is your SPI
clock fast enough to transfer that much data? (Assume for now that DMA is working
so the transfer overhead is minimal.)

   transfer clock (minimum) = bandwidth (in bits) = 352,800 × 8 = 2.8 MHz

Is it still fast enough if the SPI bus is shared with other peripherals? Even if the other
peripheral is the display? Or flash? All of these things add up, so you’ll need to deter‐
mine how much of your total SPI bandwidth is used by each device. Calculate the
normal (nominal) number and the worst-possible number to make sure you have
margin.
So far we are talking about a continuous sample. You may also have bursts of samples,
such as recording an interesting event for 4 seconds. That would give you a total
recording snippet size of:

   snippet size = bandwidth × length = 352,800 × 4 = 1.3 MB

How does this work if your processor has only 512 KBs of RAM? Do you need off-
chip RAM for temporary storage? (Is it SPI? Does it need to go into the clock speed
calculation?)
Can you write to the flash fast enough to store the data? If the goal is recording (with
or without bursts), you’ll need to go back to the flash datasheet to see if it can keep
up. Putting the data throughput in terms of bytes/second will help you total up
shared buses and compare different resources.
And then, how do you get the data off the device? (More on that in Chapter 10.) Do
you have to keep sampling while also reading the data out?
Figure 8-10 shows some of the speeds and feed information for this system. The cal‐
culations for each step are in the Speeds and Feeds Calculator in the GitHub reposi‐
tory for this book.
For each bus and each peripheral, you’ll need to estimate how much of the possible
throughput is used. Some buses will be simple; for an underutilized I2C with a few
simple sensors, you probably won’t even need to grab a calculator. Then for each pro‐
cessing element, you will need a buffer to hold the samples needed for processing. But
embedded systems are purpose-built applications; they are often cost-sensitive, so
extra RAM and faster SPI devices may not be on your BOM unless you can prove
they are necessary.

                                                       Calculating Needs: Speeds and Feeds   |   237
Figure 8-10. Looking at the system as a series of elements with inputs, outputs, buffers,
and necessary bandwidths to maintain

Memory Throughput and Buffering
Most microprocessors have both volatile (RAM) and nonvolatile (flash) memory on
the chip. This is handy, but for many applications it isn’t enough. External RAM is
often used to buffer data, stage screens for display, or temporarily hold data. Display
assets, file systems, long-term data storage, and firmware updates are often put into
external flash.

Memory often ends up being a shared resource, used by different parts of the system.
As you may recall from Chapter 2, shared resources add complexity to the system and
to the code. Mutexes will be required. Beyond that, flash may be busy as it erases or
accesses large display assets. This is an area where a priority inversion can cause the
system to lock up as several tasks wait for the flash system to complete commands.
While internal memory also takes time to access, it is not usually an issue unless you
are trying to wring every cycle out of the processor or writing to internal flash (often
for firmware updates). External memory might be a bottleneck if there are too many
different subsystems trying to access different parts of the flash. As noted in “External
Flash Memory” on page 220, erasing takes more time than writing, which takes
longer than reading. So an inopportune erase of the KV store may cause delays in
data storage writes or display asset retrieval.
As you look at the types of memory you have available, you’ll need to estimate how
much of each you’ll be using to determine if you have enough space for the intended
purpose.
When you look at memory, here are some questions to ask:

  • How large is it? Don’t be fooled by memory sizes given in megabits (Mb) instead
    of megabytes (MB)!
  • How long does it take to read and write the memory? This may depend on com‐
    munication bandwidth as well as the memory characteristics.
  • How much do you need to erase at a time? How long does an erase operation
    take?
  • How many times can it be rewritten? Flashes can be erased and rewritten only a
    limited number of times.

While we often think about protocols connecting external peripherals to the pro‐
cessor, during system design, those connections are more about how each element
flows, which means looking at bandwidth and buffers. The memory type and speed
your device has available constrains the application.

Further Reading
This chapter covered many things, so I have lots of places for you to look if you want
to dig deeper into a particular area. As mentioned elsewhere in this book, Erich
Gamma et al. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software and Eric
Freemen et al. Head First Design Patterns, are great references for understanding
design patterns.
Signal processing and motor control have a lot in common in their underlying math
(Laplace and Fourier transforms). If you haven’t had those in school (or cannot

                                                                     Further Reading   |   239
dredge up the memories), you might consider taking a class. It isn’t the sort of thing
to learn from a book. But if you are going to anyway, the seminal textbook is Signals
and Systems by Alan V. Oppenheim et al. (Prentice-Hall).
Or, you can skip to practical applications with a really fantastic book, The Scientist
and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing by Steven W. Smith (California Tech‐
nical Publishing). It is also available online for free.
If you really want to understand pipelines, take a look at GStreamer, an open source
tool for audio and video processing. It is amazingly powerful and horrifically compli‐
cated.
The GitHub repository that goes along with this book has a spreadsheet that shows
the calculations for “Calculating Needs: Speeds and Feeds” on page 236.

                          Interview Question: Designing a System
  What are some considerations you take into account when designing a sensor system?
  Sometimes the goal of an interview question is to make sure the interviewee will ask
  questions. Sure, they could answer with statements: power, connectivity, operating
  environment, criticality, accuracy, cost, and so on. Of course, I’d like them to mention
  pipelines and bandwidths.
  However, what I really want to see is when they stop answering my question and start
  asking their own. There is something amazing when someone stops reacting and
  starts getting curious. You can’t force that, especially in a tense interview situation.
  But you can invite it with interview questions like this one.
  The questions they ask will shine a light on how they think about systems. Their ini‐
  tial questions will show their experiences.
  I have to admit that my response to this question would be a flood of questions:

      • Is the design for a distributed network of homogeneous sensing devices? Or is
        this a single device?
      • If it communicates with another system, is it a continuous flow of information or
        bursty? What should it do if it can’t communicate? What if it can’t communicate
        for a long time?
      • What is the level of precision and accuracy needed for the sensors? For the
        output?
      • Is the signal being monitored for anomalies? Is the data being stored?
      • What kind of processing is likely to be needed? What processing power is avail‐
        able? How much manipulation does the signal need? Is data being processed
        locally or remotely? How much latency is allowable at each stage?

  • What sensors are specified and why were they chosen? What are their failure
    mechanisms?
  • Is sensing happening at a fixed interval, on demand, or in reaction to something?
  • What kind of environment does it need to work in? Are there requirements
    related to size? How will it be installed?
  • What kind of power will it use? Does it have to run on a battery?
  • Is operation critical to something? What are the stakes (ramifications) if it fails?
    How are low battery or other faults supposed to be handled?
  • What is the budget and what are the cost goals?
  • Who are the users?

Detailed initial questions are likely to be reflections of what not to do from a previous
project. You can always dig in with a query as to why a point is important. Hopefully,
you’ll hear about a project they still think about.
More importantly, the questions will show that they will ask questions. I’m not going
to claim that there are no dumb questions. But questions show that the person is
thinking about something, not passively taking in information or responding by rote.
Questions are an indication that they are engaged. Even seemingly dumb questions
show that. And often, they aren’t as dumb as they sound, simply asked from a differ‐
ent frame of reference.
(Thanks to members of the Embedded.fm Slack for sharing their thoughts on this
question!)

                                                                      Further Reading   |   241
