                                                                       CHAPTER 10
                                Building Connected Devices

Whether you have IoT devices, ubiquitous sensors, distributed systems, or edge com‐
puting, your device is going to connect to a wider world. It may be a closed system or
the whole internet. Either way, suddenly there are many new problems and features.
While your connection mechanism is important to the design of your system, once
you are connected, you’ll need to consider getting data to and from the devices,
updating the code remotely, and monitoring the whole system’s health. Oh, and of
course, don’t forget security.

Connecting Remotely
From your processor’s point of view, a cloud server or a host computer is just another
object to talk to, the same as any other peripheral. Sure, the host might meddle with
your device, such as changing your processor’s code or instructing it to move the
motor to a different location. But all of those things are just digital communications.
In fact, anything that your processor has been sending bytes to over a digital interface
has its own processor. The motor you’re controlling over SPI and the humidity sensor
you’re reading over I2C each have their own processor. To those processors, your pro‐
cessor is a host computer.
Just as each of your peripherals has a documented interface, your system’s interface to
its host should be reasonably well documented (even if you control both sides).
Putting a documented interface in place will let the two systems change independ‐
ently (as long as the interface remains fixed). As for implementation, the command
interpreter in Chapter 3 is a good place to start.
As more of our everyday objects enter the networked world, we build up detailed pic‐
tures of the environment. Whether it is a fridge that sends a shopping list to your

phone when you’ve entered a grocery store or a scattering of small sensors monitor‐
ing a forest for fires, we are building distributed sensor networks. Increasing the
intelligence of the sensors makes each one better able to deal with irregularities in its
particular location, making the whole network more robust. The information can
return to a host for integration and processing (e.g., forest fire sensors) or be gener‐
ated with each piece contributing its knowledge in a hostless system (e.g., groceries).
The strength of the sensor network is that each element works together to construct
information that is greater as a whole. However, that is also its weakness; if the system
cannot communicate, it is much less useful. Further, if enough sensors go offline, the
system can become degraded to such a degree as to be useless.
There are many ways to implement the connection. The easiest to understand is con‐
necting the device directly to the cloud as shown at the top of Figure 10-1.

Figure 10-1. Topology of different connection methodologies, including direct connec‐
tion, gateway device, and mesh networks.

Directly: Ethernet and WiFi
Because it is so complex, using Ethernet usually implies an operating system. Since
this book doesn’t make any assumptions about you having an embedded OS, I’m not
going to spend many words on this. However, as systems become more intelligent,
Ethernet becomes more important. Due to the standard infrastructure around Ether‐
net, it is easily integrated into a large system. While Ethernet is the data link layer, it
implies that there will be a network layer and a transport layer as well, so your soft‐
ware will interface to a networking protocol, usually TCP or UDP (User Datagram
Protocol). (TCP provides a reliable communication path so your data always gets
there, but it is more complicated than UDP.)
Robust communication isn’t that important when you are communicating with an
LCD controller that shares board space with your processor. However, if your device
is in the middle of an ocean, monitoring for tsunamis, you may want something more
reliable than serial communication.
If you are using a wireless network, you definitely want something reasonably relia‐
ble. Radio networks are hard. I mean, they are really hard. Murphy (of Murphy’s Law)
loves radio networks.

                One of the most difficult parts of dealing with a radio network is its
                dependence on the environment. I know of one device that worked
                when it was installed in November but gradually stopped working
                as spring came: tree leaves absorb 2.4 GHz radio waves.

There are amazing and fascinating applications of networked systems. However,
when faced with the cost of a good radio, most companies flinch. At that point, some‐
one will say, “Let’s just implement our own. The components aren’t that expensive.” I
know you want to agree, as your product is amazing and the radio cost is a big hurdle
to make it truly compelling in the market. I’ve been there, thinking, “How hard could
it be?” Take how hard you think it could possibly be and multiply that by at least one
order of magnitude.
Don’t reinvent the wireless radio wheel, as expensive as it seems. Spend the time mak‐
ing your system work. Once that’s done, you can cost-reduce the product to imple‐
ment your own Ethernet controller or wireless network. A precertified radio module
is a good shortcut.
In the meantime, you’ll need to learn a bit about networking: packets, routers, gate‐
ways, IP addresses, data forwarding, and network topology diagrams. That is a whole
book on its own; see “Further Reading” on page 282 for suggestions.

                                                                      Connecting Remotely   |   265
Through a Gateway
A networked sensor may not connect directly to the cloud, opting instead to go
through a gateway, some intermediate device that aggregates and filters the data. For
my purposes, I’m going to call this a smartphone. (Probably by the time this book
comes out, smartphones will be passé and you’ll be on to supersmartphones, which I
hope you call supes.)
A smartphone is usually more general-purpose than the embedded devices we build.
While the smartphone may connect to a camera or pedometer via BLE (Bluetooth
Low Energy), those devices don’t need to know about each other. Instead the smart‐
phone has an application specific to the device, acting as an intermediary between the
cloud services and the device.

                     When developing with a gateway, don’t forget the software that
                     runs on the gateway! Whether it is a phone app or a small Linux
                     system, that software is the glue that holds the whole system
                     together. If it is weak, the system will fall apart.

The gateway usually handles some of the communication difficulties, such as making
sure data is transferred correctly and helping the device through updating code (more
about that soon). However, this means you need to define the way your device com‐
municates with the gateway. Even within a well-structured system like BLE GATTs,
there will still be a need to figure out what bits and pieces of data need to go to the
cloud. Some data needs to go to the users of your system, but there will always be data
you need for the health of the device (more about that in “Managing Large Systems”
on page 280).
As with network administration for direct connection, you will need to learn the con‐
nection method in detail. While we all want to simply use these protocols, they aren’t
that simple, and there is a good chance you’ll need to dig in deeper to optimize the
speed and power for your system.

                     Chapter 6 talked about active objects as a way of setting up the
                     main loop of a device. Manufacturers of BLE chips often use this
                     design pattern to integrate your application with their code.

Via a Mesh
In a mesh network, the nodes (your devices) try to build a network. If you thought
that learning how to do direct networking configuration was a pain, imagine how
hard it is for your devices when they don’t even know the overall network topology.

Some popular mesh protocols include Zigbee, Thread, BLE, and Matter. Some mesh
networks configure on initial boot or inability to connect from some timeout. Other
meshes reconfigure regularly (necessary if the nodes are moving around).
Some meshes have coordinator nodes that have more visibility and responsibility in
shaping the network. This allows some nodes to conserve power as they aren’t needed
for network traffic. However, it limits the network. There are many of these balancing
issues with advantages and disadvantages for each option.
The main issues in a mesh network are:

  • How do you create a fairly efficient communication path from each node to the
    cloud?
  • How do you identify and recover nodes that get lost and are unable to connect to
    their neighbors?
  • Should the system configure once (or occasionally) to have a stable path, or con‐
    figure often to keep up with changes?
  • Is every device always on and participating in routing, or can they conserve
    power by sleeping?
  • How do you avoid data traveling in loops around the mesh?

All of the mesh network implementations try to solve these problems. As you create a
system, you will probably want to know how much data can be passed, how quickly
the data from a node can get to a cloud server, and how far apart the nodes can be.
Unfortunately, those numbers will change depending on the network configuration.
The answers are not a matter of simple calculation. While meshes can be extraordi‐
narily flexible, their complexity makes their use a special case.

                              We Still Use Modems
 Sometimes we need to reach farther than those weak little network technologies
 above can manage. When we need to reach into the depths, risking the possibility that
 our pointless human transmissions might awaken eldritch horrors lurking in antedi‐
 luvian caves and tunnels beneath the ocean, we fall back on what might seem like
 older and more arcane systems: cell phone networks, satellites, audio-based modems,
 and the occasional interdimensional rift opened via rituals and incantations.
 For that, we turn to a short text language dating back to 1981 called AT commands.
 These are a series of commands that control the modems themselves, describing how
 to connect to another modem, ideally one hooked up to something that gets to the
 internet. While there are other, more modern, modem configuration and communi‐
 cation methods, the AT commands will likely outlive the existence of computers as
 we know them.

                                                                Connecting Remotely   |   267
  However, from your device’s point of view, the connection to a modem is probably
  straightforward: a serial connection where you read and write data, just as you would
  on a command line to a debug port. Then the data magically appears where you
  needed it to go, often tunneled through a layer of Ethernet, but still looking like the
  serial command line.
  That magic comes with costs:
  Financial
      Cell and satellite modems are quite expensive to run, with limited transmit and
      receive data bandwidth.
  Power
     While remote systems often have limited power, most modems are still power
     hogs so that they can get back to civilization. The modem is usually powered off
     unless the device is communicating or there is a scheduled window to listen for
     transmissions from the home office.
  Configuration
      While a command line seems like a good idea, determining which modem
      belongs to which device can be a challenge. As systems scale to the thousands,
      the organization must scale beyond the Excel spreadsheet on a shared drive.
  Modems remain an excellent option for devices that need to always be available, even
  when WiFi coverage is unlikely, such as traffic light cameras, open-ocean sensors, and
  smartphones.

Robust Communication
Once you can connect to the cloud, how are you sending the data? I know, I asked
this question before, and the answer was: directly, through a gateway, with a mesh
topology (or network), or with a modem. But this question of “how” keeps going
because now I’m asking about the application layer communication protocol.
When you communicate with an ADC via SPI or I2C, there is a structured way of
talking to it: commands you send (often called registers) and data you can read,
sometimes with a FIFO. In that sense, what is the interface your device presents to
other systems?
The term I’m looking for is data serialization. Is the data going to be encoded as
something humans can read? Maybe in a JSON or XML file that is passed back and
forth via HTTP? Or is it going to be a packed C structure in binary format? Will you
create a protocol that conforms to a format like type-length-value (TLV) or develop
one more specific to your application?
The good news is you can do anything you want. That is also the bad news.

Version!
Your protocol should identify the protocol version. This can be a specific command,
or you can embed the version into each command. Someday, in the future, the cloud
and devices will be on different versions of the code and will need to negotiate what
version of the protocol they can both speak.

Checksums, CRCs, Hashes
No matter your throughput, you need to know that the data you received is the data
that was transmitted.
The simplest form of checksum is just to sum all of the bytes in question, ignoring
any overflow. If your buffer is {10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 90}, your checksum should be 300. If
you are using only an 8-bit checksum, that becomes 44 (300 mod 256). There are
many other combinations that could sum to the same value (e.g., {44} or {11, 11, 11,
11, 0, 0}), but those aren’t likely to happen by chance (statistics says there is a 1 in 256
possibility if all of the bytes are random). Even this paltry 8-bit checksum is likely to
save you if a byte or two gets corrupted, as long as two bytes don’t get corrupted in
ways that cancel each other out.
If you have lots of data, 1 in 256 aren’t very good odds. You could sum everything as
16-bit words, which gives you a much lower probability of good checksums with bad
data. Note that you need to sum the data as 16-bit words, not just keep the overflow
from an 8-bit sum.
The types of errors you get depend on the memory or communication pathway. A
simple checksum will always catch a single bit change, but it cannot detect when two
bytes in the stream are swapped. And errors can cancel each other out in the check‐
sum if multiple bytes are modified. In many communication methods, the errors tend
to be bursty, so that many bytes will get corrupted at once.
So when people say “checksum” they often mean “CRC value.” CRC stands for cyclic
redundancy check, which you don’t need to remember. CRCs give you more protec‐
tion than a checksum against multiple-byte and swapped-byte errors. The math
behind the CRC is designed to find transmission errors. However, CRCs require
more computational power than the simple sum. If there isn’t a CRC engine in your
processor itself, there are many versions available online; see “Further Reading” on
page 282 for pointers to code.
Remember, the main goal of a checksum is to detect that an error has occurred. A
more complex scheme might be able to tell you where the error occurred or even cor‐
rect small errors.
Like CRCs, hash functions take in a chunk of data and produce something smaller
which represents that chunk of data. The result is sometimes called a digest (or a

                                                                  Robust Communication   |   269
hash). The math behind a hash function is designed to distinguish between different
chunks of data. It is more like a unique identifier than an error detector. (Though if
your unique identifier hashes don’t match after transmission, then there was an
error.)

Encryption and Authentication
Checksums and CRCs are not preventions against hacking. That is, they don’t protect
against intentional modification of data. There are two main forms of protection
against that.
Encryption ensures that no one can read (or modify) your data without having the
correct keys and method of decryption.

                     Some processors come with cryptographic hardware acceleration.
                     Check your processor manual before implementing it in software.

Authentication lets you know that your software is talking to something you know.
Printer manufacturers want to make sure the printer cartridges come from a known
source (partly because the wrong ink could ruin a printer and partly because consum‐
ables are profitable). The authentication may be an encrypted hash acting as a digital
signature.

                     When a consumable is cloned, the authentication information is
                     copied to make a hacked consumable look good to your software.
                     A common precaution against this is to use a database to indicate
                     that your system has seen the same serial number more frequently
                     than it should expect.

Authentication and encryption are difficult. It isn’t the same as a complex algorithm
where once you understand, you can test your implementation and then be done.
Authentication and encryption are things you can never finish successfully. Sure, you
might implement the algorithm correctly, but that doesn’t mean the data is safe. The
more valuable your consumable or data is, the more likely someone will take the time
to reverse engineer your encryption or authentication method. A determined hacker
will eventually succeed, though sometimes only by a brute-force attack (it is probably
easier to get into the manufacturing building and access the source code than figure
out a 128-bit AES key).
You can’t be in charge of locking all the doors; the best you can hope for is that your
code is robust enough to fend off the casual attacker and create enough headaches

that they leave your product alone. You probably don’t have a lot of processing power
for your system. Trying to implement AES or some other well-understood encryption
when you are running an 8-bit processor at a few MHz may lead you to throw up
your hands and put out a welcome mat for the hackers.
However, not all encryption methods have symmetric processing burdens. Some
algorithms make it easier to decrypt than encrypt (or the other way). Let the cloud
server do the hard math. Alternatively, you can run encryption only on the critical
data, leaving the rest in clear text (or with a reduced encryption level). It may make
your code more complex, but if the choice is between good encryption for the impor‐
tant part or mediocre encryption for all, I know which I’d take.
Even if you have to use an encryption algorithm that isn’t good enough to stand up to
a government agency, use a well-understood algorithm. Though you may have a
tricky mind, your 8-bit encryption solution will not be better than a well-understood
algorithm. Use one of the most common algorithms: RSA, DES, or AES. You may
have to use a smaller key for an embedded system, but then you can estimate the time
it takes to crack the key and give your management a reasonable effort level, some‐
thing you may not be able to do if you design your own algorithm. (Which is a bad
idea.)

Risk Analysis
As you design your system, put on your malevolent hacking hat. What would you do
to attack the system? Assume the hackers know the algorithm but not the keys.1 The
next section describes ways to protect your code from being read via JTAG. Given
that, is the easiest way to obtain the keys the relatively difficult matter of putting the
chip under an electron microscope to read out the code? Or can intruders read it
from your email because another developer sent it to you in clear text, or log in to
your source code repository with the guest account? Your authentication and encryp‐
tion algorithms are only as good as the weakest link.
Risk assessment is about figuring out what can go wrong and how much it will cost to
reduce the risk. It is also about considering how much it might cost to leave the secu‐
rity flaw(s)—not only in embarrassment and irritated customers, but also in legal fees
and class action lawsuits.
Mild paranoia aside, protecting your system is hard. Your management team will
need to determine how much time (and money) they are willing to spend on develop‐
ing protocols to keep your data (or consumables) safe. It is a business decision as well

1 In cryptography, this is called Kerckhoffs’s principle: a cryptosystem should be secure even if everything about
  the system, except the key, is public knowledge.

                                                                                   Robust Communication     |   271
as a technical decision. It is also a long-term decision; staying ahead of the hackers is
an ongoing concern, not a one-time algorithm choice.
In the short term, there are many top ten security checklists for designing systems
and for coding. Use them; security is a field that is always changing. Getting different
perspectives as you work is important.
As developers, we’re under pressure to deliver projects under time constraints. Hack‐
ers don’t have that problem. It feels like they will always win. We do what we can to
make it better, which means we make today better than yesterday. That’s all.
Figure 10-2 shows some good points to remember about designing for security, pri‐
vacy, and robustness.

Figure 10-2. Designing for security, privacy, and robustness is an ongoing process.

Updating Code
Whether you call it over-the-air update (OTA), firmware update (FWUP), device
firmware update (DFU), or downloading the code, the goal is to take your newly built
image and put it on a remote system. This seems like it should be straightforward,
essentially a remote copy operation. Sadly, this is the opposite of straightforward
(curvy-roundabout?). There are good reasons for the complexity: there are many fea‐
tures and corner cases that can cause catastrophic issues. Each piece of complexity
addresses the problems someone else encountered.

Let’s start with the idea that you have a connected device with code space and some
form of additional flash. Figure 10-3 shows what you want to have happen and then
the first few steps of complexity.

Figure 10-3. In the increasing complexity needed for updating firmware, there are a few
stages pushing toward a bootloader solution.

To start with, it is a simple copy. However, the device is running (in order to handle
the communications), and you can’t overwrite a running program. You’ll need to
break the code into two pieces: the bootloader, in charge of doing the update, and the
application code, which is all the good stuff.
In this second example in Figure 10-3, the bootloader needs to handle communica‐
tion, which is often quite a lot of code, something the application always needs to do.
To solve that problem, in the third example, the old app can get the new code and put
it in another piece of memory. Then the bootloader can update the code without
interacting with the outside world, allowing the bootloader to be simpler.

In systems like these, as shown in Figure 10-4, upon boot, the bootloader will:

 1. Check to see if there is code in the auxiliary flash.
 2. Check the flash code’s version against the processor’s current code version.
 3. If they are the same, call the current code and run normally.
 4. If the flash’s code is newer, copy over the flash code to the processor’s memory.
 5. Reboot (after which the system will end up at step 3 and run normally).

Figure 10-4. Upon boot, a bootloader looks at the code in the device and the code avail‐
able to the device to determine what to run. In your HAL documentation, this flowchart
may get more complicated as additional checks are added.

There are several good things about this last bootloader pattern. First, in the initial
example where the bootloader communicated over the network, it was possible to
lose the connection or power, causing the device to be partially updated. Second, the
bootloader can do additional checking of the new code, verifying the new code is
good and was signed by a trusted source. Third, the bootloader can check the flash’s

code for validity and update it if the code has been corrupted. Finally, the bootloader
can decrypt the new code as it programs it to the processor.

                Don’t wait until the end of the project to start developing the firm‐
                ware update process. The more testing you can get on this critical
                feature the better. If your firmware update process has a bug, you
                may not be able to fix it in the field, resulting in costly recalls and
                replacements.

Firmware Update Security
Adding security into the mix tends to make updating code exponentially more com‐
plex. In general, winning against a sea of hackers is impossible, but you can make cas‐
ual attacks more difficult. The first step is to identify what you are protecting: a secret
algorithm in the code? The ability to create or verify consumables? The integrity of
the hardware? What you choose to implement depends on your priorities.
You might get a little bit of help from your processor. Many chips offer code-read pro‐
tection. Once it is turned on, on-chip memory becomes unreadable. The processor
can still execute the code, but a debugger (or a loader) cannot read the code space.
Oftentimes, the code-read protection will limit the processor’s ability to erase sector
by sector. Instead, you have to erase all of it before updating code. (Some levels of
protection won’t even let you write new code at all.)
Once you’ve done that, the weak point is in the way new code is handled. Ideally, the
new code is seen only by trusted associates who will be updating the code (and the
code will travel only over secure networks). However, we can’t usually ensure that, so
we must add security to the updating process.
There are two components to firmware update security:

  • Secure the device so only intended code can run on the hardware
  • Secure the code so no one can look inside

The first part is usually done with a hash and a signature. Like a checksum, the hash
is used to verify the code integrity, to make sure the image we sent is the image the
device received. The signature shows that the new code came from a trusted source.
Code is often encrypted so it cannot be read, disassembled, and used by other people.
Where before we had only the new code, now our firmware bundle becomes like that
shown in Figure 10-5. The bootloader uses the public key to verify the signature and
calculate the hash. If those are good and the version is newer than the current appli‐
cation, it will decrypt and program the new code.

Figure 10-5. Working with a secure bootloader means creating a firmware bundle that is
signed and encrypted.

Cryptography has come a long way, and the chip vendors, compiler vendors, HAL
vendors, and the RTOSs have made it possible to have decent security on an embed‐
ded device. Use these features instead of making your own.
In systems like these, upon boot, the bootloader will:

 1. Check to see if there is code in the auxiliary flash.
 2. Check the flash code’s version against the processor’s current code version. If they
    are the same, call the current code and run normally.
 3. Check the flash code’s hash and signature using the private key. If it does not
    match, erase the flash code and reboot.
 4. If the flash’s code is newer, decrypt the flash code in sections, programming each
    section.
 5. Reboot (after which the system will end up at step 2 and run normally).

Sometimes the bootloader will also check the hash and signature of the current code.
This prevents problems with the microprocessor flash becoming corrupted. It can
program the defective code with good code from the flash. Of course, if the process‐
or’s code and the flash’s updated code are both bad, the unit will likely be in an infin‐
ite reboot cycle.

                            High Security: Per-Unit Keys
  For the best security, each device should have its own key. This way, if one key gets
  loose or the device is cracked, the other devices remain secure.
  However, this means you have to program that key during manufacturing, and then
  have to keep track of that serial number–key pair for the life of the product. You’ll
  also need to write a script to create each over-the-air firmware bundle individually
  when you are ready to update the units. Your server will need to make sure each bun‐
  dle gets to the right unit.
  Oh, and don’t forget to keep all of those keys protected, possibly for millions of units.
  Per-unit encryption is a matter of managing data. It is a significant amount of extra
  work.
  The way you handle your keys depends on how much of a target your system is. You
  have to assess the risks to determine how much of your development budget will be
  spent on defending your device against bad actors.

Multiple Pieces of Code
Often there are multiple pieces of code, even apart from your application and boot‐
loader. There may be an operating system (or other binary library from a vendor).
You may have a multi-core processor that requires two firmware images.
Each of these may need to be updated separately. As you can imagine, this increases
the complexity significantly. In Figure 10-6, I have a processor’s program flash on the
left showing what it is running. On the right, is the device’s auxiliary flash that has
recently received an update over the air.
Upon reboot, the bootloader will identify the new code, verify it, load it into the pro‐
gram flash, and run it.

Figure 10-6. An example of a processor’s program flash running an application, an OS,
and a bootloader. In the auxiliary flash there is a new runtime that will be loaded upon
the next boot (if it is valid).

Fallback Lifeboat
Changing the code on your device carries some inherent risks: the device could lose
power during programming, the source firmware might be corrupted as it goes into
the auxiliary flash, cosmic rays could rain down, and so on. As you grow to a million
devices, your chances of a failing firmware update increase.
There is a way to mitigate the possibility of creating a brick out of your hardware. As
shown in Figure 10-7, you can keep old images around in case you need them.
In the auxiliary flash are version 1.0 of the runtime and OS images. These were pro‐
grammed in the factory and are stored in case updating firmware goes horribly
wrong. This is essentially a lifeboat, something to fall back to in case of icebergs. Fac‐
tory reset is often a last resort that comes with clearing any settings kept on the
device. The user will be mad about their lost data, but at least the device isn’t a brick.

Figure 10-7. The auxiliary flash stores other versions of the runtime and OS to allow the
device to do a factory reset.

Staged Rollout
Updating the firmware on your desk unit is generally no big deal, a programmer can
usually fix the issue if the update goes poorly. Updating the firmware for everyone on
your team may be slightly more difficult. As they update with their own program‐
mers, they’ll ask questions and probably choose the wrong bundle, not knowing
which version they are on or which they are going to.
Next, you update firmware for the whole company, getting some non-engineering
beta testers. At this point, the process has to be push-button or invisible so the users
don’t complain. If something catastrophic happens, folks will be annoyed but under‐
standing. After all, they are part of building the thing. If it is truly necessary, all of the
units can be collected and updated with good firmware.
That stops being possible when you update to the public. Remote units may not be
accessible at all (satellites, deep sea equipment, and so on). Consumer units may
number in the millions. Breaking these with a bad firmware update will be
unrecoverable.

What you need to do is plan for a staged rollout: send it to groups of customers in
small numbers to find bugs that you can’t find locally. Some problems I’ve encoun‐
tered that weren’t obvious at my desk:

  • Normal (for customers) power fluctuations triggering a flood of alerts
  • Global time zones with different daylight saving schemes
  • GPS readings parsed incorrectly, as they weren’t anywhere near my desk
  • Haywire ADC readings due to Boston’s salt fog
  • Excessive battery drain on one particular manufacturing run of the hardware

Even as management and marketing want all of the promised features to be delivered
and the bugs fixed, moving too fast on firmware updates can create problems that
aren’t solvable.
Sadly, a staged rollout may not be something you have control over (due to cost or a
different team being responsible). Once your firmware is released (whatever that
means for your company), there is probably a server that provides the new firmware
to your devices (either pushing the firmware to them or the devices polling for the
update). In general, it is more complex for the server to keep track of which (groups
of) users should get the new update.
However, this is necessary for making sure the new firmware doesn’t crash more
often or deplete its battery more quickly. Of course, adding new features might
deplete batteries, but in a good, users-are-using-the-new-feature way, while adding
more diagnostics could cause the batteries to die in a bad way. The statistics alone
don’t have enough information; you’ll need to combine them with knowledge of what
was in the firmware update.
Oh, but you do need those statistics. Let’s stop talking about updates and move on to
monitoring large numbers of units.

Managing Large Systems
Scaling up from a few units to a few hundred is exciting. Scaling up beyond that
requires a lot more infrastructure.
When you hit a million devices, one-in-a-million problems shows up. Reproducing
those is very difficult. It might be the Bluetooth stack of a particular Android version.
It might be someone whose magnetometer reading makes no sense because they are
actually at the South Pole. It might be a minor solder ball from a particular day in
manufacturing.
Identifying the frequency of the problems can be more important than identifying the
cause.

Monitoring actual product business data is separate from the device health informa‐
tion. While I can’t really speak to your business data—other than to say checksum,
encrypt, and privacy—the device health should have a few important features:

  • Boot cause: when the device reboots, why did it reboot? If it was a hard fault,
    there should be some tracking (see “Debugging Hard Faults” on page 254). If it
    was a user reboot or battery depletion, indicate those with different codes.
    — Frequent user reboots may indicate a hang or other user frustration.
    — An increase in battery-related reboots may indicate a change in firmware has
      caused an increase in battery drain.
  • Voltage over time can help you determine issues with battery drain before it
    becomes a reboot issue, but the battery life also depends on usage patterns. You
    may need to also keep track of active time versus sleep time to make battery level
    monitoring useful.
  • Heartbeats are small packets sent to the server to let it know that the device still
    exists, that it is still operating. The size and frequency depends on the applica‐
    tion. More heartbeats give up-to-date information, but they require more power.
    Heartbeats may include other information (sometimes temporarily for debug‐
    ging, sometimes permanently) such as firmware version and other diagnostics.

Scaling to talk to many devices means working with a cloud service to provide a
dashboard or way to access the data to use it in debugging. It is odd because this
doesn’t look like firmware programming, but you still have to be involved to keep
track of which units checked in, which units crashed, which units rebooted and why,
and which units are running old firmware.
Finally, crashes or errors logged become a matter of statistics. You can’t chase hun‐
dreds of crashes a day. You try to reproduce the most common ones and the worst
ones. Over time, you may see patterns (like devices that crash every Tuesday at mid‐
night in their time zone). Finding these patterns likely requires digging through a
database or CSV file, possibly with a Python script or some fancy spreadsheet work.
Hopefully, it gives you a path to determine the most productive way to spend your
engineering time.

               There are services that can handle the server side of monitoring
               and analytics for you; look for device operations and fleet
               management.

                                                              Managing Large Systems   |   281
Manufacturing
The first units are probably built by hand by someone you know. Eventually, the
device goes to a manufacturer. Well, usually it goes to a contract manufacturer (CM)
that does assembly and packaging for a number of different companies.
The CM may need you to write software to test the firmware before shipment. The
goal is always to know whether a board or system passes or fails. The CM doesn’t tend
to want wishy-washy numbers, hoping instead for a big green or red light. Manufac‐
turers don’t debug for you; their goal is to keep their manufacturing line moving.
The CM will need to know how to program the devices, ideally in multiples, not sin‐
gletons. It will also need to provision the device, which is to say put on the secure keys
and enable it to connect to your cloud service. As the CM is not part of your com‐
pany, you may end up doing the final provisioning at your company instead of hand‐
ing over your secrets. That tends to cost more, but as previously noted, security is
expensive.
Note that provisioning is different from onboarding, which is what customers do
when they get the device to link it to their account.

                    Often part of manufacturing is to test the device with the radio on.
                    If there are many devices, this can cause interference. While you
                    can make a reasonable Faraday cage from tinfoil and a shoebox,
                    planning to update firmware via Bluetooth may not be viable in
                    such a noisy environment.

Further Reading
Network administration is its own field. The online book An Introduction to Com‐
puter Networks by Peter L. Dordal is an excellent resource on how to understand net‐
works. For those of us needing only to become knowledgeable users, the introduction
to the book, “An Overview of Networks”, is excellent. The Networking Fundamentals
YouTube playlist by Practical Networking is also an in-depth resource.
For more about different ways to put together messages, take a look at Memfault’s
“Event Serialization”.
For an introduction to CRCs, along with some code, look for Michael Barr’s CRC
implementation code.
For more about how contract manufacturing works and what you need from the
firmware to make it work efficiently, check out Alan Cohen’s Prototype to Product: A
Practical Guide for Getting to Market.

         Interview Question: Getting a Goat Safely Across a River
A man is taking home a goat, his partially tamed wolf, and a cabbage. They reach a
river, but the bridge is washed out. The boat, conveniently tied on his side of the shore, is
very small and can hold only the man and one passenger at a time. If the goat and the
wolf are left alone, the wolf will eat the goat. If the goat and the cabbage are left alone,
the goat will eat the cabbage. The wolf, however, will not eat the cabbage. How can they
cross the river safely? (See Figure 10-8.)

Figure 10-8. Taking everyone home safely.

Although this style of question is pretty common, I am strongly opposed to interview
questions that involve goats crossing water, so I wouldn’t ask this one. Basically, if it is
necessary for me to herd goats, I don’t particularly want the job.
However, loading code is a lot like this problem. There are dangers and resource limi‐
tations at multiple points. You have to know what to look for and then use some little
mental twist you learned along the way to make the leap to the solution. I generally
prefer to see how people think instead of whether they are in the club that already
knows the answer. Since I don’t know what I’d look for in a candidate’s response, I’ll
just provide the solution.
In this case, the trick is to note that the goat is the dangerous one and must be kept
away from the others. If you frame the problem that way, the solution falls out a little
easier.
The man starts on side A with the wolf, goat, and cabbage. He crosses to side B with
the goat, then returns to side A. He takes the wolf (or the cabbage, it doesn’t matter)
to side B. Now, he has to take the goat back to side A, leaving it there while he ferries
the cabbage (or wolf) back to side B. The man crosses back to A, gets the goat, crosses
back to B, and moves the parade along.
The trick behind the problem is that he can take extra trips to get the job done, as
long as the job is done properly. Updating firmware is a lot like that.

                                                                         Further Reading   |   283
