                                                                       CHAPTER 11
                                            Doing More with Less

Engineering requires technical skills and a deep understanding of the relevant tech‐
nology. Writing good embedded software goes a step further, also requiring a devious
mind with an affinity for puzzles.
Implementing the requirements on a system that has everything you need is a matter
of turning the metaphorical crank to get the answer. Some solutions are more elegant
than others, but most will work well enough to get the product shipped. It all gets
more interesting when you have a system that seems as if it can’t possibly contain
everything you need. You could compromise on the features, but where is the fun in
that?
For me, the great part of embedded systems implementation is the thrill of finding
just the right tweak that liberates a few more processor cycles, being excited about
freeing eight bytes of RAM, digging through the map file to find a whole section that
you can reclaim for the use of your code, and realizing you can get your product that
coveted green award if you can just squeak out a few more milliseconds of deep sleep.
The downside to all of this is that you’ll probably make the system more fragile. For
instance, when you free the RAM by having two otherwise decoupled subsystems
share it, those subsystems become linked. Maintainers of the system become con‐
fused and frustrated by hidden linkages. The code is no longer modular, and subsys‐
tems cannot be reused. Flexibility is lost.
This chapter looks at ways to get more out of your system. We’ll need to start by char‐
acterizing the resources we have and those we need. Some of the resource optimiza‐
tion techniques allow you to trade one resource for another. Identifying the plentiful
resources is almost as important as determining where the scarce ones disappear to.
One of the most important resources is development effort. Your time is valuable.
You will need to balance the value of a solution versus the time it takes to implement

it. For example, moving to a larger, faster chip in the family is a cost to all units,
which could be a win if you are building only a few; trading memory and processor
cycles may require you to restructure some code; and going line by line to optimize
assembly code is going to take serious effort (and skill).

Need More Code Space
Implementing an application on a system without enough code space is like trying to
write a term paper in a booklet that is too small. Even though you plan ahead and try
to figure out how much space should be allocated to each point, in the end you will
have to write in tiny print on that last page and wind up using the margins. This sec‐
tion will help you cope with the code space situation.

Reading a Map File (Part 1)
I get a sinking feeling when the linker gives an error message during a build. The
compiler provides all sorts of friendly advice and critiques my typing. But the linker
usually doesn’t talk back unless it is something important.
On the other hand, the linker provides a wealth of information if you know where to
look. “Intro to Linker Scripts” describes the linker input. The output map file is easier
to read, though still foreign to most developers.

                     You may need to configure your linker to output the map file. Look
                     in the directory where your executable is located for a .map file. If
                     it isn’t there, check the compiler or linker manual.

Map files are toolchain-specific. The examples in this section come from a GNU-
based toolchain for the NXP LPC13xx. Most map files have the same information,
though it may be in a different order or have different formatting. You’ll need to
make some educated guesses as you look through yours. If you aren’t sure that your
map file is giving you the information you are looking for, try this: make a copy,
change the code, rebuild, and then diff the resulting map file with the original.
The GNU linker for the LPC13xx starts off with a list of the library modules that are
included and which module is responsible for the inclusion. In this example, libcr_c.a
is included in your build because your code module aes256.c calls memcpy(). Note
that only part of the libcr_c.a library is included (specifically memcpy.o):
      Archive member included because of file (symbol)
      ../lib/gcc/arm-none-eabi/4.3.3/../../../arm-none-eabi/lib/thumb2/libcr_c.a
                                    (memcpy.o)./src/aes256.o (memcpy)

If you find that a library is large, this section helps you figure out which part of your
code is calling functions in that library. You can then decide whether the code module
needs to make that call or if there is a way around it.
Next in the map file is a list of global variables and their sizes:
    Allocating common symbols
    Common symbol       size                   file
    gNewFirmwareVersion
                        0x6                    ./src/firmwareVersion.o

Limiting the scope of the variables using the static keyword will cause them to be
later in the map file (sometimes the linker won’t list them at all), so if a common sym‐
bol such as the one just shown isn’t in your file, you’ve done a good job of getting rid
of global variables. If you have a lot of data here, review “Object-Oriented Program‐
ming in C” on page 31 to remember the difference between global variables and file
variables.
Next is a list of sections, addresses, and sizes of code that is not referenced by any‐
thing. This section, titled “Discarded input sections” in the LPC13xx map file, shows
which functions and variables are cluttering your code but not taking up any code
space. Often the unused code remains in the codebase when it is part of a library,
some vendor code you don’t want to modify, or test code that is used only in special
circumstances.
A reflection of the linker script is shown in a memory map:
    Memory Configuration
    Name      Origin         Length        Attributes
    Flash      0x00000000    0x00008000    xr
    RAM        0x10000000    0x00002000    xrw
    *default* 0x00000000     0xffffffff
This can be useful as you test out your linker-modification skills. Also, some map files
give you the amount of each resource used, which is very helpful for determining
how close you are to running out of resources.
The next section of the map is a tedious list of all the files included in your project.
Skip over that.
Eventually you get to a section that lists each function, the address where it is located,
its size, and the file it came from. These are in the order they occur in the compiled
image, generally grouped together by file (module). The function listings start with
the first section in the linker file (you may want to pull up the linker input .ld file as
you go through the map file so you know what to expect). The line at the top gives the
section (.text, which contains all the code), the address, and the size of the section:
    .text             0x00000000      0x7ccd

Other than experience and expectation, there is nothing to indicate that this line is
more important than the others. In the “Memory Configuration” snippet shown ear‐
lier, the total flash size is 0x8000 (removing the preceding 0s in the length from
before). Here we see that the code is taking up nearly all of that.
Next, the listing breaks down the contents of the code section:
      .text.Initialize
                           0x0000037c           0x7c ./src/main.o
                           0x0000037c                    Initialize
       .text.main          0x000003f8           0xb4 ./src/main.o
                           0x000003f8                    main
In the map output, most functions have two lines like this, giving slightly redundant
information, though this is often configurable via command-line options to your
linker:
      .section.functionName           address     size        file
                                      address                 functionName
This part of the map file shows you the size of every function. The first step to reduc‐
ing the footprint is to find out which pieces are particularly large. Many of the largest
pieces will be libraries, especially if you are using floating-point, C’s standard I/O
(scanf/printf), or C++’s iostream. Even operators, such as division, end up calling
functions:
      .text.__aeabi_ldiv0
        0x00006c6c 0x4    ../lib/gcc/arm-none-eabi/thumb2\libcr_eabihelpers.a(rtlib.o)
        0x00006c6c        __aeabi_ldiv0
      .text.__bhs_ldivmod
        0x00006ec0 0x20c ../lib/gcc/arm-none-eabi/thumb2\libcr_eabihelpers.a(rtlib.o)
        0x00006ec0        __bhs_ldivmod

The aeabi_ldiv0 function is a wrapper because it is only four bytes, just enough to
jump to another function. However, bhs_ldivmod is a real function. Doing signed
long divides is costing the program 0x20c bytes, more than twice the size of the main
function.

                     Some map files don’t break out the function sizes in the same way.
                     Instead they list the address of each function in the image, and you
                     need to calculate the differences to get the size.

Functions are not the only things that take up code space. Later in the example map
file is the section for read-only data:

    *(.rodata*)
     .rodata.str1.1
                      0x000070cc         0x36 ./src/main.o
    .rodata           0x0000715c         0x10 ./src/aes256.o
    .rodata.str1.1
                      0x0000716c         0x35 ./src/aes256.o

Here, main has 0x36 bytes of str1.1, not something I’d name a variable. Actually, this
is the automatic name that this compiler gives to string variables. So wherever there
are constant strings (such as “Hello world”), the compiler collects them into one area
that goes into the read-only data section. In addition to the 0x35 bytes of string data
in aes256.o, the previous snippet also shows unspecified data in the file (0x10 in
length). In the source file’s test function, a variable is declared with static initializers:
    uint8_t buf[16] = {0xe5, 0xaa, 0x6d, 0xcb, 0x29, 0xb2, 0x71,
           0xae, 0x0e, 0xbc, 0xfa, 0x7a, 0xb2, 0x2b, 0x57, 0x59};
Because this is inside a function, it isn’t visible by name to other files. Therefore the
map file doesn’t show the variable name, but it lists the constants because they take up
space in the executable image.
All constants take up space, whether they are declared in #define declarations or
with the keyword const. Global constants are often visible in the map file, but con‐
stants declared with #define end up in the code, so they aren’t called out in a similar
way. You can see the variables declared with const in the map file under .rodata:
    .rodata          0x00007ab8        0x6A ./src/displayMap.o
                     0x00007b8a              kBackgroundInfo
                     0x00007bf4              kBorderInfo

There may be some sections that say fill. These indicate that the data between files
got misaligned, generally because a file used a constant that was smaller than the
native format of the processor. For example, a character string that is five characters
long will consume 1.25 words on a 32-bit processor, causing the linker to fill three
bytes (usually with zeros). This is wasted space but difficult to recover. Unless you
really need every byte, it is better to focus on the larger users of memory.
The rest of the map file is filled with juicy RAM details (we’ll get to those later) and
debug information (generally not useful, though your debugger unit will probably use
the information).

                If the map file doesn’t present the data in a way that is useful to you,
                write a script to parse it yourself! Read the map file, and create an
                output table where the height of the cell is proportional to the size
                of the function. This is pretty easy to do in Python, especially if you
                use HTML as the output.

Process of Elimination
Now that you know what is taking up your code space, you can start to reduce the
size. Start with your tools. In addition to the different optimization levels you nor‐
mally see to make your code go faster (e.g., the -O3 compiler option), there are special
optimization flags to make your code smaller (for instance, in GCC, -Os tries to opti‐
mize for code size instead of speed of execution). This may be enough to solve your
code size issues.

                      If you get a different runtime outcome when you turn on optimiza‐
                      tions, check that all of your variables are initialized and that volatile
                      variables are marked as such. Occasionally a compiler will disallow
                      rare but legal features, so if you’ve eliminated the obvious, check
                      your compiler manual.

If compiler optimizations aren’t enough, as you look for memory, it is useful to keep
score so you know which changes lead to the best improvements. Not only does this
give you a feel for the types of improvements, but it will also help you express trade-
offs to your colleagues (e.g., “Yes, that code is uglier now, but it saves 2 KB in code
space”).
As shown in Table 11-1, create a spreadsheet, starting with the baseline numbers. For
every change, fill in a row so you can see the relative value of the changes. If your
linker output gives you the numbers in hex, you might want to let the spreadsheet
translate to decimal (or the other way around).

Table 11-1. Optimization scorecard example
Action                      Text (code)      Data      Total        Total (hex)   Freed         Total freed
Baseline                    31949            324       32273        7E11
Commented-out test code     26629            324       26953        6949          5320          (Reverted
                                                                                                change)
Reimplemented abs()         29845            324       30169        75D9          2104          2104
Calculated const table at   29885            244       30129        75B1          40            2144
init time
= comment from you          = size of .text = size     = total      = hex of      = bytes       = total bytes
                            section         of .data   image size   total image   freed with    freed since start
                                            section                 size          this change

The table documents how you tried multiple actions, including commenting out a
large block of test code. As described in Chapter 3, it is often good to be able to run
code tests in the field. However, these take up precious space. Although feature
reduction is undesirable, when looking at code space reduction, the relative impor‐
tance of features should be kept in mind.

               “Reduced size of code by 40%” is a super line on your resume.
               Hard numbers are great, but be prepared to explain how you did it
               and the trade-offs you considered. (And the explanation shouldn’t
               consist solely of “turned on compiler optimizations”!)

Libraries
As you go through the memory map, look at the largest consumers first. You may
find that some unexpected libraries are included. Trace through the functions to see
where the calls to these libraries are coming from.
While some (monolithic) libraries are included if any function is used, other libraries
are granular, loading only the required functions. Even the standard libraries can be
monolithic so that using the built-in string copy function leads to a large footprint.
Your map file will show you these space hogs.
Many times you can write a function to replace the library. Other times you’ll need to
figure out how to work around a limitation. Here are some common examples to get
the ideas flowing:

  • Replace floating-point numbers with fixed-point representations (see Chap‐
    ter 12).
  • Replace printf with a few functions that don’t take variable arguments (e.g., Log,
    LogWithNum).
  • Replace strcpy with your own implementation to exclude the strings library.
  • Replace the abs function with a macro to remove floating-point math library
    dependencies.

Note that there is no magic in standard libraries. The ones that come with your devel‐
opment environment may not be the most efficient for your device. There is no law
saying you have to use the standard library that is buried in your tools directory.
There are other options if you look for them.

               Embedded Artistry has a C standard library (LibC, available in Git‐
               Hub) specifically for embedded systems usage. It has a reduced set
               of functionality appropriate for very constrained environments. It
               is designed for portability and quick bring-up. Its documentation is
               also excellent and the code is a good read. The related blog posts
               are also useful.

That said, don’t write your own libraries if you don’t have to. Standard and off-the-
shelf libraries are often better specified and tested than the one you can write yourself
in the time allotted. Use the time and effort other folks have put in.

Functions Versus Macros: Which Are Smaller?
Keeping your code modular is critical to readability. However, each function comes
with a price, increasing code space, RAM, and processor time. The code space cost is
easy to quantify.
For example, I needed a small implementation of the algorithm to find the minimum
of three variables (Example 11-1).

Example 11-1. Minimum-of-three algorithm

if a < b,
  if a < c, return a
  else, return c
else,
  if b < c, return b
  else, return c

I put together some code to try out the different implementation options. First, I
wrote out the code in the main function and compiled it to get my baseline code size
in bytes (given the other cruft automatically compiled in, this was almost 3 KB). I
changed the implementation to be a macro:
      #define min3(x, y, z) (((x)<(y))?(((x)<(z))?(x):(z)):(((y)<(z))?(y):(z)))

                     Don’t remember the ternary conditional operation? It is a short‐
                     hand version of an if statement:
                             test ? value if test is true : value if test is false
                     Not only does this make your code more dense, but there are also
                     times when it nudges the compiler into more optimal code.

Then I modified my code to run the macro a few times to get different code space
sizes. I changed the macro to a function and ran the same tests. It was a bit odd: the
compiled code size was the same, regardless of whether I used an inline function, a
regular local function, or an external function.

                    The inline keyword should have made the function behave as the
                    macro did, replicating the code into each location. However,
                    inline is only a suggestion to the compiler, not a requirement.
                    How the compiler takes the suggestion is very compiler-specific.
                    There is often a compiler-specific pragma to disallow inline (e.g.,
                    __attribute__((noinline)) in GCC).

After I recorded the size, I turned optimizations on and reran the tests, recording the
difference in bytes from the baseline for each implementation (see Table 11-2). All
along I had all my variables marked as volatile, so the compiler couldn’t remove code
that appeared to have no side effects (e.g., the interim function or macro calls).

Table 11-2. Optimization scorecard showing the difference from the baseline for macros
versus functions
Implementation                   1 call 2 calls 3 calls
Macro                                0      76     152
Function (local or external)        20      60      96
Macro with space optimization     –40         8     56
Function with space optimization –40       –20        0

The key thing to note from the table is where the crossover points are (two calls
without optimizations, one call with). A macro uses the same amount of space as
copying the line of code into your function (essentially the preprocessor does a search
and replace). Once you’ve called the min3 macro a few times, it would take less code
space to turn it into a function. Although the function call generally makes for
smaller code, we’ll have to return to the issue when we look at functions in RAM and
processor cycle optimization.
Macros do have the advantage (of sorts) that they don’t do type checking; the same
macro could be used for integers, unsigned integers, or floating-point numbers. If
you need to perform an operation on many different types, you’ll need to compare
the space consumed by multiple functions against the equivalent macro.
Finally, a smaller snippet of code might never have a crossover point, so a macro may
always be better. (Even the innocuous minimum-of-two-variables function has a
crossover point of three calls, so a smaller snippet of code could be very small
indeed.) Crossover points depend on many factors, including processor architecture,
compiler implementation, and memory layout. You may need to do some experimen‐
tation on your system to determine the code space trade-off between macros and
functions.

Constants and Strings
Going through the map file, you may find that your debug strings take up a lot of
your code space. This is a really tough dilemma because those debug strings provide
valuable information and useful comments.
If you’ve implemented a logging API (described in “Creating Interfaces” on page 27),
you already have the ability to turn the debugging on and off per subsystem at run‐
time. To get rid of the debugging strings, you’ll need to go a step further and remove
the functions at compile time.
You can still get some flexibility (and some documentation) using this common
idiom that lets you turn off the logging in a particular subsystem (the motor subsys‐
tem in this example):
      #define MOTOR_LOG 1 // set this to zero to turn off debugging
      #if MOTOR_LOG
      #define Log(level, str)             Log(eMotorLog, (level), (str))
      #define LogWithNum(level, str, num) LogWithNum(eMotorLog, (level), (str), (num))
      #else
      #define Log(level, str)
      #define LogWithNum(level, str)
      #endif

When you change the value of MOTOR_LOG to 0 in the #define, all strings get compiled
out (even though the code looks the same). This is part of motor.c, on the principle
that you want to touch only the code you are working on. However, some systems use
the more global log.h to allow (and disallow) logging in each subsystem. Either way, it
can be a little frustrating if you forget and try to turn debugging on during runtime,
so you’ll need to find the balance between runtime flexibility and code space.

                     Adding a significant amount of complexity might give you even
                     more compression. If you really need to know what is going on,
                     consider a macro system that replaces strings with constants and
                     uses a separate script to build a dictionary of all the strings from
                     the code. The output looks useless, but a postprocessing script
                     makes it readable, and you’ve potentially saved a ton of code space.

As for other constants, why are they there? Do you really need them? Are there ways
to calculate the data at runtime? Or compress it? Can you move the information to
another storage mechanism (an external device such as a flash or EEPROM)? The
options depend on your system, but now that you know where the space is going, you
can dig into the problem.

Need More RAM
Unlike the angst produced when your linker says you are out of code space, a RAM
resource error from the linker should give you a sense of relief at having dodged a
bullet. The alternative symptom for a RAM shortage is a system that crashes
randomly.
Some of the same techniques for finding more code space work for RAM as well.
However, it’s more difficult to find out where the RAM is disappearing to. You can
make it easier on yourself with some design choices.

Remove malloc
To really understand where your RAM goes, eliminate dynamic memory allocation.
Because some local variables are hard to see thanks to compiler optimization and reg‐
ister use, you can make the variables global. Then you can use the memory map out‐
put of your linker to determine where the RAM is used. Dynamic allocation is always
invisible in the map file.

                If your system uses a language with garbage collection, you might
                not have the luxury of knowing where your RAM is going. For
                embedded systems written in such languages, dealing with RAM
                constraints becomes much more difficult.

If I haven’t convinced you that transparency is a good enough reason to get rid of
dynamic allocation, there are some other reasons. If you have an operating system,
malloc makes an application nondeterministic. Even without an OS, malloc makes
the same function run differently depending on the current state of the heap. Say you
have a heap that is 30 bytes in size (this is a little small, but it makes my example eas‐
ier), and in a particular function you allocate a 10-byte buffer and a 5-byte buffer.
Then you free the 10-byte buffer so you can allocate a 20-byte buffer. What is wrong
with this picture? More than you might expect:
Wasted RAM
   The heap requires RAM to keep a data structure describing the memory that’s in
   use. Every dynamic allocation has some amount of metadata overhead.
Lost processor cycles
    Keeping track of the heap is not free. Searching the heap data structure for avail‐
    able memory is usually a binary search, which is pretty fast, but it is still a search.
Fragmentation
    As shown in Figure 11-1, after you’ve allocated the 10-byte and 5-byte buffers,
    the first half of the heap is used. After you free the 10-byte buffer, there are 25

      bytes available. However, there isn’t a contiguous block for the 20-byte buffer so
      malloc will fail to allocate a buffer, returning NULL. By mixing buffer sizes, the
      heap gets fragmented. With a heap that is much larger than the variables (and few
      or no small allocations), this is less of a problem. However, in an embedded sys‐
      tem, you probably won’t have the luxury of a large heap.

Figure 11-1. An example of heap fragmentation

If you have a buffer that can be recycled after it is used, there are options besides
using the built-in dynamic allocation system. If you need two buffers—say, one for an
interrupt to write to and one for the normal code to read from—use a ping-pong
buffer as described in “Direct Memory Access (DMA) Is Faster” on page 199. If you
have a queue of data, implement a circular buffer (see “Circular Buffers” on page
203). If all of your buffers are the same size, consider a chunk allocator (there are
many examples on the web and in Wikipedia). However, avoid reinventing the wheel.
If your memory system is so complex that you end up rebuilding malloc, use the
built-in version. Its benefits will probably outweigh the costs on your system.

Reading a Map File (Part 2)
Going back to the map file, we may find some RAM information in the .data
and .bss sections. These sections are not always obvious, and you may need to search
for them; they often look like the text section filled with functions. For each section
there is a summary that shows the total amount used:
      .data           0x10000000             0x144
      …
      .bss            0x10000000             0x1b7c

                     In some map files, the .data section is called .cinit. Most linkers
                     are pretty standard, but if you see things you don’t recognize, you
                     may need to break out the linker manual or search online.

Looking back at the overview memory map (the memory configuration in “Need
More Code Space” on page 286), this program is taking up quite a lot of its 0x2000
bytes of RAM.
Note that this total doesn’t include the heap or the stack; see “Stacks (and Heaps)” on
page 129. There is no heap in this program, so all remaining RAM is allocated to the
stack. Often allocation for the heap and the stack is done in the linker file (or as an
argument passed into the linker). Without malloc, the heap can be allocated to zero
(or only as large as your libraries require). Long function call chains can make for a
large stack, particularly when the intermediate calls have many local variables.
To determine the size of your stack, in a debug build, fill a larger-than-expected stack
with a canary pattern (such as 0xDEADC0DE). Then exercise as much of the system as
possible. Finally, check how much of the stack is undisturbed to see how much you
can eliminate. The stack allocation should be a bit larger than the amount you calcu‐
late (I’d say 25% larger). Stack overflow bugs are very difficult to solve, and a bit of
buffering will save you from needing to do so. (If you have an operating system, each
thread may have its own stack and heap.)

                Recursion is seldom used in embedded systems, because the stack
                may be exhausted before the solution is obtained.

Returning to the map file, the .data section contains constants for your initialized
variables, and .bss contains all of your uninitialized global and static variables.
The .data section variables also require code space for their initial values, which is
captured in the .rodata section. The .bss section variables are RAM only. The layout
is similar to the one for functions:
    .section       address       size        file
                   address                   global variable name
                   address                   global variable name
If your variables are local to your file (or static variables in a function), only the size
and filename are shown:
    .bss            0x10001bb4          0x14 ./SharedSrc/i2c.o
As with functions, the goal here is to look for the larger variables, as those are where
the best savings can be had. (Reducing a 12-byte array by 50% is not as exciting as
doing the same for a 200-byte array.)

Registers and Local Variables
Unlike global variables, it is more difficult to estimate the RAM consumed by local
variables (those within functions). Registers are the memory pieces of a CPU. Some
processors can’t perform actions on RAM directly. Instead, they have to load the
value from RAM into a register, perform the action on the register, and then store the
information back to RAM. That’s a lot of instructions for a line of code that says:
      i++;
Not every processor needs to go through such gymnastics, but registers are faster for
any processor to use. The reason local variables are difficult to count when tallying up
RAM usages is that many local variables spend their whole existence as registers.

                     C has a keyword called register that is supposed to give a hint to
                     the compiler about which variables you think should go in regis‐
                     ters. The keyword is generally ignored, if it is implemented at all.

Function parameters
A function’s input arguments are often in registers instead of on the stack (RAM).
You can encourage the compiler to do this if your function has only a few parameters.
A good rule of thumb is fewer than four parameters per function. If you have a 32-bit
processor, that would be four 32-bit variables, not a dozen pieces of data crammed
into four structures.
In fact, if you have an N-bit processor, try to stick to N-bit variables. Larger variables
generally are not candidates for precious registers. (Smaller variables often add pro‐
cessor steps because the compiler tries to access only the part you find interesting.)
To use registers, you usually want to pass arguments by value. If you pass by reference
(or by pointer), you are sending the address of the data. The address may be in a reg‐
ister, but the data will need to be accessed in RAM. For example:
      int variable= 10;
      function(&variable);         /* this takes more RAM than passing by value
                                     because variable has to be in RAM to have
                                     an address */
There is an exception to the pointer guidelines if you pass a structure to a function. If
you pass a structure by value, you are likely to have two copies of it in RAM: the orig‐
inal and the stack version of the copy. Pass pointers to structures to eliminate
duplication.

Minimize scope
You are probably familiar with namespace (where a variable is valid according to the
programming language). A variable may be global, in which case its namespace scope
is the whole program. Or it may be declared in a file, a function, or even a designated
area of a function (e.g., inside a loop). However, there is another form of scope: where
the variable is used by the code. You might define 10 variables in your function in
such a way that their namespace is the whole function, but if you use each one in a
limited area, its scope is that area, not the whole function.
For the most efficient register use, each function should use only a small number of
variables at any time. When optimization is on, your compiler will move around the
code to limit the scope of the variables and free up registers. However, you can help it
figure out what is going on. For a simple (and somewhat lame) example, take this
code snippet that needs to make each array value equal to its place in the array. It does
some processing and then needs the array to be reinitialized to its original values
before going on:
    for (i=0; i < MAX_ARRAY_LENGTH; i++) { array[i] = i; }
    … /* do stuff to array, need to set it up again */
    /* i still equals max array so subtract one and run through
       the loop again*/
    for (i--; i >= 0; i--) { array[i] = i; }

The programmer thought that avoiding the need to reinitialize i would save a few
cycles. However, as the code is written, its value has to be remembered across other
processing steps, even though it doesn’t really matter. The variable’s scope is increased
without cause. We can rewrite the code to enable the compiler to forget about i when
it isn’t in use (and the compiler can reuse a register for a different variable):
    for (i=0; i < MAX_ARRAY_LENGTH; i++) { array[i] = i; }
    … /* do stuff to array, need to set it up again */
    for (i=0; i < MAX_ARRAY_LENGTH; i++) { array[i] = i; }
For this example, the solution is a no-brainer (and has cleaner code). However, when
you look at your code, can you see places to decrease the scope of the variables?
Maybe do all the processing on one variable before shifting to another?
Don’t worry about the total number of variables you have in a function. If you limit
the scope of each variable and within each scope limit the total number of variables in
play, the compiler can figure out the rest. It doesn’t always pay to reuse variables, par‐
ticularly when your compiler can’t recognize an old variable used in a new scope.

Look at the assembly
How do you know if you’ve been successful in your attempts to mind meld with the
compiler? Look at the assembly code. No, wait! Stop running away!

I’m not suggesting you learn assembly language for this. Well, maybe read it a little. I
definitely am not suggesting you write in assembly language (that is in “Coding in
assembly language” on page 318). However, you can learn a lot about your compiler
(and your code) by looking at the list file (.lst) or walking through the assembly in
your debugger. Make sure you can see the higher-level language at the same time as
the assembly. Your code acts as sort of a comment for the assembly code so you know
what it is trying to do. (You may need to add a compiler option to retain the list files;
look on the web or in your compiler manual.)

                     The first few times you look at assembly and walk through it, make
                     sure optimization was off during compilation. The tricky things
                     that occur during optimization are not a good introduction to
                     learning how to read assembly code.

As you look at the code in a new light, note that when the compiler optimizes for
speed, it will put the most often used variables into registers so that it doesn’t have to
load and store them for each access. If you can set your compiler to optimize for
RAM usage, it will instead put the largest number of variables in registers, possibly
leaving an often-used variable in RAM if its scope is large.

Function Chains
We saw in “Stacks (and Heaps)” on page 129 that each function call increases the size
of the stack. Say we have three functions: main calls first, and first calls second. At
that point, our stack looks like the left part of Figure 11-2.
Only a few registers are available on the processor, so everything else goes on the
stack. You don’t get extra registers for making function calls; there is a static number
through the whole system. So, if you have a chain of functions, the local variables and
parameters from earlier functions will have to go on the stack to make way for the
latest calls. Even when a parameter or a local variable starts out as a register, if it has a
large enough scope, it may end up on the stack when you call another function.
As shown in the right side of Figure 11-2, if you can tweak your design to have a flat‐
ter function structure, your stack can be smaller (and each stack frame will be smaller
as you increase the register usage).

Figure 11-2. Function chains in the stack

One exception to the rule that functions calling functions incur RAM costs is a tech‐
nique called tail recursion. It isn’t really recursion (remember that recursion is bad in
an environment with limited RAM!). In tail recursion, you call the next function as
the last statement of the current one (for instance, call second at the very end of
first). This lets you retain encapsulation for your modules and keep the stack small.
The compiler will remove first’s local variables and parameters from the stack,
allowing the second function to return directly to main (without passing through
first). Even though first called second, the stack looks like the right side of
Figure 11-2.
Also, whereas an earlier section discussed the trade-offs of macros in terms of code
size, macros play a different role in RAM reduction. Macros take up no stack frame at
all, so they are good for decreasing the RAM footprint (especially for little functions
such as the one in Example 11-1). A little more code space might lead to less RAM
(and faster execution).

Pros and Cons of Globals: RAM Versus Stack
Global variables have a bad reputation. They’ve been party to all sorts of spaghetti
code, they continually conspire with inexplicable outside forces to control the flow of
code, and they don’t know the meaning of the word reentrant.1
Coders that use global variables are often accused of being lazy. But laziness and con‐
venience are not the only reasons for using global variables. They do have a good
side.
But a little more about their bad side first. Global variables always take RAM. They
are almost always slower to access than a local (register) variable. So if you have a
global variable that could be replaced by a local one, make it local. Even if it ends up
on the stack instead of in a register, once the program execution goes out of scope,
that RAM is free for use elsewhere.
When can a global save on RAM? Say you have a function chain and need a particular
variable in several functions (or worse, you need the data only at the end of your
function chain). If you pass the data in via a parameter to each function in the chain,
with intermediate processing, the compiler may be unable to keep the data in a regis‐
ter all the way through the chain. Because it is a parameter to each function, the data
will go on the stack multiple times. A global variable is stored outside the stack and
short-circuits the process.

Clever Memory Overlays
Does your system have a few large buffers? Some of the particularly bulky ones I’ve
found on some of my systems include display buffers, communications buffers, and
sensor input buffers. Once you’ve identified the large buffers in the system, ask your‐
self whether they all need to be used at the same time.
For example, maybe your display buffer is used to build up the image and then sits
idle until the next time you need to update the display, at which point you build it up
again. Or the sensor input buffer isn’t needed while you’re waiting for an interesting
event. Once you notice the event, you need the whole buffer to queue up the data, but
until then, only a small area of it is needed. Or maybe you have a large communica‐
tions buffer for when you are receiving new code to load, but in general you need
only a little of it. Does any of that sound familiar?
If your system uses dynamic memory allocation, these subsystems might allocate and
free their memory to avoid tying up the RAM resources. However, if you’ve banned
dynamic memory allocation (and if a chunk allocator is overkill), your system might

1 A subroutine is reentrant if it can be interrupted in the middle and then safely called again before its previous
  invocation has been completed. (More in “Reentrant Functions” on page 134.)

benefit from RAM overlays. This is where two (or more) subsystems share some or
all of their allocated memory, but only one gets to use it at a time. By overloading the
resource, you effectively get a lot more RAM. Figure 11-3 shows a 4 KB RAM buffer
available on a processor. Without the overlay, the buffers overflow the available space
and the system won’t compile. With the overlay, the buffers fit. However, the subsys‐
tems depend on each other in a way that is not obvious to the casual observer (since
you’ve smashed encapsulation to bits).

Figure 11-3. Example of sharing RAM between modules where, without the overlay, the
buffers overflow the available 4 k RAM

There are several ways to implement memory overlays. The simplest is to treat the
buffer as private to one module and allow access to it through a single function, as
described with the modified singleton pattern in “Creating Interfaces” on page 27.
Another method is to implement a union of several arrays, possibly with an owner
tag to indicate the current user of the memory.
Alternatively, to make the subsystems less entwined, you can modify the linker script
to overlay the RAM buffers on each other. This eliminates any direct interaction
between the two subsystems, but requires that any future developer understand that
the two subsystems cannot run at the same time (without catastrophic results).

Need More Speed
Of all the places to spend your valuable development time, the worst can be sunk in
trying to squeeze out a few more cycles from the processor. Try to avoid that position
by starting with the design of the system, maybe building in some overhead when
selecting a processor. However, there are times when you have to make the code go
faster to respond to a real-time event, to add another feature, or to reduce power con‐
sumption (see Chapter 13).
Before delving into serious system tuning, start by profiling your application to make
sure you focus on the important parts. Profiling is not as simple as reading the map
file, but it is still unwise to optimize the wrong thing (e.g., cutting half of your

initialization time, which runs only once at system boot, instead of focusing on the
problem in your main loop).

Profiling
To know where to spend your time optimizing the code, you need to know where the
cycles are going. Many compilers (and operating systems) have some built-in analysis
tools, including profilers. If you have those, learn them. If you don’t, you may want to
build your own rudimentary profiler to give you some insight.
In physics, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle says that electron momentum and
position cannot simultaneously be known to an arbitrary precision. In profiling,
there is also uncertainty: the more precisely you need to know how long each piece of
code takes to run, the less you can know about the whole of the execution. That is,
your profiler will change the behavior (and timing) of the code. Understanding the
impact your profiler has on your code is an important part of profiling.
Profiling usually starts off trying to answer questions about where the processor time
is spent. By digging down into a particular function, you can apply the same method
to determine which part of that function is longest (and so on). Each of the four pro‐
filers discussed here has a slightly different focus to help you get a broad and deep
view of your system.

                     Similar to the code space and RAM score cards, use your profiler to
                     track which modifications were most effective.

I/O lines and an O-scope
If you have a few open I/O lines going to test points, they can show you where to start
on the path to profiling your code. As you enter a function of interest, set an output
line to be high. When you leave, set it low. Watch these lines on an oscilloscope to see
how long each function takes.
For example, we have a system that waits for data to be ready, reads the data, trans‐
forms it, and displays the result to an LCD:
      Interrupt sets data ready variable when data is available to be read

      Main loop:
        Loop, waiting for data ready to be set
        Read the data in the buffer
        Transform data into information
        Write the information to the LCD

If we had four I/O lines, setting and clearing one for each stage, the result might look
like Figure 11-4. Each I/O switches exactly as its predecessor completes (often you
don’t need to instrument everything; you can look at the gaps). In the beginning, it
looks like everything is good; the bulk of the time is spent waiting for the data to be
ready and writing information to the LCD. Eventually, the data to be ready goes to
zero, but the other tasks take up the same amount of time.

Figure 11-4. Profiling using I/O lines on an oscilloscope

Two things in the graph are important. First, as time goes on, the data is always ready
as soon as the LCD write is finished. Let’s assume the data is ready at a fixed interval
(e.g., sampled from an ADC). The narrowing data-wait time means that you will start
to miss data because the system can’t keep up. Second, the system time is dominated
by the LCD write, which is the activity on the bottom. If you can fix what is taking so
long in there, the system might be able to keep up with the input.
The great part about I/O line profiling is being able to set and clear an output line in
an interrupt. It will slow down your system to add the I/O changes to interrupt ser‐
vice routines, but only by a tiny bit. The profiling information you gain about the sys‐
tem is often worth the temporary slowdown.

Timer profiler 1 (function timer)
For a system with few interrupts, another way to implement a profiler is to time how
long a section of code takes to run. In “System Tick” on page 143, I talked about how
to build a system clock to measure how long things will take. We built the TimeNow
function to return the number of milliseconds since the processor started. Using that
as a simple timer profiler might look like the following:
    struct sProfile {
      uint32_t count;
      tTime    sum;
      tTime    start;
      tTime    end;
    } ;
    void main(){

          struct sProfile profile;
          ...

       profile.count = 0;
       profile.sum = 0;
       while (1) {
           profile.start = TimeNow();
           ImportantFunction();
           profile.end = TimeNow();
           profile.sum += profile.end - profile.start;
           profile.count++;
           if (profile.count == PROFILE_COUNT_PRINT) {
              LogWithNum(eProfiler, eDebug, "Important Function profile: ", profile.sum);
              profile.count = 0;
              profile.sum = 0;
            }
          ... // continue with other main loop functions
        }
      }

The function profiled (ImportantFunction) should be longer than the timer tick—at
a minimum, twice as long, and preferably at least 10 times as long. It is also critical
that the profiling function (TimeNow) takes a negligible amount of processing com‐
pared to the profiled function.
Note that the summation and logging are outside the scope of the profiler. Try to
sample only the things you care about and not all of the accoutrements of profiling. If
you aren’t sure that you’ve eliminated the profiler overhead, try commenting out the
function of interest so that you are profiling only the start and end time acquisition.
The result should consistently be zero if the profiler is working properly.

                      If you have a few functions of interest and are trying to decide
                      where to spend your development time, you might use three or
                      four profiler variables to monitor different areas of code.

Finally, using many samples will average out any minor differences (for example, if
you have a short, intermittent interrupt). By sampling multiple times, you also get a
small increase in precision as the integers get larger. For example, with one sample,
the function may take 10 ms. But with a thousand samples, the sum may give you
10,435 ms, indicating an average of 10.4 ms.
Figure 11-5 shows how this function timer profiler measures one area of interest at a
time.

Figure 11-5. Comparing timer and interrupt profilers

Timer profiler 2 (response timer)
If you want to profile a function that is much shorter than your timer tick, you can
use a shorter timer tick in your profiler or change the way you sample. The following
example, for instance, profiles the whole main loop because the profiler timer doesn’t
stop until the counter has reached its goal, as shown in the middle of Figure 11-5.
This may yield valuable information if you are trying to react to an event within a
certain amount of time:
    profile.count = 0;
    profile.start = TimeNow();
    while (1) {
      ImportantFunction();
      profile.count++;
      if (profile.count == PROFILE_COUNT_PRINT) {
        profile.end = TimeNow();
        profile.sum = profile.end - profile.start;
        LogWithNum(eProfiler, eDebug, "Important Function profile: ", profile.sum);
        profile.count = 0;
        profile.start = TimeNow();
        }
      ... // other main loop functions are also part of the profile
    }
This timer profiler has a larger impact on the results because it increments the
counter and compares it to a constant inside the profiled area. If your loop is very
quick, these activities may be non-negligible. As before, you can check this assump‐
tion by commenting out everything in the main loop except the profiler. By taking
this measurement, the baseline of the profiler can be subtracted out of your final
analysis.

As shown in Figure 11-5, this profiler gives you a longer view of the system timing.
Both of the timer profiling methods break up the flow of code. They tend to be tem‐
porary pieces of code that you remove after gathering the information you want.
Instrumenting the code in this fashion is straightforward, so reproducing the code as
needed is usually better than leaving it in to slow down the code and/or confuse
future generations.

Sampling profiler
If you have an interrupt-driven system, profiling can be more difficult. However, if
you can allocate a block of RAM to it, you can implement a sampling profiler with a
timer-based interrupt.
First, create a timer interrupt that is asynchronous to everything else in the system.
For example, if you have 10 Hz and 15 Hz interrupts, make sure your new timer is
not 1, 2, 3, or 5 Hz. Instead, make it something like 1.7 Hz so it is not evenly divisible
into any of your other time-based interrupts. This ensures that your results are not
biased by periodic functions. Figure 11-5 illustrates the relative timing of two func‐
tions and your custom timer (the little arrows at the bottom).
Now, on every profiler timer interrupt, save the return pointer to the block of RAM
(you’ll need to know the stack frame format of your processor and possibly some
assembly to do this). The return pointer tells you what code was running when the
timer interrupted. Once the RAM buffer is full, stop the timer and output the list of
addresses. Armed with a list of return addresses, figure out where these are in the
image using the map file. A scripting language will significantly help you parse the
map file and count up the number of times the profiler sampled from each function.
You can thus figure out what percentage of the processor time each function is taking.
This method works best when your processor allows nested interrupts, and the pro‐
filer timer is the only one allowed to interrupt other interrupts. If you have other
nonmaskable interrupts, you won’t be able to see those in the results.
This sampling profiler doesn’t slow down any particular function, but it does place a
tiny drain on the whole system. (Outputting the list of addresses may be a larger
drain, depending on your implementation.) This sort of profiler is readily left in the
code, with the timer (and output function) turned off when they are unneeded.

Optimizing for Processor Cycles
Armed with the knowledge of what is slowing down your system, you can now
explore the options available to you. Definitely start by turning on optimizations in
your compiler. The less tweaking you need to do, the better your code will be.

Next, try to get most of your variables into registers. Even if you have a long function
call chain and variables end up going on the stack while another function is called, if
they can at least be registers in a smaller scope, the code will be faster.
Having done those basics, consider the techniques in the following sections.

Memory timing
Wait states are a bane to efficient use of the processor resources. Many types of mem‐
ory cannot be accessed as fast as the processor runs. To get information from such
memory, the processor has to wait some number of processor cycles to offset the tim‐
ing difference. Memory has a number of wait states. For example, if your code runs
from a four wait state flash, every time it needs a new instruction, the processor has
to wait for four clock cycles.
I should point out that four wait state memory doesn’t (always) mean your code runs
four times slower than in one wait state memory. Processors can pipeline instructions
to reduce the impact of slow memory—in other words, look up the next instructions
while executing the current one. If the number of pipeline stages is greater than the
number of wait states, the memory will slow execution only when the pipeline stalls
(which tends to happen at branches, such as if statements, and function calls because
the processor can’t just assume that it will execute the next instruction in memory).
By knowing how many wait states each type of memory has, you have options for
speeding up execution by moving code to faster memory. For example, you may want
to copy a critical function to zero wait state RAM if that is faster than your normal
program flash. If you need the function occasionally, you can overlay the memory
with another buffer. When the function is needed, copy it out of code space into
RAM (though you’ll need to do some profiling to make sure the overhead of copying
it is balanced by its amazing speed in RAM). Many compilers support a keyword
(ramfunc), pragma, or macro that lets you indicate that the function should be stored
in code space but loaded into RAM on boot (by the startup code that runs before
main). Often you’ll need to modify your linker file to put the section into RAM.
Check your seldom-used compiler manual for this, not your handy processor
manual.

Variable size
When you are working on an 8-bit processor, it is easy to understand that using a
larger variable will incur a higher cost in terms of processor cycles. Although it might
not seem as logical, using a smaller variable on a larger processor may have some
unwanted overhead as well. For best results, local variables should match the size of
the registers.
When the compiler needs to reduce the size of a local variable from a native 32-bit
variable to an 8-bit char or a 16-bit short, it has to extend the sign, which means

every manipulation takes two instructions (or one extra instruction to zero extend
unsigned variables). Thinking about this tedious level of optimization all the time is a
job for your compiler. However, you can give it better hints if you generally imple‐
ment variables using native types.
Along the same lines, try to use the same type of variables for the bulk of your pro‐
cessing. Type conversions are a waste of processor time. Converting between signed
and unsigned also should be avoided as much as possible.

                      Signed ints are upgraded to unsigned ints when the two are com‐
                      pared. So a small negative-signed variable is likely to be considered
                      a numerically larger value when unwisely compared with an
                      unsigned variable. Stick with unsigned variables unless you really
                      need negative numbers.

One last look at function chains
Functions make your code run more slowly because the processor switches context
by pushing data on the stack (and usually having to refill the pipeline). Of course,
functions make your code maintainable (and usually make it more correct), so don’t
eliminate them entirely. However, the drive toward encapsulation can have cost as
well as benefit.
For example, take an LCD display driver. LCD drivers are often optimized because
the data needs to be on the screen before the screen refreshes. If there is no other
form of control and only part of the data is available in the LCD’s buffer, the screen
may tear (show part of the old image and part of the new) until the next refresh cycle.
Our example driver is for an LCD that is 240 × 320 pixels, and each pixel is 16-bit
(meaning it has 216 colors). When putting an image on the screen (or part of the
screen), the driver reads from a buffer of RAM and puts it on a GPIO-controlled par‐
allel bus that is 8 bits wide. The code starts out looking like this:
      // in Lcd.c
      void LcdWriteBuffer(uint16_t* buffer, uint16_t bufLength){

          int i = 0;
          while (bufLength) {
            LcdWriteBus(buffer[i] & 0xFF);        // write lower byte
            LcdWriteBus((buffer[i] >> 8) & 0xFF); // write upper byte
            i++;
            bufLength--;
          }
      }
      void LcdWriteBus(uint8_t data){

          IoClear(LCD_SELECT_N);               // select the chip
          IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, data);       // write to the I/O lines
          IoSet(LCD_SELECT_N)                  // deselect the chip

    }

    // in Io.c
    IoWriteBusByte(uint32_t io, uint8_t data){

        // ioBus was configured during initialization
        ioBus[io] = data;
    }
That is a lot of code, and when it’s lined up like that you may see some chances for
optimization. When the code is scattered in multiple files, it can be harder to see.

                 When you find a spot that seems worth optimizing, look at its call
                 chain as a whole.

Selecting and deselecting the LCD for every write is silly. The LcdWriteBus function
has to do it because it doesn’t know what else is going on around it. However, the
LcdWriteBuffer function knows it is sending a large amount of data. Although the
LcdWriteBus function is probably used by other parts of the code, the LcdWrite
Buffer code won’t call it, instead implementing its own version:
    //in lcd.c
    void LcdWriteBuffer(uint16_t* buffer, uint16_t bufLength){

        int i;
        IoClear(LCD_SELECT_N);                       // select the chip
        while (bufLength) {
          IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, buffer[i]);        // write lower byte
          IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, (buffer[i] >> 8)); // write upper byte
          i++;
          buffLength--;
        }
        IoSet(LCD_SELECT_N)                          // deselect the chip
    }
So you’ve eliminated one link in the function chain. The function will run faster, and
there is no way the compiler could have done that optimization for you. All you had
to do was copy code from one function to another, not sell your soul or anything.
However, if there was a bug in LcdWriteBus, now it is likely to be in LcdWriteBuffer.
Maybe you should add a comment in each function cross-referencing the other, so a
maintainer will know to change both locations.
The slope gets much more slippery from here. The next function in the chain is
IoWriteBusByte. It is only one line of C code, but underneath, it does some indirect
addressing to write to the I/O register. It does that every time the function is called,
even though the byte is written to the same LCD I/O lines each time.

It seems like an easy change. However, the I/O function is in the I/O module, not the
LCD module. If you change this, your code becomes faster but less portable, as it
won’t have any abstraction between the LCD and the hardware. Is it worth it? Are you
looking at a situation where you need a few more cycles or one where you absolutely
need a lot more cycles?
The cost of making a dramatic improvement is often high. Even if the change is fast
to make now, future development time will need to be invested as the system becomes
less flexible and more information-intensive. The next person is not going to recog‐
nize the trade-offs, so they will stumble over the code and ask why you made it so
ugly.
There is another option. By making IoWriteBusByte a macro, you can preserve the
modular boundaries and still eliminate the stack manipulation. The macro will take
up a little more code space (especially if IoWriteBusByte is used in many other func‐
tions). Worse, you are still spending processor cycles with the pointer access. How‐
ever, before we think about breaking encapsulation further, let’s think through some
other options.

Consider the instructions
If you were the processor, what would go on with the instructions that appear in the
two IoWriteBusByte calls that read buffer[i] twice and then increment i? Though
the machine code is processor-dependent, we can estimate the steps for each line of
code:
      IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, buffer[i] & 0xFF); // write lower byte
        (Variable i would already be in a register, already initialized)
        Copy the buffer pointer from the stack into a register
        Add the buffer pointer to i
        Read the contents of memory at that address
        Perform bitwise AND with contents
        Put i on stack
        Call IoWriteBusByte, passing data
        Pop i off the stack

       IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, (buffer[i] >> 8) & 0xFF); // write upper byte
        Copy the buffer pointer from the stack in a register
        Add the buffer pointer to i
        Read the contents of memory at that address
        Perform shift with contents
        Perform bitwise AND with result
        Put i on stack
        Call IoWriteBusByte, passing data
        Pop i off the stack

      i++;
        Increment register i

I broke the process down into pretty granular steps. Although some assembly lan‐
guages could combine some of my instructions, most of them would need a few
more. The goal is to think like a microprocessor. And if you do this, even if you are
wrong sometimes, you will write better and more easily optimized code. Thinking
along those lines, it would be more efficient if we didn’t have to add the index to the
buffer pointer:
    IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, *buffer & 0xFF); // write lower byte
      (Variable buffer would already be in a register, already initialized)
      Copy the buffer pointer from the stack in a register
      Add the buffer pointer to i
      Read the contents of memory at that address
      Perform bitwise AND with contents
      Put buffer on stack
      Call IoWriteBusByte, passing data
      Pop buffer off the stack

    IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, (*buffer >> 8) & 0xFF); // write upper byte
      Copy the buffer pointer from the stack in a register
      Add the buffer pointer to i
      Read the contents of memory at that address
      Perform shift with contents
      Perform bitwise AND with result
      Put buffer on stack
      Call IoWriteBusByte, passing data
      Pop buffer off the stack
    buffer++;
      Increment register buffer
    i++;
      Increment register i
This doesn’t really change anything important; it only gives a hint to the compiler
about what choices it could make to go faster. (And some compilers are intelligent
enough to have parsed the code to get to the same point.)
The immediate lesson is to use pointer arithmetic (buffer++) instead of arrays and
indexes where possible. Pointer arithmetic uses a little less RAM and gives the com‐
piler a clearer path toward optimization. The larger lesson is to understand how your
code is translated into machine language, and to make it easy for a compiler to take a
faster route. (Compiler Explorer is a great resource for this, see “Further Reading” on
page 320 for more information.)

Reduce math in loops
What next? Ideally, we’d like to do less math during a loop. The shift and bitwise-
AND are relatively cheap, but if you do them on every pass, they add up. It wouldn’t
be necessary if the buffer were a byte buffer instead of a word buffer:

      void LcdWriteBuffer(uint16_t* buffer, uint16_t bufLength)
      {
        uint8_t *byteBuffer = (uint8_t *) buffer;
        // buffer is now a buffer of bytes.
        // This works only if your endian-ness matches what the
        // hardware expects
        bufLength = bufLength*2;

          IoClear(LCD_SELECT_N);         // select the chip
          while (bufLength) {
            IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, *byteBuffer);
            bufLength--; byteBuffer++;
          }
          IoSet(LCD_SELECT_N)            // deselect the chip
      }
The code now relies on a feature of the processor (endian-ness) that will not be
portable. However, the change will speed up the code—probably. Remember that
memory size matters. This change would improve the speed of an 8-bit chip signifi‐
cantly. For a 32-bit chip? Well, it shouldn’t slow it down much, because we were
already doing the bit manipulation previously shown. At least now we are letting the
compiler do the best optimization it can. The potential improvement depends on
your architecture.
Usually, making the loop smaller is a good idea, as is making it do exactly the same set
of operations each time. Keep if statements out of loops, as they mess with your
pipelining and slow it all down.
However, there is a conditional statement (while) in the previous loop. At this point,
it may be taking a nontrivial number of cycles. If you were to walk through the
assembly code, you might see that the loop is writing the byte, decrementing and
incrementing some registers, and checking to make sure one register is not zero.

                   Checking against zero is cheaper than checking against a constant
                   (much cheaper than checking against a variable). Make your loop
                   indexes count down. It saves only an instruction or two, but it is
                   good practice.

                                           Making a PB&J
  There is a neat experiment you can run if you have some 5–9-year-olds handy. Ask
  them to pretend that they have a robot (you) and want to make a peanut butter and
  jelly sandwich (PB&J). The ’bot is very dumb, so they have to give it complete and
  detailed instructions.
  The robot already knows how to grasp and lift objects (bread, peanut butter, jelly,
  bread, and spreaders). But it doesn’t know how to put it all together to make a

  sandwich. What are the steps, and how do they go together? As the child writes (or
  says) the steps, the robot often creates a mess instead of a sandwich as it interprets
  each command literally.
  Breaking down the process of making a PB&J is a fun way to get kids to understand a
  little bit about the process of writing software. Plus, you get to say “does not compute”
  like a Dalek until they manage a sandwich.
  (Thanks to Walter and Emma Stockwell for letting me experiment upon their sons,
  Alasdair and Toby.)

Loop unrolling
By now, when you look at the assembly for the loop in this function, the check against
zero may be one of about 10 instructions. The decrement of bufLength is another.
You are spending 20% of your time dealing with loop overhead.
The compiler can’t get rid of that, but you know more about the situation. You have
more context about what your code is trying to do. For example, you know that there
are an even number of bytes (because you made it that way). There is no need to
check the loop on every pass, only on every other pass:
    void LcdWriteBuffer(uint16_t* buffer, uint16_t bufLength){

        // Use a buffer of bytes. This works only if your endian-ness
        // is correct.
        uint8_t *byteBuffer = (uint8_t *) buffer;
        bufLength = bufLength*2;

        IoClear(LCD_SELECT_N);         // select the chip
        while (bufLength) {
          IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, *byteBuffer);
          byteBuffer++;
          IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, *byteBuffer);
          byteBuffer++;
          bufLength--;
        }
        IoSet(LCD_SELECT_N)            // deselect the chip
    }
Now, if this loop previously took 10 instructions to write a 16-bit pixel, now it will
run in 8. We’ve eliminated an increment to bufLength and a check against zero for a
20% improvement (yay us!). This process of loop unrolling reduces the number of
iterations by duplicating code inside a loop. Improvements that large are not usually
so cheap. Now we look back to IoWriteBusByte as the largest consumer of cycles in
the loop, even as a macro. We’ll stop here because, as noted earlier, it accesses

variables in another file, so it is a more egregious modification with respect to main‐
taining modularity.
Why don’t I care about removing the bufLength multiplication at the top of the func‐
tion? For the same reason I never mentioned breaking modularity to reduce IoClear
and IoSet. Reducing the code outside the loop is much, much less important because
it runs only once (or once per function call).
When you are optimizing, focus on the loops and the repeated actions.
When I introduced the LCD function, I mentioned the screen was 240 × 320 pixels.
Could you have a single function write out a whole screen’s worth of data without any
conditionals? Of course. And it would be faster than having conditionals. However,
you’ll be sad when you’ve lost count after pasting the 12,243rd instance of:
      IoWriteBusByte(LCD_BUS, *byteBuffer); byteBuffer++;
Worse, when you compile, you may find that all those repeated instructions come
with a cost: code space.

                      Explaining Optimization to a Business Major
  Ultimately, optimization is an economics problem. You start out with a portfolio of
  assets associated with your system. The major ones are the RAM, processor cycles,
  and code space. You may also have some auxiliary assets in power consumption and
  peripheral support on your processor. Your most liquid asset is development time, so
  think of that as money. Once you invest (or allocate) these assets to parts of the sys‐
  tem, you lose the opportunity to use them in other subsystems.
  If the set of investments you initially selected does not deliver the expected returns,
  you might partially recoup the spent resources, but to do so you will need to sink
  more development time into the project. As you go further along the development
  path, switching the allocations becomes more and more costly (and less and less pos‐
  sible). Making the right call at the start of the design process can mean the difference
  between buying at the bottom of the market and losing your shirt.
  In order to make strategic trades that are truly beneficial, you need to understand
  your resources in terms of the assets and debts. Unfortunately, the system portfolio is
  not yet a slick, prepared prospectus that comes in the mail. An accurate, precise
  understanding of it takes a lot of time (aka money). Estimation can suffice for certain
  areas; others require in-depth investigation (profiling).
  Your system’s assets are somewhat fungible. For instance, you can trade RAM for pro‐
  cessor cycles or code space (you will need some development time to facilitate the
  transaction). Sometimes you don’t have to trade anything, and spending more devel‐
  opment time will reduce your debt load. However, the total amount of any resource is

  fixed, and a resource can become so scarce that any amount of development time
  (and assets) will fail to produce any more of it.
  As you consider different optimization strategies, consider as well the high opportu‐
  nity cost that comes with investing your assets. Buying futures is almost always
  cheaper than buying stock. Similarly, selecting resources at the design phase is
  cheaper than waiting until the last minute and realizing you are seriously in debt with
  no easy way to recover.
  (Thanks to Jane Muschenetz for helping with the business side of this analogy!)

Lookup tables
Nothing is ever free in optimization. Even turning on the compiler optimizations
takes development time because the debugger no longer works as it did. When you
step through line by line, the debugger won’t show you most of the variables (the ones
the compiler removed), and it jumps around (because the compiler rearranged the
assembly instructions).
Loop unrolling trades code space for speed. Using a macro instead of a function also
trades code space for speed. These trades go either way, so if you need more code
space, you may want to roll up any loops and eliminate macros.
There is another trade-off between cycles and code space (or RAM) that goes beyond
macros: lookup tables. These store the values needed for operations on a particular
parameter. When the running code needs the information, instead of performing cal‐
culations, it finds the result in the table, often with a simple index.
For a simple example, if you need to transform the 128 ASCII characters into their
Unicode equivalents, you can put them in a table to look up the result. Lookup tables
go far beyond this, though. Many complex algorithms (e.g., encryption’s AES) have
two implementations: a fast, large one that uses lookup tables and a slow, small one
that computes the values it needs. (Generating lookup tables to reduce math overhead
is covered in gory detail in Chapter 12.)
Lookup tables can be code-based (where the values are calculated at or before compi‐
lation) or RAM-based. The latter are useful if your RAM access is fast (fewer wait
states), or you have plenty of RAM but not enough code space (calculate the table on
initialization). They can also be useful if your lookup values need to change when cir‐
cumstances change (e.g., a networking router’s lookup tables change when a different
protocol is needed).

                     The compiler may create a lookup table when you use a switch
                     statement in place of an if-else. Looking at your assembly code will
                     tell you whether it has (and whether it is a savings to you).

Coding in assembly language
Looking at your assembly code is an important part of optimizing. Even if you don’t
start out knowing the meaning of the instructions in your assembly language, follow‐
ing along in the debugger for critical functions will help you figure out what the pro‐
cessor is really doing. Once you understand that, you may be able to tweak your high-
level language code to help the compiler do something more efficiently.
That said, your time is valuable. Don’t program in assembly language. Really, it isn’t a
good idea. The resulting code is usually a mess and almost always easier to redo from
scratch than it is to maintain, even by the original programmer. That isn’t to say it is
easy to rewrite, just that it can be impossible to read. Maintenance of assembly code
tends to be in the form of major refactoring (aka rewriting it all and fixing the old
bugs, but indubitably writing new ones).
However, if you have a function that really, really needs to be superfast and the com‐
piler is clearly not doing all it can, well, programming in assembly can be kind of fun,
in a furtive playing-Tetris-at-work sort of way.
Start off with the high-level code. Understand the assembly generated by the com‐
piler. Next, turn on optimizations and really understand the new assembly generated
by the compiler. You are smarter than the compiler, and you have more system
knowledge. But the compiler almost certainly knows the assembly language better
than you do. Let it show you what it thinks is important before you start tweaking the
assembly that the compiler generates.
That is the big secret: don’t start with a blank slate. Start with the assembly your com‐
piler gives you and go from there. Paste the equivalent high-level code into the
assembly code as comments so that your future self can remember the goal of each
section.

Summary
I can’t provide a comprehensive list of optimization techniques. They depend on your
processor and your compiler. Even more importantly, they depend on your require‐
ments and your available resources. I can say that if you’ve gotten to the end of the
project and are looking for cheap ways to reduce your code by 40%, you have seri‐
ously misjudged the capacity of your hardware resources. But I’ve made that mistake,
too.
Optimization starts with a good design, preferably one with a little extra overhead
just in case the future features turn out to be larger, slower, and more RAM-intensive
than you’d planned. Even at the end of the project, you need a few spare resources to
fix bugs and respond to hardware changes.

               In medical and safety-related products, that margin needs to be
               larger. Recompiling the code is a paperwork-intensive process,
               even for a minor one-line change. If you end up changing 50 lines
               because you need one more byte of RAM or just a few more pro‐
               cessor cycles to implement the change, the paperwork and testing
               grows exponentially.

Although there is some fun to be had in reducing the resources as far as possible,
you’ll get diminishing returns. The first 10% of improvement shouldn’t be too diffi‐
cult, but the next 10% will probably take twice as long (and so on). Start with a goal,
and don’t optimize much beyond there.
There are trade-offs in optimization. You can share resources between subsystems,
but every time you do that, your product becomes a little less robust and a little more
fragile for the next person to modify. There is something incredibly embarrassing
about handing a project off to another team and explaining that they should never
change subsystem X, because it will change the very precise timing of subsystem Y.
A better way of utilizing development time is to look for ways to optimize using well-
understood algorithms. Keep reading books (and blogs) for ways to solve common
(and not-so-common) problems. A proven algorithm is well worth the time invested.
Instead of inventing the wheel all over again, you can refine someone else’s.

                                                                          Summary   |   319
One last point: many times, the tuning of the system is left to the end of the develop‐
ment cycle, even after the first testing has completed. I’ve heard that this is done on
the theory that the features should work before they get tuned. The process of keep‐
ing the system within its resources should be planned for and maintained during sys‐
tem development. Introducing complex changes right before you ship a product will
lead to an unstable system. Balance the risk of making a premature optimization (e.g.,
reading all of your assembly list code looking for ways the compiler could have
reduced a single instruction) against the benefit of making an optimization early so it
can be tested thoroughly and have an impact on other design considerations.

Further Reading
Have you ever done something that pleases you whenever you look at it? Well, I gave
a talk about memory maps that makes me happy. The talk and the graphics I created
make me laugh. I’d love to share it with you.
Although I have attempted to give you some tools to take care of the largest prob‐
lems, there are almost always ways to squeak out a little bit more. For more optimiza‐
tion techniques, look at your processor vendor’s application notes and your compiler
manual. Atmel has a particularly good application note for one of their 8-bit process‐
ors: AVR035: Efficient C Coding for AVR.
Another great resource showing how to wring the most out of your limited resources
is the Stanford Graphics Bithacks site. It shows how different algorithms can be
implemented with different resources.
Small Memory Software by Charles Wier and James Noble describes design patterns
that are specific to systems with memory constraints. Many of the patterns are tactical
(using bitmasks in a structure, having client functions handle the memory in inter‐
faces, implementing memory pools, and so on). While showing its age with discus‐
sions of operating systems from long ago, the tips on reducing memory usage are still
relevant. The book is free and online.
To compare how these different implementations work (or different versions of your
own implementation), take a look at Compiler Explorer, also known as Godbolt, as it
is named after its creator Matt Godbolt. This web tool lets you compile functions and
see the assembly output. Many compilers and languages are supported. The assembly
is documented and interspersed with the code. The goal is to let you see how your
coding choices affect your assembly. It is a growing tool with ever-expanding features.

                 Interview Question: Reverse Bits in a Byte
Start by reversing the bits in a byte using limited memory. Once you’ve finished, modify
the code to be as fast as possible (but without the memory limitation).
In an interview setting, I don’t mind if the interviewee starts out slowly with a simple
solution. Optimization should take a backseat to correctness:
    uint8_t SwapBitsInByte(uint8_t input) {
      uint8_t output=0;
      for (uint8_t i = 0; i < 8; i++) { // for every bit in the byte
        if (input & (1 << i)) { // need to set the bit in the output
          output |= 1 << (7-i);
        }
      }
      return output;
    }
Generally, I don’t look for syntax during interviews (that is what compilers are for).
However, in this problem, parentheses are important, because the bit-shift operator
has lower precedence than addition or subtraction. If the interviewee has missed this,
I’d ask about operator precedence. Not everyone has that memorized, though it can
cause havoc in your code if you get it wrong (might as well use parentheses every‐
where, just to be safe).
Ideally, the programmer should check their own code, running through it with a cou‐
ple of values to make sure that following the instructions works. Like mental unit
tests, I like to see the interviewee do this as they write the code (or even before).
When I look at the solution, naming is important, for both function names and vari‐
able names. Comments are nice as long as they are useful (“// set the bit in the out‐
put” might be useful on an if statement, but it probably isn’t on the line that actually
sets the bit).
Using variables to implement the problem is a good start to the solution, although
there is a straightforward way to do it with one variable (by unrolling the loop). If the
candidate mentions that both variables (and the input parameter) are likely to be in
registers, I can point out that the use of an extra register probably meant some other
variable got pushed onto the stack. Despite the correction, the interviewee gets a lot
of points for the observation.
As for the second part of the problem, I don’t know many people who have success‐
fully worked out the problem in an interview situation. It is one of those tricks that
you just need to know: use a lookup table. If you can allocate 256 bytes (in RAM
memory or in code space, whichever is faster), to quickly find the reverse of a byte, all
you need to do is use the value of the byte as a lookup into the array of bytes:
    uint8_t SwapBitInByte(uint8_t input) {
       const uint8_t lookup_table[256] = {0x00, 0x80, 0x40, 0xC0... 0x7F, 0xFF};

                                                                      Further Reading   |   321
           return lookup_table[input];
       }
  This technique is often used in embedded situations when the system has more code
  space than time. I hope that by this point the interviewee has mentioned that they’d
  look up the algorithm to make sure they had a reasonably optimal solution for the
  design constraints.
  There is a more optimal solution to the first part of the question. Instead of reversing
  the bits one after another using a temporary variable, the code can reverse the bits
  pairwise, then reverse the pairs, then reverse the nibbles, all without a temporary
  variable (and I suspect one fewer register can be used):
       uint8_t SwapBitInByte(uint8_t val) {
         val = ( ( val & 0x55 ) << 1 ) | ( ( val & 0xAA ) >> 1 );
         val = ( ( val & 0x33 ) << 2 ) | ( ( val & 0xCC ) >> 2 );
         val = ( ( val & 0x0F ) << 4 ) | ( ( val & 0xF0 ) >> 4 );
         return val;
       }
  I would not expect an interview candidate to come up with this on their feet. I had to
  adapt it from Hacker’s Delight by Henry S. Warren (Addison-Wesley). On the other
  hand, now I’m tempted to make future interviewees explain what the code does (and
  how to make it faster, hoping they will come up with a lookup table).

