                                                                             CHAPTER 13
                            Reducing Power Consumption

Whether you are building a device that fits in your pocket or trying to save the world
by reducing your company’s carbon footprint, decreasing a system’s power consump‐
tion can take an order of magnitude more time than implementing the product fea‐
tures. Choosing all the right hardware components is a huge part of making a system
power-efficient. But because the processor is likely to be one of the largest consumers
of power in the system, software can play a big role in saving electricity.
The pressures to decrease power usage and cost are what lead us to select processors
that don’t have enough resources to comfortably deliver the product features. Since
you are a relatively expensive resource, using your time to save on the cost of the pro‐
cessor is sensible only if you are building enough units to amortize your time.

                How expensive are you? Take your annual salary and divide by a
                thousand. That is about what each hour of your time costs your
                company, counting salary, benefits, office space, and all the little
                things that add up. So if you are making an example salary of
                $1,000 per year, each hour is worth about $1. If you can buy a $3.50
                tool to save four hours, it is usually worth it. Of course, there is a
                difference between capital outlay (cash) and sunk cost (your sal‐
                ary), so although this is a good rule of thumb, your boss might not
                let you buy the scooter to get from your desk to the break room,
                even after you describe the cost benefit of saving 30 seconds every
                day.

On the other hand, a processor with the minimum amount of cycles, RAM, and code
space consumes less power than one with plenty of resources. As suggested in Chap‐
ter 11, you may want to optimize to “as low as possible,” but that will take an infinitely
long time. Start with a quantifiable system goal. Let your electrical engineering team

do its part when choosing the components. Then use the points in this chapter to
reduce the power further.

Understanding Power Consumption
All electrical circuits can be modeled as resistors, though this is akin to saying all dif‐
ferential equations can be modeled linearly. It is true, but depending on the circum‐
stances, you might expect to see a lot of errors. However, it is a good starting point.
Power is measured in watts and is proportional to the square of the current used in
the system:
      P = I2 * R
      power = (current)2 * resistance
      Watts (W) = (Amps (A))2 * Ohms (Ω)
Because your system is modeled as a resistor, if you focus on decreasing your current,
you decrease your power consumption. Another way to look at power is as the prod‐
uct of voltage and current:
      P = V * I
      power = voltage * current
      Watts (W) = Volts (V) * Amps (A)
This is why your processor core may run at 1.8 V even though other parts of your
system run at 3 or 5 V. Because the core takes a lot of current, the lower voltage
means less power consumption. The two ways of looking at power are equivalent,
according to the golden rule of electrical engineering, Ohm’s law:
      V = I * R
      voltage = current * resistance
      Volts (V) = Amps (A) * Ohms (Ω)
There is a lot more that Ohm’s law can do for you, so if this overview has given you a
buzz of interest, check out “Further Reading” on page 370 for some electrical engi‐
neering reading.
One more useful equation is for energy:
      W = P * T
      work or energy = power * time
      Joules (J) = Watts (W) * seconds
Finally, we have an equation with time. Basically, it says that if you are designing an
energy-efficient system, you can minimize the power it uses or the amount of time it
is powered on.
If we want to reduce energy (work), then we need to reduce power or time powered
on (or both). If we want to reduce power, we have to reduce current or change our
system so it has less resistance (P = I2 * R). If we want to reduce power, we need to
reduce voltage or current (P = V * I).

To summarize, to reduce how much energy the device uses, we have to reduce volt‐
age, resistance, current, and time. These are not all independent (Ohm’s Law tells us
that), but let’s treat them as though they are for now and try to reduce each:
Reducing voltage
   Is generally a matter of choosing lower voltage parts, such as processors and
   peripherals that work at 1.8 V.
Reducing resistance
   Is also about component selection, identifying parts such as new MEMS sensors
   instead of older mechanical ones.
Reducing current
   Is related to the previous two but there are software techniques that are useful
   here: things like GPIO settings and features you might find in your processor
   manual (or an application note).
Reducing time
   Can be done by turning off as much of the system as possible.

Measuring Power Consumption
It’s very hard to optimize what you can’t measure. You have to know how to measure
power, and low-power things can be difficult to measure; the lower the consumption,
the more difficult it is.
One of the easiest ways to measure current is with a power supply. The more expen‐
sive ones will give you a simple reading. However, it is not that straightforward.
To start with, you’ll need to disconnect your programmer/debugger as well as the
serial port to the command line. Essentially you can’t have anything connected to the
system under test. For example, JTAG programmers may provide power to the pro‐
cessor but that power comes from your computer, not the power supply. While a
serial port doesn’t provide power, your computer is powered differently than the sys‐
tem under test, and the different grounds may change the measurement.
Thus, step one is to disconnect everything. There should be only one power and one
ground going to the system.
For a low-power system, there is a good chance that the sleep states (more on this
soon) will read lower than a normal power supply can measure.
Chapter 3 suggested that you get your own digital multimeter (DMM). If you get a
good one, you can measure current directly, as shown in part b) of Figure 13-1. Most
cheap DMMs will let you measure in the range of milliamps (mA). A small embedded
system consisting of a low-power processor and a few peripheral chips will draw tens
to hundreds of milliamps. So the DMM is an easy way to measure the current of a

                                                    Understanding Power Consumption   |   357
running system. However, if you are trying to look at power consumption in sleep
mode, you may need to measure lower amounts of current. A good DMM may let
you look at hundreds of microamps (μA), but you may need even finer granularity
than that.

Figure 13-1. Two methods of measuring current

To read power levels with my DMM, I need to move the test probes to another loca‐
tion on the DMM. (I often forget this step.) Next, I have to have an idea of how much
current I’m going to read: µA, mA, 10A. If I get the range too high, so my system
draws less current, the DMM will read zero. However, if I get it wrong the other way,
so my system draws more current than then DMM is set for, I may break my multi‐
meter (or I’ll need to replace a fuse).

                    There are a lot of ways to do this wrong, so read your multimeter
                    manual. Or watch some YouTube videos.

Using a resistor in series and burden voltage
A safer way to measure current is to put a small resistor in series with the system, as
shown in part c) of Figure 13-1. Switch your DMM to voltage mode, something it is
better at measuring. You may need to tweak the value of the resistor to get the voltage
in the range that your DMM can read. Then apply Ohm’s law:
      current = voltage / resistance
Table 13-1 shows some possible combinations to give you the idea. Depending on the
current you expect to read, you may have to tweak the resistor value.

Table 13-1. Measuring current in a system using different resistors
Expected Resistor Voltage             Notes
current in circuit measured on
                   DMM
   12 mA       1Ω       0.012 V       Easily measured on most DMMs
    23 μA      1Ω    0.000023 V       Impossible to read on most DMMs
    34 μA    10 Ω     0.00034 V       A very good DMM might be able to read this
    45 μA   100 Ω      0.0045 V       Once again, within reach of most DMMs, but the resistor is getting too large

The reason the resistor-in-series method works is because the first part of the circuit
(the system I’m testing) and the second part of the circuit (the resistor) must have to
use the same amount of current.1 So I get the system’s current by looking at the resis‐
tor’s current.
This method used to work a lot better before all the processors got so darn power
efficient. Now, the resistor’s resistance may be a significant percentage of your sys‐
tem’s resistance. The resistor needs to be large enough to read the tiny sleep currents,
but still small enough that it doesn’t become a large consumer of power itself and
interfere with the measurement.
When that happens, instead of using the resistor as a measurement tool, the resistor
is causing a significant chunk of what you are measuring. The resistor is burdening
the system with its own drama. This gives you the wrong idea about your system’s
performance.
This whole resistor measurement process is exactly what my multimeter was doing,
which is why I had to tell it what to measure. Essentially, I was indicating which resis‐
tor to use by moving the probes. A digital power supply or $30 voltmeter will give
you a satisfactory measurement as long as you are drawing milliamps or tens of
microamps.
Since it consumes power on its own, you may choose to have the resistor available
only on development boards, with a zero-ohm resistor (also known as a “wire”) on
the production boards.

                     Resistors are associated with a given accuracy. After you measure
                     current consumption, power off your system and measure the true
                     resistance value of the resistor with your DMM.

1 This is Kirchhoff ’s current law.

                                                                            Understanding Power Consumption          |   359
Sadly, multimeters only measure current right this second, a measure of static con‐
sumption. If we have sleep states or are looking for a current change, we really want
something like an oscilloscope so we can see little blips as power level changes.

Changing current and orders of magnitude problem
When your device is running, it may consume lots of power. Then when your device
goes to sleep, it may drastically reduce the power draw so the battery can last a long
time. Trying to measure both of these is difficult. They may be orders of magnitude
different, which means they need drastically different resistor values. And remember,
using the wrong resistor value (or DMM slot) may end up causing a blown fuse or a
broken tool.
There are power profiler tools to help with this, specialized tools that measure current
over different ranges. They can be expensive, but they handle burden voltage and the
order of magnitude problem for you.

Designing for Lower Power Consumption
While measuring power consumption is critical to getting the most out of your sys‐
tem, several of the ways to reduce power consumption involve choosing the correct
components. During the design phase, you have to determine what your power
budget is and whether it works for the application.
For battery applications, estimate how much space the battery occupies physically
and whether it fits your budget. These two factors can help you choose what kind of
battery works for your system.
Batteries have a voltage rating and a capacity. An alkaline AA battery has a nominal
voltage of 1.5 V and a capacity of about 3,000 mAh (milliamp hours). Thus capacity
isn’t rated in power, but in current supplied over time.
If your system takes 30 mA (and 1.5 V) when it is on, then with an AA battery it
should last about 4 days (3,000 mAh/30 mA = 100 hours). If your system takes 300
mA, it should last about 10 hours.
However, if your system consumes 3,000 mA, the AA battery won’t last an hour,
because just as with calling your system a resistor, this rule of thumb goes only so far.
Your battery will have a datasheet that explains its capacity, chemistry, peak current
draw, and other characteristics.
The capacity will determine how long the device works between charges (or battery
changes). However, to calculate that, you will need to identify the pieces of the system
most likely to consume power. Going back to Chapter 2 and the hardware block dia‐
gram, list the major components. Choose some specific parts and start estimating
how much current they consume. This is additive: if you have a screen consuming 12

mA and a processor that uses 0.6 mA at full speed, then the current consumption of
both of these is 12.6 mA (assuming they run at the same voltage).
As you create a spreadsheet of components and their current consumption, you will
find that parts change current consumption based on their operating status: a screen
that is off may consume 0 mA, a processor that is asleep may be more in the 80 µA
range. Your device will likely have its own higher level states: “on” and “asleep” are the
simplest states to identify. If you have a network sensor, the radio may consume
enough power to warrant a separate “high power” system state (especially while
transmitting). A robotic system may also need states about how far and fast it can
travel.
Note that these are not generally the states in your software flowchart. These device
states are usually much less granular, more like the operating modes visible to the
user.
These different device states become columns in your spreadsheet, letting you calcu‐
late the current consumption of each. From there, determine the amount of time
spent per state to find the average consumption. Alternatively, use the amount of cur‐
rent you have available to determine how much time you can spend in any given
state.
In summary, when designing for low power consumption applications, you need to
answer these questions:

  • What is the battery cost budget? How big can it be?
  • How long between charges or battery changes?
  • What are the major power consuming components?
  • What are the states of the system? What is the power draw in each state?
  • How much time can you spend in each state given the battery goals? If this is
    insufficient, recheck the answers to the other questions.

Turn Off the Light When You Leave the Room
The easiest way to reduce power consumption is to turn off components that are not
needed. The downside is that those components won’t be ready when you need them,
and bringing them back will add both some power usage and some latency in
responding to events. You’ll need to investigate the trade-offs; I tend to use a spread‐
sheet to help me weigh the power savings.
The following sections detail some of the ways to turn off or reduce the power drain
of components.

                                                 Turn Off the Light When You Leave the Room   |   361
Turn Off Peripherals
As you review your schematic and your design, consider what your processor has
access to and how to design your system to turn off peripherals that are not needed.
For example, if you have external RAM, you may be able to move the data to a local
location and then power down the RAM instead of leaving it powered on for exten‐
ded periods of time.
A chip external to the processor will consume no current if it does not have power. If
the processor doesn’t have access to the power lines, holding the peripheral in reset
should nearly eliminate the current consumption (check the peripheral datasheet!).
This isn’t as optimal as turning off the power, but better than leaving the peripheral
running.
Many chips need time to return to functioning after reset, so there is some overhead
in powering them down. The goal is to turn off the component for a reasonable
amount of time. ADCs are some of the peripherals with longer reset times, but they
are often big power consumers, so it is often worth taking the time to balance the
power consumption versus the power-on time.

Turn Off Unused I/O Devices
If you have spare I/O devices, you can save a little bit of current by configuring them
to be inputs with internal pull-downs. If your chip doesn’t have internal pull-downs,
try tri-stating it (no pull-up and no pull-downs, just floating) or setting it to be a low
output. If that doesn’t work for you, an input with pull-ups still has reasonably small
amounts of leakage current.

                    Don’t remember pull-ups as anything other than gym torture? See
                    Chapter 3 for more information on both pull-ups and pull-downs.

As for those I/Os connected to the component you’ve powered off, the preferred
order is the same (input with pull-downs, output low, input with pull-ups). Configur‐
ing one I/O in this manner isn’t likely to save a lot, but if you have a whole bunch of
them, the small savings can add up. On the other hand, if some I/Os on your system
have an external pull-up or pull-down, set the internal one to match (or eliminate the
external ones as redundant). Fighting external resistors wastes power.

                    If you have a peripheral that is powered off (or in reset), be careful
                    how you connect other processor I/Os to it. Don’t leave the lines
                    pulled-up or set high. Chips often have internal protection diodes
                    that could use the high signal to back-power and damage the chip.

Turn Off Processor Subsystems
In addition to setting I/O devices to be low power, often you can turn off whole sub‐
systems of the processor that you don’t need (are you using that second SPI port?).
Your processor manual will tell you whether this is a supported feature of the pro‐
cessor. Sometimes you can turn off all functionality (best); sometimes you can only
turn off the clock to the peripheral (still pretty good).

Slow Down to Conserve Energy
Lowering your clock frequency saves power. This is true for all of the clocks you can
control, but especially the processor clock. However, a slower processor clock gives
you fewer processor cycles to run in. That is why we spent so much time on optimiz‐
ing code in Chapter 11, even though optimizing for processor speed tends to decrease
the quality (robustness, readability, and debuggability) of your code. Often the most
straightforward way to decrease power consumption of your system by 10% is to
decrease the clock by about 10%. In other words, the power consumption of the chip
is proportional to the frequency it runs at.
If the processor has to be on all the time (for example, to monitor its environment),
being able to slow down may be crucial to achieving low power. Some embedded
operating systems will do frequency scaling for you, consuming power efficiently
when possible and still having the speed available when you need it. You can do this
without an operating system. Instead of scaling over the whole range, you might want
to create slow, medium, and fast modes and change the performance level based on
events. However, as with running a race, there is a balance between slowing the pro‐
cessor down and keeping it on for a longer time (being a tortoise) or sprinting for a
shorter period of time and then sleeping (being a hare).

           Dealing with Multiple Clock Sources of Different Accuracies
  Many power-efficient systems have a slow clock that can drive the processor in low
  power modes, often generated via a 32 kHz oscillator.2 This slow clock is used to keep
  a part of the system alive while in low-power state, often to drive a real-time clock
  (RTC) so the system knows the current time even when it has been powered “off.”

2 Actually, it is usually a 32.768 kHz oscillator, so you can count to 1 second with a 15-bit counter.

                                                               Turn Off the Light When You Leave the Room   |   363
  Such systems also have a crystal-generated fast clock with higher power consumption,
  higher accuracy, and less temperature-related error. You can use the high-accuracy
  clock to correct the errors in the low-accuracy one (aka time base compensation or
  disciplining the timing source). The goal is to determine the difference between the
  low-accuracy clock’s actual values and expected values.
  Say your fast clock is 50 MHz for this example. To determine the compensation, set
  the slow clock as an input to a capture timer. Next, set up a one-second timer inter‐
  rupt using the more accurate fast clock. The slow clock should have given you 32,768
  ticks on the capture counter when the one-second timer expired. However, it proba‐
  bly gave you a value that is a few off from that (depending on ambient temperature
  and the manufacturing process used on the 32 kHz clock). You can use this offset to
  move between the 32 kHz cycles that occurred while the system was asleep and 50
  MHz clock cycles (or between 32 kHz cycles and real time). For example, say that
  when you did the compensation, you got 32,760 captured ticks per one-second period
  (which should be equivalent to 50 M crystal clock cycles). Now the processor can
  expect 32,760 cycles per second from the 32 kHz clock.
  The final outcome is no better than the most accurate clock you have. In fact, it is
  likely to be worse because you can’t tell whether the compensation should have been
  fractional (32,760.5). (Remember jitter from Chapter 5? It applies here.) Also, as tem‐
  perature changes, the compensation varies, so you’ll need to redo the compensation
  periodically (how frequently depends on the timing accuracy your product requires).
  The precision clock might not be the fast one. Systems that use GPS for location and
  timing have access to the PPS signal. This is a very accurate (and precise) clock, but it
  is too slow to drive a system. However, it can be used to correct your clocks in much
  the same manner as described previously:

      1. Interrupt on the PPS signal.
      2. Take a measure of how many system ticks (processor or timer) passed since the
         last PPS interrupt.
      3. Adjust the system timing accordingly.

  (Thanks to Matthew Hughes for recommending the addition of clock compensation!)

Putting the Processor to Sleep
Even at a slow clock speed, the processor is consuming power. Slowing down will
help, but what if your code spends a lot of time waiting for things to happen?
Many processors designed for low-power systems can go into an energy-conserving
sleep when they aren’t needed. They use interrupts to tell the processor when to
wake up.

On your computer, sleep is a standby mode where processing is not running but the
memory is still powered. This lets the operating system wake up quickly, exactly
where it had left off. Alternatively, in hibernation, the contents of RAM are written to
the disk (or other nonvolatile memory). It takes longer to wake up from hibernation,
but the system uses much less power while in that state (maybe almost no power,
depending on the make of your computer).
Most embedded processors offer a similar range of sleep possibilities, with some pro‐
cessors having lots of granularity and others opting to have only one low-power
mode. In decreasing levels of power consumption, some sleep modes you might find
in your processor manual include:
Slow down
    Going beyond frequency scaling, some processors allow you to slow the clock
    down to hundreds of hertz.
Idle or sleep
     This turns off the processor core but keeps enabled timers, peripherals, and RAM
     alive. Any interrupt can return the processor to normal running.
Deep sleep or light hibernation
   In addition to the processor core being disabled, some (possibly all) on-chip
   peripherals can be configured to turn off. Be careful not to turn off the subsystem
   that generates the interrupt that will wake up the processor.
Deep hibernation or power down
   The processor chooses which on-chip peripherals to turn off (usually almost all
   of them). RAM is usually left in an unstable state, but the processor registers are
   retained, so the system doesn’t need initialization on boot. Usually only a wakeup
   pin or a small subset of interrupts can restart the processor.
Power off
   The processor does not retain any memory and starts from a completely clean
   state.
Deeper sleep modes place the processor into a lower-power state but take longer to
wake from, increasing system latency. You’ll need to spend some time with the user
manual to determine how to achieve the lowest power level possible that will meet
your product’s needs.
The wake-up interrupts could be buttons, timers, other chips (e.g., ADC conversion
complete), or traffic on a communications bus. It depends on your processor (and
your sleep level).
Once you’ve determined that your processor can sleep, how do you design a system to
make the best use of it? We’ll explore that next.

                                                          Putting the Processor to Sleep   |   365
Interrupt-Based Code Flow Model
Understanding the interrupt-based code flow model is critical for power-sensitive
applications. “Main Loops” on page 166 described how to set up your code to maxi‐
mize sleep using interrupts and events.
Instead of idling, the microprocessor spends time sleeping, waking up only when an
interrupt occurs, then handling the interrupt and going back to sleep. The goal is to
maximize the amount of time the processor is asleep, thereby maximizing power effi‐
ciency. See Figure 13-2 for a flowchart describing the interrupt-based code flow
model.

Figure 13-2. Interrupt-based code flowchart

The interrupt may be generated from a peripheral to indicate it needs processor
attention (like an ADC finishing with its data, needing the processor to read the
result and start another conversion). In other systems, the interrupt may be generated
by a button the user presses or a sensor rising above a threshold. The interrupts may
also be generated internally, for example, by a timer.
When an interrupt occurs, the processor wakes up and calls the appropriate ISR. The
ISR sets a flag to indicate the cause for the wake-up and modifies the sleep register to
keep the processor awake. When the ISR returns, because the sleep register is set to

awake, the main loop runs. The main loop checks each possible flag and, when it
finds a flag set, runs the appropriate handler (also clearing the flag). When the main
loop completes and all of the flags have been cleared, the processor returns to sleep
mode. Figure 13-2 illustrates the general idea with two handlers to check.
Let’s say you have a processor that can sleep. To experiment, start with a timer inter‐
rupt. These are common in the interrupt flow model because the timer lets you wake
up to do any necessary housekeeping. Run the processor without sleep, and set up an
interrupt to run so it toggles an output line or LED. The frequency doesn’t matter,
though a slow interrupt is better. I’d recommend about twice per second (2 Hz). Mea‐
sure the current of the system as described in “Measuring Power Consumption” on
page 357.
Now set your processor to sleep between interrupts. From the outside, the processor
behaves the same. However, when you measure the system current, it should be
smaller. How much smaller depends on many aspects of your system. For instance, I
tried this procedure with the Texas Instruments (TI) MSP430 Launchpad develop‐
ment kit using the G2231 processor. When it was in a while loop, waiting for the next
timer interrupt, the system consumed 9 mW (3 mA at 3 V). When I let it enter a low-
power mode instead of idling in the while loop, the results were dramatically differ‐
ent. I used the third level of sleep (the processor has four). However, even with a
handy 100 Ω resistor, I couldn’t measure any voltage drop over the resistor with my
cheapo DMM. When I was consuming 3 mA with the 100 Ω resistor, I got about 300
mV of drop. Lower current implies lower voltage, of course. But my DMM wasn’t
sensitive enough to make the measurement in the low-power state.
The datasheet informed me that the current should be about 0.9 μA (2.7 μW) in this
state, which would require additional special tools for me to measure (and/or a much
larger resistor, probably 100 kΩ). The timer interrupt to toggle the LED must have
spent some time at 3 mA, but the processor woke up, set the timer flag, toggled the
LED in the main loop, and went back to sleep before it could make a blip on my
meter. Remember, energy efficiency is about time as well as current.
The processor on TI’s Launchpad kit is designed to be super low power when it is
sleeping, so the results might not be so dramatic on another device.

A Closer Look at the Main Loop
Handling the interrupts in the main loop allows you to keep the interrupt service
routines short, because all they do is set a couple of flags and exit. Long interrupts
tend to decrease system responsiveness. Plus, going through the main loop can aid in
debugging, as the system revolves around sleeping and the flags set by the most
recent interrupts. (If you can output the cause variable on every pass, you’ll get a
good view of what the system is doing.) Note that additional interrupts may happen
while executing the handlers for the interrupt that caused the processor to wake up.

                                                          Putting the Processor to Sleep   |   367
By putting the flags in the bits of a variable (or two), it becomes simple to check that
all interrupts have been processed:
      volatile uint16_t gInterruptCause = 0; // Bitmasked flags that describe
                                             // which interrupt has occurred

      void main(){
          uint16_t cause;
          Initialize();
          while (1) { // atomic interrupt-safe read of gInterruptCause
              InterruptsOff();
              cause = gInterruptCause;
              InterruptsOn();

                while (cause) {
                    // each handler will clear the relevant bit in
                    // gInterruptCause
                    if (cause & 0x01) { HandleSlowTimer();}
                    if (cause & 0x02) { HandleADCConversion();}
                    // while awake, make sure the watchdog stays happy
                    FeedWatchdog();
                    InterruptsOff();
                    cause = gInterruptCause;
                    InterruptsOn();
                }
                // need to read the cause register again without allowing
                // any new interrupts:
                InterruptsOff();
                if (gInterruptCause == 0) {
                    InterruptsOn();
                    // an interrupt will cause a wake-up and
                    // run the while loop
                    GoToSleep();
                  }
                InterruptsOn();
          }
      } // end main
The interrupts themselves just need to set the flag and modify the sleep register to
keep the CPU awake after they return. The handlers will perform the necessary
actions and clear the appropriate bits in the cause register (gInterruptCause) in an
interrupt-safe manner.

                    Remember that working with interrupts can be tricky due to race
                    conditions. See Chapter 5 for more tips on interrupts.

If you have multiple power modes and need to decide which to enter when your main
loop has finished, you may need to examine a lot of states scattered through your sys‐
tem. For example, if a peripheral is busy and can’t be shut down, or if a communica‐
tion bus remains active, you may not be able to achieve the lower states of sleep until
they have finished. One option is to have a power management module with a table
of registered function pointers. Each module that might preclude some sleep level
registers a callback. When considering the next sleep state, all functions in the table
get called and can veto certain sleep levels.

Processor Watchdog
In “Watchdog” on page 164, I talked about the importance of having a watchdog and
how you shouldn’t use a timer interrupt to service the watchdog. Now that your sys‐
tem is entirely interrupt-based, how are you going to make sure the watchdog
remains content?
In the lightest levels of sleep, your processor will probably let the watchdog continue
to run. The processor may let you configure whether you want the watchdog to run
while the processor is asleep (consuming some power during sleep and forcing the
processor to wake up to service it) or want to have the watchdog sleep when the pro‐
cessor does (losing a fail-safe mechanism for your system). Recognizing the trade-off
will help you make the right decision for your system.
If you leave the watchdog on, you may need to set a timer to wake the processor up
before the watchdog expires. This goes against the grain of my earlier advice. How‐
ever, here the watchdog is not only verifying that the system is running properly, but
also verifying that the system is waking up from sleep properly.

               For processors with internal watchdogs, you may not need to
               worry: deep sleep automatically disables the watchdog.

Avoid Frequent Wake-Ups
Since each wake-up requires some overhead from the chip (and the deeper the sleep,
the more overhead is required), avoid frequent wake-ups. If you have a low-priority
task that doesn’t have a hard real-time requirement, piggyback it on another task.
This spreads the overhead of waking up the processor over several tasks.
Although a timer to do housekeeping can be valuable, it may be better to check
whether enough time has passed to do the low-priority tasks and reset the timer so
you can skip a wake-up.

                                                          Putting the Processor to Sleep   |   369
Chained Processors
It is pretty common to have a small, very efficient processor monitor the important
signals, waking up a larger processor when needed. In this case the larger processor
requires more power to wake up (and possibly more time if it is running an operating
system). So the small processor does the housekeeping: checking for buttons pressed,
looking for lower power conditions that indicate the system should shut down, or
waking the large processor due to a preset alarm.
In such systems, both processors spend as much time asleep as possible, but the sys‐
tem is designed so that the interrupts get triaged in the small processor, which can opt
to handle them itself or wake up its larger partner.

Further Reading
As noted in Chapter 3, for a gentle introduction to electronics, I recommend Make:
Electronics. This step-by-step introduction to putting a system together (and solder‐
ing) is an easy read.
For a more serious look at electrical engineering, The Art of Electronics by Paul Horo‐
witz and Winfield Hill (Cambridge University Press) is the seminal book, along the
lines of Knuth’s The Art of Computer Programming, discussed in Chapter 12.
If you are somewhere in between those two and looking for a more intuitive grasp of
analog components, try There Are No Electrons: Electronics for Earthlings by Kenn
Amdahl (Clearwater Publishing). This fun book gets away from the plumbing model
of electronics and gives you a different story about how resistors and capacitors work.
The GitHub repository for this book contains a Power_consumption_Wordy_ring.xlx
worksheet showing the calculation process from the engineering perspective (build‐
ing it up from components and readings to determine features) and from the design
perspective (identifying use goals and determining features based on those and com‐
ponent information).

                 Interview Question: Is the Fridge Light On?
In two minutes, how many different ways can you figure out how to tell whether the light
in a fridge is going off when you shut the door? Please don’t damage the fridge. (Thanks
to Jen Costillo for this question.)
This question is all about the quantity and creativity of solutions offered. This is not a
question with a lot of depth (though I will ask a follow-up if I want more depth). Lots
of people come up with the common solutions, some of which are:

  • Take a video recording
  • Wireless (and presumably battery-powered) light sensor
  • Solar panel charger (check the charge of a battery after a period of time, with and
    without the door open)
  • Disable the cooling assembly so the fridge uses only a small amount of power,
    then check the difference in current with the door open and closed
  • With the door open, press the door-closing button to see what happens

Interviewees get credit for the number of solutions, uniqueness of them, what implicit
assumptions they make, and how they apply the scientific method to solve the prob‐
lem. I like to see them note the trade-offs in terms of time and cost, but I’d rather they
spend the time generating different answers.
There seem to be three types of responses when faced with this question. First (and
worst) are the interviewees who come up with only one of these and can’t figure
something else out, even with prompting. Second (and most common) are the inter‐
viewees who come up with a solution and tweak one thing at a time until they get to
another solution. They generally rack up enough solutions and often surprise me
with a few really creative ones. The last set of responses can only be classified as
mildly insane. These are the most fun, and as long as they manage to get a few of the
more sensible answers, these are the best people to work with.
One person suggested a statistical method: First, you get 100 units. Leave the door
open on 50 of them and the door closed on 50. Determine the mean time between
failure (MTBF) for the lightbulbs in the open units. Now open all the closed doors
and wait for those to fail. If they fail about the same time as the initially opened ones,
then the light was off with the door closed.
This isn’t necessarily sensible or easily accomplished in a reasonable amount of time
for testing the lights in fridges, but there are times when this sort of method will work
very well. It gets bonus points for extra creativity.

                                                                       Further Reading   |   371
