                                                                         CHAPTER 14
                                           Motors and Movement

The first time I made a motor move under my software’s control was the moment I
fell in love with embedded systems. It is more than blinking lights and sensing the
environment. There is something magical about having my code change the world.
Since then, I’ve caused many small fires trying to recapture that rush. If your hard‐
ware is good and your software pays attention, perhaps you can learn from my find‐
ings instead of recreating them.

Creating Movement
Actuators are what your software uses to make a mechanical impact on its environ‐
ment. The simplest actuator is a solenoid, which is kind of like a button in reverse. It
is an electromagnet that will move a piece of metal: if you set it high, the solenoid is
in one position; if you set it low, the solenoid is in another. These are useful for lock‐
ing things or turning valves on and off.
Haptics are usually piezo buzzers or vibration motors that are used as part of a user
interface (like your phone in vibrate mode). While these are often on/off as well,
sometimes you can drive them with different frequencies to create musical tones as
well as vibration. (Piezos can also be used as speakers, but that’s a bit more
complicated.)
However, moving things is a lot more fun if you use a motor that can do more than
on/off or buzz a tune.
Whether you are making a bipedal robot or moving a widget along a conveyor belt,
motors are where the systems really get to play in the real world. While motors are
nifty and you should definitely try them out, good motor control requires its own

book. I’ll list some things to look for, but I can’t give you anything more than a brief
orientation to motors.

                    Just as you can buy an easier implementation using a digital sensor,
                    some motor assemblies include a motor controller chip that will
                    implement a control algorithm compatible with the style of motor.
                    The controller will provide a simple API to your processor as well
                    as increase the precision and life of the motor.

There are many types of motors, and your choice will be affected by such characteris‐
tics as the life-span of the device, torque (turning power), energy efficiency, and
power consumption.
A stepper motor is a popular choice, though it can be relatively expensive. A stepper
motor can be positioned precisely and will stay there (high holding torque). These are
the simplest motors to use because you can run them in an open loop, without any
feedback mechanism. Because they have a number of magnets to turn the motor
shaft, stepper motors require multiple I/O lines. Each I/O line gets energized to cause
the shaft to step forward to the next position (this can cause a bit of a jerk). When
you want the motor to go smoothly in one direction, you need to make the I/O lines
dance in a complicated pattern dictated by its datasheet (this dance is called
commutation).
At the opposite end of the motor spectrum is a brushed DC motor. This is very cheap
and usually requires only one I/O line (two if you want it to be able to go backward).
The speed of the motor depends on the voltage applied. You can use PWM to give
you more control than the binary choice between “off ” and “running full speed.”
Motors usually don’t like to be jerked on and off in a digital manner, so using PWM
(and some relatively simple drive circuitry) to give a smoother velocity profile will
increase your motor’s life-span (we saw PWM control in Chapter 4). A difficulty with
DC motors can be stopping them at the precise position you want; they often require
a feedback control system to achieve this.

                    The torque of a brushed DC motor depends on the current. But
                    your processor probably sources only enough current to drive a
                    very wimpy DC motor, and current surges can damage your I/O
                    lines. So these I/O lines will go through some additional circuitry
                    to get more oomph.

A brushless motor usually has a longer life-span because it doesn’t have the jerkiness
of the stepper or any parts (brushes) that touch. As with a stepper motor, it needs a
few I/O lines working together to achieve rotation. As with a brushed DC motor,
controlling the speed is easier than controlling the position. Brushless motors are

power efficient, quiet, and usually priced between stepper and brushed DC motors
with similar characteristics. Finally, brushless motors can be DC motors or can use
alternating current. Linear motors are similar to brushless motors but they go in a
straight line instead of around in circles. They are also similar to solenoids but with
more granular control.

               The voice coil in a speaker is an example of a brushless DC linear
               motor. If you have a spare speaker lying around, try connecting a
               battery across the terminals and watch it work at DC. (Note:
               depending on the speaker and the battery, you may damage the
               speaker, so start small.)

There is one more very important motor type: servo motors are stepper or DC motors
that contain a controller to serve as a built-in feedback mechanism. Essentially, servo
motors aren’t motors but small systems that contain a motor. You can buy servo
motors, but you may be building one as part of your system.

Position Encoding
The second most important thing to understand about your motor system is this:
how will you know when it gets to wherever it is going? With a stepper motor, you
can count the steps from where you are to where you want to be. However, how do
you know where you are starting from?
If your position feedback method gives you an absolute position, you can just read
that. However, many systems use a cheaper position sensor that will give you only a
relative position, so you need to know where the start of the measuring stick is
located.
Most motors (stepper or not) have a home sensor that indicates the absolute position
in one particular location along the motor’s travel. Usually home is at an extreme
(e.g., all the way to the left or at the bottom), although sometimes home is the center
of travel instead of one edge. Finding home is a matter of moving the motor slowly in
that direction until the home position is sensed (sometimes with an optical sensor or
contact switch). If the home is at one extreme, it serves as the zero position of the
system, and other positions are counted from there. Once your motor is in its home
position, you can use relative positioning to start moving to a location.
In a stepper motor, the relative position is calculated based on motor steps. For any
other type of motor, you’ll need another type of sensor called an encoder. It will often
be an optical encoder that uses a series of alternating areas (black/white, reflective/
matte, opaque/transparent) that lets your software treat the signal as a digital input.

                                                                    Position Encoding   |   375
A linear encoder measures the position of the motor along a straight line and is usu‐
ally incremental, so the software must keep track of where it is in reference to a home
position.
A rotary encoder measures the angle of the motor shaft. These can get complex as
you increase position precision. Rotary encoders usually have multiple circles of
alternating patterns. For example, three circles will need three sensors, which go to
three GPIOs. In your code, you’ll get three bits of data to let you know which of the
eight (23) positions your motor is in, measuring off eighths of a circle, which is not a
lot of accuracy. But if your motor moves 1 mm per full turn, it may be enough.
Figure 14-1 shows a simple motor system with some PWM control lines going to a
motor. As the motor rotates, the encoder rotates with it (the dashed lines indicate the
mechanical black box that includes gears and whatnot). An optical sensor sees the
black and white areas on the encoder. The sensor connects to a counter on the pro‐
cessor and measures the relative position.
Initially, the motor goes through its homing procedure, where it moves in one direc‐
tion until it sees the desired edge on the home sensor. Once there, the software can
begin to count changes in position using the encoder. Your processor probably has a
feature that will do this sort of counting; check the “Counter/Timer” section of your
user manual.

Figure 14-1. Motor and encoder system.

Driving a Simple DC Motor with PWM
For DC motors, speed is proportional to the voltage you supply. They are usually
controlled by PWMs as shown in Figure 14-1. The higher the duty cycle of the PWM,
the higher the average voltage, and the faster the motor turns.
However, the processor GPIO driving the PWM is not ever directly connected to the
motor. Motors require much more current than your processor I/O lines can supply.

Instead, the GPIO’s PWM output goes through a transistor1 which switches the volt‐
age on and off from a higher current power source. The simplest way to think about
these is that they are automatic doors: when your code uses an I/O pin to press on the
FET, it opens a pathway between the motor and power source. If you don’t do this,
your processor’s pin (or the whole processor) will likely fail, possibly letting out the
magic smoke.
If you want the motor to turn the other way, you need to make the voltage negative.
This usually involves an H-bridge, a circuit or part of a motor driver chip that allows
the voltage to go positive or negative, allowing a motor to go forward or backward.
Where voltage controls the speed of the motor, current controls the torque (the force
of the rotation). Starting from a dead stop is hard on a DC motor; it wants to stay as it
is. So it requires quite a bit of current to get into motion (DC motors are couch pota‐
toes). So whether you are accelerating or working against an opposing force, generat‐
ing torque requires a lot of current.
As described in Chapter 13, current is additive in the system. If you have a processor
that consumes 3 mA when running and a motor that consumes 2 A, your system will
need at least 2.003 A. In low-power systems with motors, the motors are usually the
largest consumer of power.
Motors draw (sink) a lot of current: they need it to move. Most systems separate the
supplies for the microprocessor and motor to avoid problems. Note that when
motors start moving, they are working against inertia, which means there may be a
sudden rush of current. This inrush current can cause lots of problems, including
reducing the system voltage (which can cause the processor to reset). A battery-
powered system is especially vulnerable to this as the available current at low battery
levels may not be the same as it is at full charge.

                    Batteries in series give you more voltage; batteries in parallel give
                    you more current.

So how much current do you need? Read the motor datasheet if you have it. For sim‐
ple DC motors, you can use the tools you learned about in “Measuring Power Con‐
sumption” on page 357: essentially, measure the motor’s current draw with your

1 These transistors are chips external to your processor. Broadly speaking, they can be bipolar junction transis‐
  tors (BJT) or field-effect transistors (FET). Each of these transistor categories has multiple subtypes, such as
  the insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) or the metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect-transistor (MOS‐
  FET). These terms mean important things to some people, but it is OK for you and I to forget them.

                                                                      Driving a Simple DC Motor with PWM    |   377
power supply. This may not give you a precise value for inrush current, but it can give
you an idea of the magnitude of current to expect.

                   One way to find a motor’s max current is to make it stall (force it to
                   stop moving), though this is bad for the motor, so don’t do it often.

                                   Jerk, Snap, Crackle, Pop
  To start with, we need some equations of motion:
       distance = velocity * time
       velocity = acceleration * time
  Turning these around:
       velocity = distance / time
       acceleration = velocity / time
  Then we can say smart-sounding things like velocity is the derivative of displacement
  (distance) and acceleration is the derivative of velocity. Which just means that veloc‐
  ity is how distance changes with respect to time; acceleration is how velocity changes
  (with respect to time).
  Torque is different; it is related to rotation and force, where force is the same as New‐
  ton’s law:
       force = mass * acceleration
  I think of torque as oomph: the ability of a motor to spin against resistance. That
  resistance may be me holding the motor in place or a gear that is jammed. A low-
  torque motor will just sit there (getting hot, maybe making sounds); a high-torque
  motor will spin out of my hands or crush the jammed gear.
  Since torque is related to both mass and acceleration, higher torque motors can also
  change their speed more rapidly as well as move larger masses.
  Anyway, I don’t want to talk about torque. I want to mention that the derivative of
  acceleration is jerk. This is aptly named: motors with rapid changes in acceleration
  cause jerky movements. It also causes vibration and additional wear and tear on your
  motors. Reduce jerk by smoothly changing acceleration.
  The derivative of jerk is snap. The derivative of snap is crackle. The derivative of
  crackle is pop. You don’t need to know this to work on motors (or if you do, you’ve
  gone beyond my motor experience). But isn’t it awesome?

Motor Control
In feed-forward control (aka open-loop control), you use how the motor is expected to
work to tell it to go places. For example, for stepper motors, you can tell them to take
100 steps and they do. Their steps are of a known size, so you have a good reason to
believe you know where you are.
In feedback control (aka closed-loop control), you use a sensor to measure what the
motor is doing, changing the commands (or voltage) to the motor based on what you
measure. However, this is not as simple as telling it to go until you get to a position
and then telling it to stop. By then, the motor has overshot the position. You could tell
it to go back, but then you will overshoot again. Unless you are trying to rock a baby,
you don’t want to keep going back and forth like that.

PID Control
The most common way to handle this problem is to use PID control. PID stands for
proportional, integral, and derivative. Each term handles a part of the problem, and
together they can tell you how much power to send to the motor (usually in terms of
PWM level). The procedure starts with an error measurement that is simply the dif‐
ference in position between where the motor currently is (the process value, or PV)
and where you want it to be (the set point, or SP).
The proportional term is easy to understand. It is just a constant multiplied by that
position error:
    error = goalPosition – currentPosition;
    PID.proportionalTerm = PID.proportionalConstant * error;
So when the motor is far from the goal, your software gives it a lot of juice; whereas
when you are close to the goal, it powers down. Sometimes this is all you need. How‐
ever, starting the motor full-on when you are far away from the target will cause it to
jerk, which is bad for it. Further, you may still overshoot the target, leading to oscilla‐
tions around the goal position. Or, if your error is small, the proportional term will
never give the motor enough power to actually move, so you end up stuck in not
quite the right position (a steady state error).
The integral term helps these problems by adding up the error over time:
    PID.integralSum += error;
    PID.integralTerm = PID.integralConstant * PID.integralSum;
Not only is the integral term proportional to the amount of error (as the proportional
term is), it also takes into account how long there has been error. After the motor has
been commanded to move, the error has been around for only a short time. But after
a few cycles of the PID control loop, if the motor hasn’t gotten close to its destination,
the integral term lends oomph, accelerating toward the goal. However, it is kind of

                                                                        Motor Control   |   379
like momentum. Once the integral term gets going, it tends to cause an overshoot,
one even worse than the proportional term would alone. Although the controller will
find its way back to the goal position—sans oscillation or constant error, thanks to
the integral term—it would be better not to overshoot the target. This is where the
derivative term comes in:
      PID.derivativeTerm = PID.derivativeConstant * (error – previousError);
This makes the controller decrease the output if the error is decreasing. This adds
some friction to balance the proportional and integral terms, usually counteracting
the PI terms as the error term gets smaller.
The output of the PID controller is the addition of these three terms. This output
then goes to the motor driver code, which turns it into a PWM duty cycle.
Figure 14-2 shows a reasonably well-tuned interaction between the terms and their
output as the system is commanded to go to a set point (position). Note that the out‐
put of the system feeds back into the controller, so this is a feedback system. As such,
it can be unstable. Too much proportional control can make the motor oscillate (or
ring). Too much integral control, and the motor may smash itself to bits as it over‐
shoots the position.

Figure 14-2. PID response to a change in set point, such as a motor being commanded to
a new position. The output signal goes to the motor driver (which divides by 2 and out‐
puts it as a PWM duty cycle).

Error signals are often noisy. If they are too noisy, the derivative term can lead to ran‐
dom results. Feedback systems that get out of control can do dangerous things.

                Consider including limit switches in your design. Like the home
                sensor, limit switches can identify absolute positions, though they
                are usually put in positions where the motor is likely to fail or
                become uncontrollable.

However, there are many, many engineering problems where a PID controller pro‐
vides a good solution. I’ve used PIDs with motors, heaters, and modeling spring sys‐
tems. This control method is widely used and well understood; consider it an
engineering design pattern. And you can see from the earlier code snippets that
implementing one in software is simple.
However, those constants? The ones that describe how much weight each PID term
brings to the output? Figuring those out is a painful process called tuning. The field
does provide some easy guidelines: start with proportional control until you get it
working pretty well, then add derivative control to smooth out overshoot, then (if
necessary) add integral control to avoid smaller errors. But three weeks after the
project was supposed to end, you may still be cursing the person who gave you this
advice, telling you to just tweak the parameters until the motor works.
There are also some mathematical tools to help you with tuning (e.g., the Ziegler-
Nichols method). Despite the mathematical tedium and having to estimate some
inputs (the real world doesn’t match the mathematical ideal), I recommend using
these in addition to trial and error. But these methods often require a formal and
deep understanding of the problem.
Note that the PID concept is pretty standard, but implementations vary. For example,
because the derivative term is sensitive to noise in the error signal, many implementa‐
tions will use an average of error over several samples. This hardens the derivative
term against noise-induced insanity, but makes it less responsive to the system. There
are many dozens of these little tweaks to ensure better performance and deal with
system-specific issues.

                At this point, I have given you enough information to be danger‐
                ous, but not enough to do a good job. “Further Reading” on page
                387 suggests some sources to help you implement and tune a PID
                controller (and some other control methodologies).

                                                                         Motor Control   |   381
Motion Profiles
How do you want your motor to move? Forget all that PID stuff, think about you
being in a tiny car, driving that motor. Do you have a heavy foot on the gas and
brake? Accelerate hard until you get halfway there, and then decelerate hard?
This type of motion is called a triangular motion profile. See Figure 14-3. You’ll get
there as fast as possible, but is that good for the motor? Or the passengers?

Figure 14-3. Maximum acceleration, then maximum deceleration will get you there fast‐
est, but is tough on your parts.

So another option is to consider something a little gentler: trapezoidal motion. In
Figure 14-4, you can see it takes longer to get to the same point, but the motor doesn’t
have to jerk from full positive acceleration to full negative. (Remember, jerk is the
derivative of acceleration: it looks like jerkiness or vibration on the motor.)

Figure 14-4. In a trapezoidal motion profile, the system accelerates to a reasonable speed
and gets to the goal position a little later.

Note that because speed is related to input voltage, it is often easier to control than
position, even with position feedback. When writing motion profile code, you often
need to consider the goal position in terms of speed (voltage) and time. This is why
the triangular and trapezoidal motion profiles describe the shape of the velocity
curve, not the position.

                Many processor vendors will offer a motor control library tuned to
                your processor’s features. Look in their application notes. These
                libraries will probably do the math for you so you can have point-
                to-point position moves instead of worrying about velocity and
                acceleration.

                                                                        Motor Control   |   383
An even better profile would smooth out the acceleration even more, reducing the
jerk until it no longer matters. This is usually called an S-curve as shown in
Figure 14-5.

Figure 14-5. An S-curve motion profile reduces jerkiness, leading to far smoother
motion.

An S-curve motion profile will take longer than a triangular profile but can be faster
than a trapezoidal profile, depending on the maximum speed goal of the motor.

Ten Things I Hate About Motors
I love motors. They do so much: a motor can close a door or make a robot move. A
motor can pump liquids into DNA scanners or provide a boost in an electric bike.
The applications are endless and fascinating.
But there are things I hate about motors:

Servos aren’t even a type of motor (except when they are hobby servos).
    Unlike DC, brushless DC, or stepper motors, a servo is simply any kind of motor
    system with a position feedback. There is no standardization. The exceptions to
    this are hobby servos (or RC servos) which have two power wires and one con‐
    trol wire. They use a potentiometer for simple feedback control on the motor.
Motors can cause the processor to reset.
   If motor power is connected to the processor power, then motor moves may
   cause the processor voltage to sag, causing brownouts. These may lead to resets
   or odd behavior involving hard faults.
    The power source for the processor needs to be isolated from the motor supply
    with lots of decoupling between them. (Decoupling usually means lots of capaci‐
    tors.) You must also use a MOSFET or other transistor circuit to keep the GPIOs
    on the processor safe from the current that the motor sinks and the transients
    starting a motor can cause.
Motors are not power efficient.
   Where a system with two hundred 5 mA LEDs may require about 1 A of power,
   that’s probably what a single small motor needs. As you work with motors, your
   power budget is probably mostly consumed by the motors.
Motors and their driver chips get hot.
   All that power has to go somewhere and not all of it makes it into motion. A lot
   of the power goes to the driver chips (they can get so hot that they desolder
   themselves, though that usually indicates a problem in the circuit design). Imper‐
   fect commutation can cause a lot of problems, but so can jams and stalls.
Motors break things.
   Depending on the gearing you have, your motor may be too fast or too powerful,
   so that when you accidentally send a command you shouldn’t have (whoops,
   didn’t check for a negative PWM?), suddenly, parts are flying across the room.
   Motors don’t have emergency stops for human safety (until we develop them).
Motors can draw excessive current when starting up. Or holding position. Or when they
find a dust mote to play with.
     DC motors use a lot of current when starting and when stalled. Stepper motors
     use a lot of current standing still (holding position).
    The usual heuristic is that the supply needs to source and sink three times the
    maximum current needed for a normal full load. Many power supplies do not
    sink current at all.
    For example, connect a DC motor directly to a linear voltage regulator. The
    motor turns on OK, but when turned off, the regulator can’t absorb current com‐
    ing back from the load. That’s why there is a snubber diode to conduct the

                                                       Ten Things I Hate About Motors   |   385
      reverse current to a safe place, away from the regulator. Without the snubber, the
      reverse current will cause a voltage spike. (An H-bridge is the fancy way to solve
      this problem.)
      DC motors with “noisy brushes” turn themselves on and off many times a second
      as the brushes make intermittent contact with the armature. So this isn’t an only-
      when-you-stop phenomenon; it happens all the time.
Motors catch fire.
   Hardware costs money. It takes time to put together. Minor coding issues can
   lead to costly and dangerous consequences. (OK, often hilarious consequences,
   too, but that doesn’t belong in a list of why I hate motors.) Admitting to your EE
   that you blew up another FET because you tried to control the motor without
   disabling the debug UART interrupt, well, I’ve been there and I feel for you.
   Work on the very lowest levels first and get a solid base before trying to do fancy
   motion profiles.
Motor control can be trivially easy or impossibly hard.
   Motor control is an entire field of study. If you are lucky, you can afford to buy a
   good servo motor that will go where commanded with power circuitry to sup‐
   port any necessary movement. If you aren’t, well, commutation can make for
   really pretty oscilloscope traces as you try to determine why it isn’t quite right
   and the FETs keep blowing.
Snippy diodes. Snobby diodes. Snubber diodes. Flyback diodes. Transient suppression
diodes (TSDs). Shoot through current. Actually, all of analog electronics.
    Motors use power to turn around, right? What happens when they stop? The
    power doesn’t suddenly disappear; the motor can return a little bit of power to
    the circuit as it jerks to a halt. This isn’t good for the circuit, so electrical engi‐
    neers put in snubber or flyback diodes to prevent breakage. Note: if you have a
    motor that goes both directions and are using an H-Bridge, that already has
    snubber diodes.
      In truth, none of electronics really is as instantaneous or clean as we pretend, and
      motor systems tend to shatter these illusions. It takes time for the FETs to turn
      on. When you have multiples of them (like with that H-Bridge), sometimes they
      take time to change states, which can cause them to crowbar—get stuck in a bad
      position, usually shorting the power to ground and ending the world (for your
      device).
Only five of these will be related to your motor subsystem.
    The word “motor” is like the word “sensor.” Sure there are similarities between
    different types, but there are just as many differences. It isn’t sufficient to say
    “motor” and know what kind of impact that will have on the system. Motors are

    driven with different mechanisms (PWM, communication, driver chips that do
    PWM or commutation). Position feedback comes in many forms.
    Choosing a motor depends on your application. You’ll need to define your goals
    for torque, speed, accuracy, precision, cost, life-span, and control mechanism.
    The good news is that you have many options. The bad news is that you have
    many options.

Further Reading
Adafruit has a motor selection guide that gives pros and cons of each type and follows
up with a number of more specific tutorials about running each kind of motor.
Control theory is not for the faint of heart. However, this is an area kids are learning
because they need it for FIRST Robotics competitions. So instead of the rigorous and
math-heavy tomes I’d usually suggest, I encourage you to look at:

  • CTRL ALT FTC is a complete control theory class for FIRST Tech Challenge. It
    includes code, diagrams, videos, and exercises. It starts with basic on/off control
    and builds up to PID controllers, motion profiles, and more advanced topics.
  • WPILib’s “Advanced Controls” documentation describes how its library works,
    which is great, but the important information is how all this works together,
    which is something you can use on your system.

For a more book-based approach to motor control and other control schemes, I like
The Art of Control Engineering by Ken Dutton, Steve Thompson, and Bill Barraclough
(Addison-Wesley). It is a little more math-filled than it needs to be, but still pretty
useful for actual implementation.
Many processor vendor application notes have information about using their prod‐
ucts to control motors. These can describe libraries already written for you or provide
theory. See this book’s GitHub repository for more information from various
vendors.

                           Interview Question: Teach Me
  How does an H-Bridge work?
  I had a terrible interview at a small company I really wanted to work at. I was well-
  suited to the job and the senior EE and I hit it off immediately. Then came in a junior
  EE who asked me about modern C++ language features (ones I was confident their
  embedded compiler didn’t support).
  She was very junior (to me, to her EE, to the industry). Preparing for what was proba‐
  bly the first time as an interviewer, she’d looked up questions on the internet, detailed

                                                                        Further Reading   |   387
  points about C++. But she didn’t understand them. She just knew I wasn’t giving the
  answer the internet wanted. And her EE was there, watching and nodding along with
  me (not her). She felt increasingly frustrated as I essentially belittled her questions in
  front of her boss.
  There are two lessons here.
  First, don’t be me; I didn’t get the job because I was a jerk to her. I should have been
  looking to help her understand that her questions weren’t relevant, possibly suggested
  different questions for the next interview. Your role as a senior engineer is to help
  junior engineers.
  Second, if you are the interviewer for a position for which you don’t have domain
  knowledge, don’t fake it. I’d already established my technical ability for the job, what
  she should have been looking for was whether we could work together.
  Funny enough, it was only a few months later that I was interviewing EE candidates.
  Other than basic electronics, I couldn’t figure out what to ask so that I’d be able to
  guide them if they got it wrong. I ended up asking about an H-Bridge because I don’t
  understand the circuit for more than about two weeks at a time. It was important that
  the candidate could explain it to me without making me feel stupid. And after the
  interview I could look up the answer and make sure the internet agreed it made sense
  with my new understanding.
  Essentially, I used my ignorance to help me find people I could learn from instead of
  hoping I could fake being an expert.
  To that junior EE who has probably gone on to a spectacular career, thank you for
  helping me realize that one of my goals for being an interviewer is to identify people I
  do (and don’t) want to work with. And I’m still very, very sorry I made you cry.

