
Glossary

This glossary provides a short definition of the most important non-trivial technical terms used in this book.

C
CPP file
A file in which definitions of variables and non-inline functions are located. Most of the executable (as
opposed to declarative) code of a program is normally placed in CPP files. They are named CPP files
because they usually have the suffix .cpp. However, for historical reasons, the suffix also might be .C, .c,
.cc, or .cxx. See also header file and translation unit.

F
forwarding reference
One of two terms for rvalue references of the form T&& where T is a deducible template parameter. Special
rules that differ from ordinary rvalue references apply (see perfect forwarding). The term was introduced by
C++17 as a replacement for universal reference because the primary use of such a reference is to forward
objects. However, note that it does not automatically forward. That is, the term does not describe what it is
but rather what it is typically used for.

full specialization
An alternative definition for a (primary) template that no longer depends on any template parameter.

G
glvalue
A category of expressions that produce a location for a stored value (generalized localizable value). A
glvalue can be an lvalue or an xvalue. The chapter about value categories describes details.

234                                                                                                Glossary

H
header file
A file meant to become part of a translation unit through a #include directive. Such files often contain
declarations of variables and functions that are referred to from more than one translation unit, as well as
definitions of types, inline functions, templates, constants, and macros. They usually have a suffix such as
.hpp, .h, .H, .hh, or .hxx. They are also called include files. See also CPP file and translation unit.

I
include file
See header file.

incomplete type
A class, struct, or unscoped enumeration type that is declared but not defined, an array of unknown size,
void (optionally with const and/or volatile), or an array of an incomplete element type.

L
lvalue
A category of expressions that produce a location for a stored value that is not assumed to be movable (i.e.,
glvalues that are not xvalues). Typical examples are expressions that denote named objects, string literals,
and (references to) functions. The chapter about value categories describes details.

N
named return value optimization (NRVO)
A feature that allows us to optimize away the creation of a return value from a named object in a return
statement. If we already have a local object that we return in a function by value, the compiler can use the
object directly as a return value instead of copying or moving it.
Note that the named return value optimization differs from the return value optimization (RVO), which is
the optimization for returning an object created on the fly in the return statement. The named return value
optimization is optional in all versions of C++. If the compiler does not generate corresponding code, move
semantics is used to create the return value.

P
prvalue
A category of expressions that perform initializations. Prvalues can be assumed to designate pure mathe-
matical value such as 1 or true and temporaries (especially values returned by value). Any rvalue before
C++11 is a prvalue in C++11. The chapter about value categories describes details.

Glossary                                                                                                  235

R
return value optimization (RVO)
A feature that allows us to optimize away the creation of a return value from a temporary object that is
created in the return statement. When we create the return value in the return statement on the fly and
return it by value, the compiler can use the temporary object directly as a return value instead of copying or
moving it.
Note that the return value optimization differs from the named return value optimization (NRVO), which
is the optimization for returning a named local object. The return value optimization was optional before
C++17 but is mandatory since C++17 (named return value optimization is still optional).

rvalue
A category of expressions that are not lvalues. An rvalue can be a prvalue (such as a temporary object
without name) or an xvalue (e.g., an lvalue marked with std::move()). What was called an rvalue before
C++11 is called a prvalue since C++11. The chapter about value categories describes details.

S
small/short string optimization (SSO)
An approach to save allocating memory for short strings by always reserving memory for a certain number
of characters. A typical value in standard library implementations is to always reserve 16 or 24 bytes
of memory so that the string can have 15 or 23 characters (plus 1 byte for the null terminator) without
allocating memory. This makes all string objects larger but usually saves a lot of running time because in
practice, strings are often shorter than 16 or 24 characters and allocating memory on the heap is quite an
expensive operation.

T
translation unit
A CPP file with all the header files and standard library headers it includes using #include directives,
minus the program text that is excluded by conditional compilation directives such as #if. For simplicity, it
can also be thought of as the result of preprocessing a CPP file. See CPP file and header file.

U
universal reference
One of two terms for rvalue references of the form T&& where T is a deducible template parameter. Special
rules that differ from ordinary rvalue references apply (see perfect forwarding). The term was coined by
Scott Meyers as a common term for both lvalue reference and rvalue reference. Because “universal” was,
well, too universal, the C++17 standard introduced the term forwarding reference instead.

236                                                                                                Glossary

V
value category
A classification of expressions. The traditional value categories lvalues and rvalues were inherited from C.
C++11 introduced alternative categories: glvalues (generalized lvalues), whose evaluation identifies stored
objects, and prvalues (pure rvalues), whose evaluation initializes objects. Additional categories subdivide
glvalues into lvalues (localizable values) and xvalues (eXpiring values). In addition, since C++11, rvalues
serve as a general category for both xvalues and prvalues (before C++11, rvalues were what prvalues are
since C++11). The chapter about value categories describes details.

variadic template
A template with a template parameter that represents an arbitrary number of types or values.

X
xvalue
A category of expressions that produce a location for a stored object that can be assumed to be no longer
needed. A typical example is an lvalue marked with std::move(). The chapter about value categories
describes details.
