
Chapter 3. RISC-V Memory Models
                 This chapter is currently being restructured. Its contents are normative, but the presentation
                might appear disjoint.

This chapter describes the two RISC-V memory consistency models: RVWMO, the base weakly ordered
model, and RVTSO, a more strongly ordered model enabled via the Ztso standard extension.

Additional explanatory material for both models can be found in Appendix B.1.

3.1. RVWMO Memory Consistency Model
This section defines the base RISC-V memory consistency model. A memory consistency model is a set of
rules specifying the values that can be returned by loads of memory. RISC-V uses a memory model called
RISC-V Weak Memory Ordering (RVWMO) which is designed to provide flexibility for architects to build
high-performance scalable designs while simultaneously supporting a tractable programming model.
Under RVWMO, code running on a single hart appears to execute in order from the perspective of other
memory instructions in the same hart, but memory instructions from another hart may observe the
memory instructions from the first hart being executed in a different order. Therefore, multithreaded code
may require explicit synchronization to guarantee ordering between memory instructions from different
harts. The base RISC-V ISA provides a FENCE instruction for this purpose, described in Section 2.1.7, while
the Zalrsc and Zaamo extensions additionally define load-reserved/store-conditional and atomic read-
modify-write instructions. The standard ISA extension for total store ordering Ztso augments RVWMO
with additional rules specific to those extensions.

The appendices to this specification provide both axiomatic and operational formalizations of the memory
consistency model as well as additional explanatory material.

                 This chapter defines the memory model for regular main memory operations. The interaction
                 of the memory model with I/O memory, instruction fetches (Ziccif), FENCE.I, page-table
                 walks, and SFENCE.VMA is not (yet) formalized. Some or all of the above may be formalized in
                 a future revision of this specification.

                Memory consistency models supporting overlapping memory accesses of different widths
                 simultaneously remain an active area of academic research and are not yet fully understood.
                 The specifics of how memory accesses of different sizes interact under RVWMO are specified
                 to the best of our current abilities, but they are subject to revision should new issues be
                 uncovered.

3.1.1. Definition of the RVWMO Memory Model

The RVWMO memory model is defined in terms of the global memory order, a total ordering of the memory
operations produced by all harts. In general, a multithreaded program has many different possible
executions, with each execution having its own corresponding global memory order.

The global memory order is defined over the primitive load and store operations generated by memory
instructions. It is then subject to the constraints defined in the rest of this chapter. Any execution satisfying
all of the memory model constraints is a legal execution (as far as the memory model is concerned).

3.1.1.1. Memory Model Primitives

The program order over memory operations reflects the order in which the instructions that generate each
load and store are logically laid out in that hart’s dynamic instruction stream; i.e., the order in which a

simple in-order processor would execute the instructions of that hart.

Memory-accessing instructions give rise to memory operations. A memory operation can be either a load
operation, a store operation, or both simultaneously. All memory operations are single-copy atomic: they can
never be observed in a partially complete state. Each aligned memory instruction that accesses XLEN or
fewer bits gives rise to exactly one memory operation, unless specified otherwise. An aligned AMO gives
rise to a single memory operation that is both a load operation and a store operation simultaneously.

               Among instructions in RV32GC and RV64GC, the following are exceptions to the rule that an
               aligned memory instruction gives rise to exactly one memory operation:

                 ⚫ An unsuccessful SC instruction does not give rise to any memory operations.

                ⚫ Floating-point load and store instructions that access more than XLEN bits (e.g., FLD and
                   FSD in RV32) may each give rise to multiple memory operations.

               ISA extensions such as the V extension may give rise to multiple memory operations. However,
               the memory model for these extensions has not yet been formalized.

A misaligned load or store instruction may be decomposed into a set of component memory operations of
any granularity. A floating-point load or store of more than XLEN bits may also be decomposed into a set of
component memory operations of any granularity. The memory operations generated by such instructions
are not ordered with respect to each other in program order, but they are ordered normally with respect to
the memory operations generated by preceding and subsequent instructions in program order. The Zaamo
extension does not require execution environments to support misaligned atomic instructions at all.
However, if misaligned atomics are supported via the misaligned atomicity granule PMA, then AMOs
within an atomicity granule are not decomposed, nor are loads and stores defined in the base ISAs, nor are
loads and stores of no more than XLEN bits defined in the F, D, and Q extensions, nor are the load-acquire
and store-release instructions defined in the Zalasr extension, nor are compressed encodings of the
foregoing loads and stores.

               The decomposition of misaligned memory operations down to byte granularity facilitates
               emulation on implementations that do not natively support misaligned accesses. Such
              implementations might, for example, simply iterate over the bytes of a misaligned access one
               by one.

An LR instruction and an SC instruction are said to be paired if the LR precedes the SC in program order
and if there are no other LR or SC instructions in between; the corresponding memory operations are said
to be paired as well (except in case of a failed SC, where no store operation is generated). The complete list
of conditions determining whether an SC must succeed, may succeed, or must fail is defined in Zalrsc.

Load and store operations may also carry one or more ordering annotations from the following set: acquire-
RCpc, acquire-RCsc, release-RCpc, and release-RCsc. An AMO or LR instruction with aq set has an acquire-
RCsc annotation. An AMO or SC instruction with rl set has a release-RCsc annotation. An AMO, LR, or SC
instruction with both aq and rl set has both acquire-RCsc and release-RCsc annotations.

For convenience, we use the term acquire annotation to refer to an acquire-RCpc annotation or an acquire-
RCsc annotation. Likewise, a release annotation refers to a release-RCpc annotation or a release-RCsc
annotation. An RCpc annotation refers to an acquire-RCpc annotation or a release-RCpc annotation. An
RCsc annotation refers to an acquire-RCsc annotation or a release-RCsc annotation.

               In the memory model literature, the term RCpc stands for release consistency with processor-
               consistent synchronization operations, and the term RCsc stands for release consistency with
              sequentially consistent synchronization operations.

               While there are many different definitions for acquire and release annotations in the literature,

                 in the context of RVWMO these terms are concisely and completely defined by Preserved
                 Program Order rules 5-7.

                 RCpc annotations are currently only used when implicitly assigned to every memory access per
                 the standard extension Ztso. Furthermore, although the ISA does not currently contain native
                 RCpc load-acquire or store-release instructions, the RVWMO model itself is designed to be
                 forwards-compatible with the potential addition of them into the ISA in a future extension.

3.1.1.2. Syntactic Dependencies

The definition of the RVWMO memory model depends in part on the notion of a syntactic dependency,
defined as follows.

In the context of defining dependencies, a register refers either to an entire general-purpose register, some
portion of a CSR, or an entire CSR. The granularity at which dependencies are tracked through CSRs is
specific to each CSR and is defined in Section 3.1.2.

Syntactic dependencies are defined in terms of instructions' source registers, instructions' destination
registers, and the way instructions carry a dependency from their source registers to their destination
registers. This section provides a general definition of all of these terms; however, Section 3.1.3 provides a
complete listing of the specifics for each instruction.

In general, a register r other than x0 is a source register for an instruction i if any of the following hold:

 ⚫ In the opcode of i, rs1, rs2, or rs3 is set to r
 ⚫ i is a CSR instruction, and in the opcode of i, csr is set to r, unless i is CSRRW or CSRRWI and rd is set to
    x0

 ⚫ r is a CSR and an implicit source register for i, as defined in Section 3.1.3
 ⚫ r is a CSR that aliases with another source register for i

Memory instructions also further specify which source registers are address source registers and which are
data source registers.

In general, a register r other than x0 is a destination register for an instruction i if any of the following hold:

 ⚫ In the opcode of i, rd is set to r
 ⚫ i is a CSR instruction, and in the opcode of i, csr is set to r, unless i is CSRRS or CSRRC and rs1 is set to
   x0 or i is CSRRSI or CSRRCI and uimm[4:0] is set to zero.

 ⚫ r is a CSR and an implicit destination register for i, as defined in Section 3.1.3
 ⚫ r is a CSR that aliases with another destination register for i

Most non-memory instructions carry a dependency from each of their source registers to each of their
destination registers. However, there are exceptions to this rule; see Section 3.1.3.

Instruction j has a syntactic dependency on instruction i via destination register s of i and source register r of
j if either of the following hold:

 ⚫ s is the same as r, and no instruction program-ordered between i and j has r as a destination register
 ⚫ There is an instruction m program-ordered between i and j such that all of the following hold:
      1. j has a syntactic dependency on m via destination register q and source register r
     2. m has a syntactic dependency on i via destination register s and source register p

     3. m carries a dependency from p to q

Finally, in the definitions that follow, let a and b be two memory operations, and let i and j be the
instructions that generate a and b, respectively.

b has a syntactic address dependency on a if r is an address source register for j and j has a syntactic
dependency on i via source register r

b has a syntactic data dependency on a if b is a store operation, r is a data source register for j, and j has a
syntactic dependency on i via source register r

b has a syntactic control dependency on a if there is an instruction m program-ordered between i and j such
that m is a branch or indirect jump and m has a syntactic dependency on i.

                Generally speaking, non-AMO load instructions do not have data source registers, and
                unconditional non-AMO store instructions do not have destination registers. However, a
               successful SC instruction is considered to have the register specified in rd as a destination
                register, and hence it is possible for an instruction to have a syntactic dependency on a
                successful SC instruction that precedes it in program order.

3.1.1.3. Preserved Program Order

The global memory order for any given execution of a program respects some but not all of each hart’s
program order. The subset of program order that must be respected by the global memory order is known
as preserved program order.

The complete definition of preserved program order is as follows (and note that AMOs are simultaneously
both loads and stores): memory operation a precedes memory operation b in preserved program order (and
hence also in the global memory order) if a precedes b in program order, a and b both access regular main
memory (rather than I/O regions), and any of the following hold:

 ⚫ Overlapping-Address Orderings:
     1. b is a store, and a and b access overlapping memory addresses
     2. a and b are loads, x is a byte read by both a and b, there is no store to x between a and b in program
        order, and a and b return values for x written by different memory operations
     3. a is generated by an AMO or SC instruction, b is a load, and b returns a value written by a
 ⚫ Explicit Synchronization:
     4. There is a FENCE instruction that orders a before b
     5. a has an acquire annotation
     6. b has a release annotation
     7. a and b both have RCsc annotations
     8. a is paired with b
 ⚫ Syntactic Dependencies:
     9. b has a syntactic address dependency on a
    10. b has a syntactic data dependency on a
    11. b is a store, and b has a syntactic control dependency on a
 ⚫ Pipeline Dependencies:
    12. b is a load, and there exists some store m between a and b in program order such that m has an

        address or data dependency on a, and b returns a value written by m
    13. b is a store, and there exists some instruction m between a and b in program order such that m has
        an address dependency on a

3.1.1.4. Memory Model Axioms

An execution of a RISC-V program obeys the RVWMO memory consistency model only if there exists a
global memory order conforming to preserved program order and satisfying the load value axiom, the
atomicity axiom, and the progress axiom.

Load Value Axiom

Each byte of each load i returns the value written to that byte by the store that is the latest in global
memory order among the following stores:

 1. Stores that write that byte and that precede i in the global memory order
 2. Stores that write that byte and that precede i in program order

Atomicity Axiom

If r and w are paired load and store operations generated by aligned LR and SC instructions in a hart h, s is
a store to byte x, and r returns a value written by s, then s must precede w in the global memory order, and
there can be no store from a hart other than h to byte x following s and preceding w in the global memory
order.

                   The Atomicity Axiom theoretically supports LR/SC pairs of different widths and to mismatched
                  addresses, since implementations are permitted to allow SC operations to succeed in such
                   cases. However, in practice, we expect such patterns to be rare, and their use is discouraged.

Progress Axiom

No memory operation may be preceded in the global memory order by an infinite sequence of other
memory operations.

3.1.2. CSR Dependency Tracking Granularity

Table 6. Granularities at which syntactic dependencies are tracked through CSRs
                          Name     Portions Tracked as Independent Units        Aliases
                          fflags Bits 4, 3, 2, 1, 0                             fcsr

                          frm      entire CSR                                   fcsr

                          fcsr     Bits 7-5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0                      fflags, frm

                          ssp      entire CSR

Note: read-only CSRs are not listed, as they do not participate in the definition of syntactic dependencies.

3.1.3. Source and Destination Register Listings

This section provides a concrete listing of the source and destination registers for each instruction. These
listings are used in the definition of syntactic dependencies in Section 3.1.1.2.

The term accumulating CSR is used to describe a CSR that is both a source and a destination register, but
which carries a dependency only from itself to itself.

Instructions carry a dependency from each source register in the “Source Registers” column to each
destination register in the “Destination Registers” column, from each source register in the “Source
Registers” column to each CSR in the “Accumulating CSRs” column, and from each CSR in the
“Accumulating CSRs” column to itself, except where annotated otherwise.

Key:

 ⚫ AAddress source register
 ⚫ DData source register
 ⚫ † The instruction does not carry a dependency from any source register to any destination register
 ⚫ ‡ The instruction carries dependencies from source register(s) to destination register(s) as specified

Table 7. RV32I Base Integer Instruction Set
                Source Registers   Destination Registers      Accumulating CSRs
       LUI                         rd
       AUIPC                       rd
       JAL                         rd
       JALR†    rs1                rd
       BEQ      rs1, rs2
       BNE      rs1, rs2
       BLT      rs1, rs2
       BGE      rs1, rs2
       BLTU     rs1, rs2
       BGEU     rs1, rs2
       LB†      rs1 A              rd
       LH†      rs1 A              rd
                      A
       LW†      rs1                rd
       LBU†     rs1 A              rd
                      A
       LHU†     rs1                rd
       SB       rs1 A, rs2 D
       SH       rs1 A, rs2 D
       SW       rs1 A, rs2 D
       ADDI     rs1                rd
       SLTI     rs1                rd
       SLTIU    rs1                rd
       XORI     rs1                rd
       ORI      rs1                rd
       ANDI     rs1                rd
       SLLI     rs1                rd
       SRLI     rs1                rd
       SRAI     rs1                rd

                   Source Registers     Destination Registers       Accumulating CSRs
       ADD         rs1, rs2             rd
       SUB         rs1, rs2             rd
       SLL         rs1, rs2             rd
       SLT         rs1, rs2             rd
       SLTU        rs1, rs2             rd
       XOR         rs1, rs2             rd
       SRL         rs1, rs2             rd
       SRA         rs1, rs2             rd
       OR          rs1, rs2             rd
       AND         rs1, rs2             rd
       FENCE
       FENCE.I
       ECALL
       EBREAK
       CSRRW‡      rs1, csr*            rd, csr                                         *
                                                                                            unless rd=x0
       ‡ carries a dependency from rs1 to csr and from csr to rd
       CSRRS‡      rs1, csr             rd, csr*                                        *
                                                                                            unless rs1=x0
                                               *
       CSRRC‡      rs1, csr             rd, csr                                         *
                                                                                            unless rs1=x0
       ‡ carries a dependency from csr and rs1 to csr and from csr to rd
       CSRRWI‡     csr *                rd, csr                                         *
                                                                                            unless rd=x0
       ‡ carries a dependency from csr to rd
       CSRRSI‡     csr                  rd, csr*                                        *
                                                                                            unless uimm[4:0]=0
       CSRRCI‡     csr                  rd, csr*                                        *
                                                                                            unless uimm[4:0]=0
       ‡ carries a dependency from csr to rd and csr

Table 8. RV64I Base Integer Instruction Set
                   Source Registers                Destination Registers       Accumulating CSRs
                         A
LWU†               rs1                             rd
LD†                rs1 A                           rd
                         A     D
SD                 rs1 , rs2
SLLI               rs1                             rd
SRLI               rs1                             rd
SRAI               rs1                             rd
ADDIW              rs1                             rd
SLLIW              rs1                             rd
SRLIW              rs1                             rd
SRAIW              rs1                             rd
ADDW               rs1, rs2                        rd
SUBW               rs1, rs2                        rd
SLLW               rs1, rs2                        rd

             Source Registers           Destination Registers            Accumulating CSRs
SRLW         rs1, rs2                   rd
SRAW         rs1, rs2                   rd

Table 9. RV32M Standard Extension
              Source Registers            Destination Registers           Accumulating CSRs
MUL           rs1, rs2                    rd
MULH          rs1, rs2                    rd
MULHSU        rs1, rs2                    rd
MULHU         rs1, rs2                    rd
DIV           rs1, rs2                    rd
DIVU          rs1, rs2                    rd
REM           rs1, rs2                    rd
REMU          rs1, rs2                    rd

Table 10. RV64M Standard Extension
             Source Registers            Destination Registers           Accumulating CSRs
MULW         rs1, rs2                    rd
DIVW         rs1, rs2                    rd
DIVUW        rs1, rs2                    rd
REMW         rs1, rs2                    rd
REMUW        rs1, rs2                    rd

Table 11. RV32A Standard Extension
                 Source Registers       Destination Registers       Accumulating CSRs
LR.W†            rs1 A                  rd
                        A    D
SC.W†            rs1 , rs2              rd *                                                    *
                                                                                                    if successful
AMOSWAP.W†       rs1 A, rs2 D           rd
AMOADD.W†        rs1 A, rs2 D           rd
                        A    D
AMOXOR.W†        rs1 , rs2              rd
AMOAND.W†        rs1 A, rs2 D           rd
AMOOR.W†         rs1 A, rs2D            rd
                        A    D
AMOMIN.W†        rs1 , rs2              rd
AMOMAX.W†        rs1 A, rs2 D           rd
AMOMINU.W†       rs1 A, rs2 D           rd
                        A    D
AMOMAXU.W†       rs1 , rs2              rd

Table 12. RV64A Standard Extension
                 Source Registers       Destination Registers       Accumulating CSRs
LR.D†            rs1 A                  rd
                        A    D
SC.D†            rs1 , rs2              rd *                                                    *
                                                                                                    if successful
AMOSWAP.D†       rs1 A, rs2 D           rd

                      Source Registers                       Destination Registers             Accumulating CSRs
                          A           D
AMOADD.D†             rs1 , rs2                              rd
AMOXOR.D†             rs1 A, rs2 D                           rd
                          A           D
AMOAND.D†             rs1 , rs2                              rd
AMOOR.D†              rs1 A, rs2D                            rd
AMOMIN.D†             rs1 A, rs2D                            rd
                          A           D
AMOMAX.D†             rs1 , rs2                              rd
AMOMINU.D†            rs1 A, rs2D                            rd
AMOMAXU.D†            rs1 A, rs2D                            rd

Table 13. Zabha Standard Extension
                              Source Registers                         Destination Registers          Accumulating CSRs
                                      A           D
AMOSWAP.B/H†                  rs1 , rs2                                rd
AMOADD.B/H†                   rs1 A, rs2 D                             rd
AMOXOR.B/H†                   rs1 A, rs2 D                             rd
                                      A           D
AMOAND.B/H†                   rs1 , rs2                                rd
AMOOR.B/H†                    rs1 A, rs2 D                             rd
                                      A           D
AMOMIN.B/H†                   rs1 , rs2                                rd
                                      A           D
AMOMAX.B/H†                   rs1 , rs2                                rd
AMOMINU.B/H†                  rs1 A, rs2 D                             rd
                                      A           D
AMOMAXU.B/H†                  rs1 , rs2                                rd
AMOCAS.B/H†                   rs1 A, rs2 D, rd D                       rd

Table 14. Zacas Standard Extension
                         Source Registers                         Destination Registers Accumulating CSRs
AMOCAS.W†                rs1 A, rs2 D, rd D                       rd
              *               A           D           D
AMOCAS.D†                rs1 , rs2 , rd                           rd
AMOCAS.Q†*               rs1 A, rs2 D, rd D                       rd
*
 AMOCAS.D uses register-pair operands on RV32, and AMOCAS.Q (RV64-only) uses register-pair operands on RV64.
For these forms, if rs2 is not x0, rs2+1 is also a data source register, and if rd is not x0, rd+1 is also a data source and
destination register.

Table 15. Zalasr Standard Extension
                           Source Registers                            Destination Registers          Accumulating CSRs
LB.{AQ,AQRL}†              rs1 A                                       rd
                                  A
LH.{AQ,AQRL}†              rs1                                         rd
LW.{AQ,AQRL}†              rs1 A                                       rd
LD.{AQ,AQRL}†*             rs1 A                                       rd
                                  A           D
SB.{RL,AQRL}               rs1 , rs2
SH.{RL,AQRL}               rs1 A, rs2 D
SW.{RL,AQRL}               rs1 A, rs2 D
SD.{RL,AQRL}*              rs1 A, rs2 D

                                Source Registers               Destination Registers            Accumulating CSRs
*
    LD.{AQ,AQRL} and SD.{RL,AQRL} are RV64-only

Table 16. Zicfiss Standard Extension
                                 Source Registers               Destination Registers           Accumulating CSRs
SSPUSH‡                          rs2 D, ssp A                   ssp

C.SSPUSH‡                        x1 D, ssp A                    ssp

SSPOPCHK‡                        rs1, ssp A                     ssp

C.SSPOPCHK‡                      x5, ssp         A
                                                                ssp

‡ carries a dependency from ssp to ssp
SSRDP                            ssp                            rd
SSAMOSWAP.W†                     rs1 A, rs2 D                   rd
                  *                      A       D
SSAMOSWAP.D†                     rs1 , rs2                      rd
*
    SSAMOSWAP.D is RV64-only.

Table 17. RV32F Standard Extension
                      Source Registers                  Destination Registers          Accumulating CSRs
FLW†                  rs1 A                             rd
                            A        D
FSW                   rs1 , rs2
FMADD.S               rs1, rs2, rs3, frm*               rd                             NV, OF, UF, NX              *
                                                                                                                    if rm=111
FMSUB.S               rs1, rs2, rs3, frm*               rd                             NV, OF, UF, NX              *
                                                                                                                    if rm=111
                                                 *                                                                 *
FNMSUB.S              rs1, rs2, rs3, frm                rd                             NV, OF, UF, NX               if rm=111
FNMADD.S              rs1, rs2, rs3, frm*               rd                             NV, OF, UF, NX              *
                                                                                                                    if rm=111
                                             *                                                                     *
FADD.S                rs1, rs2, frm                     rd                             NV, OF, NX                   if rm=111
                                             *                                                                     *
FSUB.S                rs1, rs2, frm                     rd                             NV, OF, NX                   if rm=111
FMUL.S                rs1, rs2, frm*                    rd                             NV, OF, UF, NX              *
                                                                                                                    if rm=111
                                             *                                                                     *
FDIV.S                rs1, rs2, frm                     rd                             NV, DZ, OF, UF, NX           if rm=111
FSQRT.S               rs1, frm*                         rd                             NV, NX                      *
                                                                                                                    if rm=111
FSGNJ.S               rs1, rs2                          rd
FSGNJN.S              rs1, rs2                          rd
FSGNJX.S              rs1, rs2                          rd
FMIN.S                rs1, rs2                          rd                             NV
FMAX.S                rs1, rs2                          rd                             NV
FCVT.W.S              rs1, frm*                         rd                             NV, NX                      *
                                                                                                                    if rm=111
FCVT.WU.S             rs1, frm*                         rd                             NV, NX                      *
                                                                                                                    if rm=111
FMV.X.W               rs1                               rd
FEQ.S                 rs1, rs2                          rd                             NV
FLT.S                 rs1, rs2                          rd                             NV
FLE.S                 rs1, rs2                          rd                             NV
FCLASS.S              rs1                               rd
                                 *                                                                                 *
FCVT.S.W              rs1, frm                          rd                             NX                           if rm=111

                    Source Registers           Destination Registers       Accumulating CSRs
                                *                                                               *
FCVT.S.WU           rs1, frm                   rd                          NX                       if rm=111
FMV.W.X             rs1                        rd

Table 18. RV64F Standard Extension
                   Source Registers           Destination Registers       Accumulating CSRs
                            *                                                                   *
FCVT.L.S           rs1, frm                   rd                          NV, NX                    if rm=111
FCVT.LU.S          rs1, frm*                  rd                          NV, NX                *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
FCVT.S.L           rs1, frm*                  rd                          NX                    *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
                            *                                                                   *
FCVT.S.LU          rs1, frm                   rd                          NX                        if rm=111

Table 19. RV32D Standard Extension
                    Source Registers           Destination Registers       Accumulating CSRs
FLD†                rs1 A                      rd
FSD                 rs1 A, rs2D
FMADD.D             rs1, rs2, rs3, frm*        rd                          NV, OF, UF, NX       *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
FMSUB.D             rs1, rs2, rs3, frm*        rd                          NV, OF, UF, NX       *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
FNMSUB.D            rs1, rs2, rs3, frm*        rd                          NV, OF, UF, NX       *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
                                        *                                                       *
FNMADD.D            rs1, rs2, rs3, frm         rd                          NV, OF, UF, NX           if rm=111
FADD.D              rs1, rs2, frm*             rd                          NV, OF, NX           *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
                                    *                                                           *
FSUB.D              rs1, rs2, frm              rd                          NV, OF, NX               if rm=111
                                    *                                                           *
FMUL.D              rs1, rs2, frm              rd                          NV, OF, UF, NX           if rm=111
FDIV.D              rs1, rs2, frm*             rd                          NV, DZ, OF, UF, NX   *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
                                *                                                               *
FSQRT.D             rs1, frm                   rd                          NV, NX                   if rm=111
FSGNJ.D             rs1, rs2                   rd
FSGNJN.D            rs1, rs2                   rd
FSGNJX.D            rs1, rs2                   rd
FMIN.D              rs1, rs2                   rd                          NV
FMAX.D              rs1, rs2                   rd                          NV
                                *                                                               *
FCVT.S.D            rs1, frm                   rd                          NV, OF, UF, NX           if rm=111
FCVT.D.S            rs1                        rd                          NV
FEQ.D               rs1, rs2                   rd                          NV
FLT.D               rs1, rs2                   rd                          NV
FLE.D               rs1, rs2                   rd                          NV
FCLASS.D            rs1                        rd
                                *                                                               *
FCVT.W.D            rs1, frm                   rd                          NV, NX                   if rm=111
FCVT.WU.D           rs1, frm*                  rd                          NV, NX               *
                                                                                                    if rm=111
FCVT.D.W            rs1                        rd
FCVT.D.WU           rs1                        rd

Table 20. RV64D Standard Extension

                 Source Registers        Destination Registers         Accumulating CSRs
                         *                                                                            *
FCVT.L.D         rs1, frm                rd                            NV, NX                             if rm=111
FCVT.LU.D        rs1, frm*               rd                            NV, NX                         *
                                                                                                          if rm=111
FMV.X.D          rs1                     rd
FCVT.D.L         rs1, frm*               rd                            NX                             *
                                                                                                          if rm=111
FCVT.D.LU        rs1, frm*               rd                            NX                             *
                                                                                                          if rm=111
FMV.D.X          rs1                     rd

3.2. Ztso Extension for Total Store Ordering
This section defines the Ztso extension for the RISC-V Total Store Ordering (RVTSO) memory consistency
model. RVTSO is defined as a delta from RVWMO.

               The Ztso extension is meant to facilitate the porting of code originally written for the x86 or
              SPARC architectures, both of which use TSO by default. It also supports implementations
               which inherently provide RVTSO behavior and want to expose that fact to software.

RVTSO makes the following adjustments to RVWMO:

 ⚫ All load operations behave as if they have an acquire-RCpc annotation
 ⚫ All store operations behave as if they have a release-RCpc annotation.
 ⚫ All AMOs behave as if they have both acquire-RCsc and release-RCsc annotations.

               These rules render all PPO rules except 4-7 redundant. They also make redundant any non-I/O
               fences that do not have both PW and SR set. Finally, they also imply that no memory operation
               will be reordered past an AMO in either direction.

              In the context of RVTSO, as is the case for RVWMO, the storage ordering annotations are
               concisely and completely defined by PPO rules 5-7. In both of these memory models, it is the
               Section 3.1.1.4.1 that allows a hart to forward a value from its store buffer to a subsequent (in
               program order) load—that is to say that stores can be forwarded locally before they are visible
               to other harts.

Additionally, if the Ztso extension is implemented, then vector memory instructions in the V extension and
Zve* family of extensions follow RVTSO at the instruction level. The Ztso extension does not strengthen
the ordering of intra-instruction element accesses.

In spite of the fact that Ztso adds no new instructions to the ISA, code written assuming RVTSO will not
run correctly on implementations not supporting Ztso. Binaries compiled to run only under Ztso should
indicate as such via a flag in the binary, so that platforms which do not implement Ztso can simply refuse
to run them.

