
Chapter 4. Scalar Integer Extensions
                 This chapter is currently being restructured. Its contents are normative, but the presentation
                might appear disjoint.

This chapter describes the scalar integer extensions. Most of these extensions are accordingly named with
the prefix Zi, with the exception of the integer multiplication and division extensions, which are named M
or prefixed with Zm.

4.1. Zifencei Extension for Instruction-Fetch Fence
This chapter defines the Zifencei extension, which includes the FENCE.I instruction that provides explicit
synchronization between writes to instruction memory and instruction fetches on the same hart.
Currently, this instruction is the only standard mechanism to ensure that stores visible to a hart will also
be visible to its instruction fetches.

                 We considered but did not include a store instruction word instruction as in (Tremblay et al.,
                 2000). JIT compilers may generate a large trace of instructions before a single FENCE.I, and
                amortize any instruction cache snooping or invalidation overhead by writing translated
                 instructions to memory regions that are known not to reside in the instruction cache.

                 FENCE.I was designed to support a wide variety of implementations. A simple implementation
                 can flush the local instruction cache and the instruction pipeline when the FENCE.I is
                 executed. A more complex implementation might snoop the instruction (data) cache on every
                 data (instruction) cache miss, or use an inclusive unified private L2 cache to invalidate lines
                 from the primary instruction cache when they are being written by a local store instruction. If
                 instruction and data caches are kept coherent in this way, or if the memory system consists of
                 only uncached RAMs, then just the fetch pipeline needs to be flushed at a FENCE.I.

                 FENCE.I was previously part of the base I instruction set. Two main issues are driving moving
                 this out of the mandatory base, although at time of writing it is still the only standard method
                 for maintaining instruction-fetch coherence.

                 First, it has been recognized that on some systems, FENCE.I will be expensive to implement
                 and alternate mechanisms are being discussed in the memory model task group. In particular,
                 for designs that have an incoherent instruction cache and an incoherent data cache, or where

                the instruction cache refill does not snoop a coherent data cache, both caches must be
                 completely flushed when a FENCE.I instruction is encountered. This problem is exacerbated
                 when there are multiple levels of instruction and data caches in front of a unified cache or
                 outer memory system.

                 Second, the instruction is not powerful enough to make available at user level in a Unix-like
                 operating system environment. The FENCE.I only synchronizes the local hart, and the OS can
                 reschedule the user hart to a different physical hart after the FENCE.I. This would require the
                 OS to execute an additional FENCE.I as part of every context migration. For this reason, the
                 standard Linux ABI has removed FENCE.I from user-level and now requires a system call to
                 maintain instruction-fetch coherence, which allows the OS to minimize the number of FENCE.I
                 executions required on current systems and provides forward-compatibility with future
                 improved instruction-fetch coherence mechanisms.

                 Future approaches to instruction-fetch coherence under discussion include providing more
                 restricted versions of FENCE.I that only target a given address specified in rs1, and/or

               allowing software to use an ABI that relies on machine-mode cache-maintenance operations.

 31                                   20 19            15 14      12 11                7   6                      0
                 funct12                        rs1         funct3            rd                   opcode
                   12                            5             3               5                     7
                                                            FENCE.I                              MISC-MEM

The FENCE.I instruction is used to synchronize the instruction and data streams. RISC-V does not
guarantee that stores to instruction memory will be made visible to instruction fetches on a RISC-V hart
until that hart executes a FENCE.I instruction. A FENCE.I instruction ensures that a subsequent
instruction fetch on a RISC-V hart will see any previous data stores already visible to the same RISC-V hart.
FENCE.I does not ensure that other RISC-V harts' instruction fetches will observe the local hart’s stores in a
multiprocessor system. To make a store to instruction memory visible to all RISC-V harts, the writing hart
also has to execute a data FENCE before requesting that all remote RISC-V harts execute a FENCE.I.

A FENCE.I instruction orders all explicit memory accesses that precede the FENCE.I in program order
before all instruction fetches that follow the FENCE.I in program order.

               In the following litmus test, for example, the outcome a0=1, a1=0 on the consumer hart is
               forbidden, assuming little-endian RV32IC harts:

                  Initially, flag = 0.

                  Producer hart:                                                     Consumer hart:

                  la t0, patch_me                                                    la t2, flag
                  li t1, 0x4585                                                      lw a0, (t2)
                 sh t1, (t0)       # patch_me := c.li a1, 1                         fence.i
                  fence w, w        # order flag write                             patch_me:
                  la t0, flag                                                        c.li a1, 0
                  li t1, 1
                  sw t1, (t0)       # flag := 1

               Note that this example is only meant to illustrate the aforementioned ordering property. In a
               realistic producer-consumer code-generation scheme, the consumer would loop until flag
               becomes 1 before executing the FENCE.I instruction.

An instruction fetch is always ordered before any explicit memory accesses that instruction gives rise to.

The unused fields in the FENCE.I instruction, funct12, rs1, and rd, are reserved for finer-grain fences in
future extensions. For forward compatibility, base implementations shall ignore these fields, and standard
software shall zero these fields.

               Because FENCE.I only orders stores with a hart’s own instruction fetches, application code
               should only rely upon FENCE.I if the application thread will not be migrated to a different
              hart. The EEI can provide mechanisms for efficient multiprocessor instruction-stream
               synchronization.

4.2. Zicsr Extension for Control and Status Register (CSR) Instructions
RISC-V defines a separate address space of 4096 Control and Status registers associated with each hart.
This chapter defines the full set of CSR instructions that operate on these CSRs.

                  While CSRs are primarily used by the privileged architecture, there are several uses in
                  unprivileged code including for counters and timers, and for floating-point status.

                 The counters and timers are no longer considered mandatory parts of the standard base ISAs,
                  and so the CSR instructions required to access them have been moved out of Section 2.1 into
                  this separate chapter.

4.2.1. CSR Instructions

All CSR instructions atomically read-modify-write a single CSR, whose CSR specifier is encoded in the 12-
bit csr field of the instruction held in bits 31-20. The immediate forms use a 5-bit zero-extended immediate
encoded in the rs1 field.

 31                                          20 19               15 14       12 11          7   6              0
                      csr                               rs1            funct3         rd            opcode
                      12                                 5               3            5                7
                  source/dest                          source         CSRRW          dest           SYSTEM
                  source/dest                          source          CSRRS         dest           SYSTEM
                  source/dest                          source         CSRRC          dest           SYSTEM
                  source/dest                        uimm[4:0]        CSRRWI         dest           SYSTEM
                  source/dest                        uimm[4:0]        CSRRSI         dest           SYSTEM
                  source/dest                        uimm[4:0]        CSRRCI         dest           SYSTEM

The CSRRW (Atomic Read/Write CSR) instruction atomically swaps values in the CSRs and integer
registers. CSRRW reads the old value of the CSR, zero-extends the value to XLEN bits, then writes it to
integer register rd. The initial value in rs1 is written to the CSR. If rd=x0, then the instruction shall not read
the CSR and shall not cause any of the side effects that might occur on a CSR read.

The CSRRS (Atomic Read and Set Bits in CSR) instruction reads the value of the CSR, zero-extends the
value to XLEN bits, and writes it to integer register rd. The initial value in integer register rs1 is treated as a
bit mask that specifies bit positions to be set in the CSR. Any bit that is high in rs1 will cause the
corresponding bit to be set in the CSR, if that CSR bit is writable.

The CSRRC (Atomic Read and Clear Bits in CSR) instruction reads the value of the CSR, zero-extends the
value to XLEN bits, and writes it to integer register rd. The initial value in integer register rs1 is treated as a
bit mask that specifies bit positions to be cleared in the CSR. Any bit that is high in rs1 will cause the
corresponding bit to be cleared in the CSR, if that CSR bit is writable.

                  Since CSRRS and CSRRC perform a read-modify-write operation, any bits that read as a
                  different value to their underlying value may be modified by these instructions even if the
                 corresponding bit is not set in rs1. For example, pmpaddrn[G-1] may have an underlying value
                  of 1 but read as 0. Executing CSRRC or CSRRS to modify a different bit will cause 0 to be read
                  from pmpaddrn[G-1] and then written back, updating the underlying value to 0.

For both CSRRS and CSRRC, if rs1=x0, then the instruction will not write to the CSR at all, and so shall not
cause any of the side effects that might otherwise occur on a CSR write, nor raise illegal-instruction
exceptions on accesses to read-only CSRs. Both CSRRS and CSRRC always read the addressed CSR and
cause any read side effects regardless of rs1 and rd fields. Note that if rs1 specifies a register other than x0,
and that register holds a zero value, the instruction will not action any attendant per-field side effects, but
will action any side effects caused by writing to the entire CSR.

A CSRRW with rs1=x0 will attempt to write zero to the destination CSR.

The CSRRWI, CSRRSI, and CSRRCI variants are similar to CSRRW, CSRRS, and CSRRC respectively,
except they update the CSR using an XLEN-bit value obtained by zero-extending a 5-bit unsigned
immediate (uimm[4:0]) field encoded in the rs1 field instead of a value from an integer register. For
CSRRSI and CSRRCI, if the uimm[4:0] field is zero, then these instructions will not write to the CSR, and
shall not cause any of the side effects that might otherwise occur on a CSR write, nor raise illegal-
instruction exceptions on accesses to read-only CSRs. For CSRRWI, if rd=x0, then the instruction shall not
read the CSR and shall not cause any of the side effects that might occur on a CSR read. Both CSRRSI and
CSRRCI will always read the CSR and cause any read side effects regardless of rd and rs1 fields.

            Table 21. Conditions determining whether a CSR instruction reads or writes the specified CSR.
                                                 Register operand
                         Instruction         rd is x0   rs1 is x0   Reads CSR     Writes CSR
                         CSRRW                 Yes          -           No            Yes
                         CSRRW                  No          -          Yes            Yes
                         CSRRS/CSRRC             -        Yes          Yes             No
                         CSRRS/CSRRC             -        No           Yes            Yes
                                                Immediate operand
                         Instruction         rd is x0 uimm=0        Reads CSR     Writes CSR
                         CSRRWI                Yes          -           No            Yes
                         CSRRWI                 No          -          Yes            Yes
                         CSRRSI/CSRRCI           -        Yes          Yes             No
                         CSRRSI/CSRRCI           -        No           Yes            Yes

Table 21 summarizes the behavior of the CSR instructions with respect to whether they read and/or write
the CSR.

In addition to side effects that occur as a consequence of reading or writing a CSR, individual fields within
a CSR might have side effects when written. CSRRW and CSRRWI action side effects for all such fields
within the written CSR. CSRRS, CSRRSI, CSRRC, and CSRRCI only action side effects for fields for which
the rs1 or uimm argument has at least one bit set corresponding to that field.

                As of this writing, no standard CSRs have side effects on field writes. Hence, whether a
                standard CSR access has any side effects can be determined solely from the opcode.
    
                Defining CSRs with side effects on field writes is not recommended.

For any event or consequence that occurs due to a CSR having a particular value, if a write to the CSR gives
it that value, the resulting event or consequence is said to be an indirect effect of the write. Indirect effects of
a CSR write are not considered by the RISC-V ISA to be side effects of that write.

                An example of side effects for CSR accesses would be if reading from a specific CSR causes a
                light bulb to turn on, while writing an odd value to the same CSR causes the light to turn off.
                Assume writing an even value has no effect. In this case, both the read and write have side
                effects controlling whether the bulb is lit, as this condition is not determined solely from the
                CSR value. (Note that after writing an odd value to the CSR to turn off the light, then reading
               to turn the light on, writing again the same odd value causes the light to turn off again. Hence,
                on the last write, it is not a change in the CSR value that turns off the light.)

                On the other hand, if a bulb is rigged to light whenever the value of a particular CSR is odd,
                then turning the light on and off is not considered a side effect of writing to the CSR but merely
                an indirect effect of such writes.

                  More concretely, the RISC-V privileged architecture specifies that certain combinations of CSR
                  values cause a trap to occur. When an explicit write to a CSR creates the conditions that
                  trigger the trap, the trap is not considered a side effect of the write but merely an indirect
                  effect.

                  Standard CSRs do not have any side effects on reads. Standard CSRs may have side effects on
                  writes. Custom extensions might add CSRs for which accesses have side effects on either reads
                  or writes.

Some CSRs, such as the instructions-retired counter, instret, may be modified as side effects of
instruction execution. In these cases, if a CSR access instruction reads a CSR, it reads the value prior to the
execution of the instruction. If a CSR access instruction writes such a CSR, the explicit write is done
instead of the update from the side effect. In particular, a value written to instret by one instruction will
be the value read by the following instruction.

The assembler pseudoinstruction to read a CSR, CSRR rd, csr, is encoded as CSRRS rd, csr, x0. The
assembler pseudoinstruction to write a CSR, CSRW csr, rs1, is encoded as CSRRW x0, csr, rs1, while
CSRWI csr, uimm, is encoded as CSRRWI x0, csr, uimm.

Further assembler pseudoinstructions are defined to set and clear bits in the CSR when the old value is not
required: CSRS csr, rs1, CSRC csr, rs1, CSRSI csr, uimm, and CSRCI csr, uimm.

4.2.1.1. CSR Access Ordering

Each RISC-V hart normally observes its own CSR accesses, including its implicit CSR accesses, as
performed in program order. In particular, unless specified otherwise, a CSR access is performed after the
execution of any prior instructions in program order whose behavior modifies or is modified by the CSR
state and before the execution of any subsequent instructions in program order whose behavior modifies or
is modified by the CSR state. Furthermore, an explicit CSR read returns the CSR state before the execution
of the instruction, while an explicit CSR write suppresses and overrides any implicit writes or
modifications to the same CSR by the same instruction.

Likewise, any side effects from an explicit CSR access are normally observed to occur synchronously in
program order. Unless specified otherwise, the full consequences of any such side effects are observable by
the very next instruction, and no consequences may be observed out-of-order by preceding instructions.
(Note the distinction made earlier between side effects and indirect effects of CSR writes.)

For the RVWMO memory consistency model (Section 3.1), CSR accesses are weakly ordered by default, so
other harts or devices may observe CSR accesses in an order different from program order. In addition,
CSR accesses are not ordered with respect to explicit memory accesses, unless a CSR access modifies the
execution behavior of the instruction that performs the explicit memory access or unless a CSR access and
an explicit memory access are ordered by either the syntactic dependencies defined by the memory model
or the ordering requirements defined in Volume II, Section 3.6.5. To enforce ordering in all other cases,
software should execute a FENCE instruction between the relevant accesses. For the purposes of the
FENCE instruction, CSR read accesses are classified as device input (I), and CSR write accesses are
classified as device output (O).

                  Informally, the CSR space acts as a weakly ordered memory-mapped I/O region, as defined in
                  Volume II, Section 3.6.5. As a result, the order of CSR accesses with respect to all other
                  accesses is constrained by the same mechanisms that constrain the order of memory-mapped

                 I/O accesses to such a region.

                  These CSR-ordering constraints are imposed to support ordering main memory and memory-
                  mapped I/O accesses with respect to CSR accesses that are visible to, or affected by, devices or
                  other harts. Examples include the time, cycle, and mcycle CSRs, in addition to CSRs that

               reflect pending interrupts, like mip and sip. Note that implicit reads of such CSRs (e.g., taking
               an interrupt because of a change in mip) are also ordered as device input.

               Most CSRs (including, e.g., the fcsr) are not visible to other harts; their accesses can be freely
               reordered in the global memory order with respect to FENCE instructions without violating
               this specification.

The hardware platform may define that accesses to certain CSRs are strongly ordered, as defined in
Volume II, Section 3.6.5. Accesses to strongly ordered CSRs have stronger ordering constraints with respect
to accesses to both weakly ordered CSRs and accesses to memory-mapped I/O regions.

               The rules for the reordering of CSR accesses in the global memory order should probably be
              moved to Section 3.1 concerning the RVWMO memory consistency model.

4.3. Zicntr Extension for Base Counters and Timers
RISC-V ISAs provide a set of up to thirty-two 64-bit performance counters and timers that are accessible
via unprivileged XLEN-bit read-only CSR registers 0xC00–0xC1F (when XLEN=32, the upper 32 bits are
accessed via CSR registers 0xC80–0xC9F). These counters are divided between the Zicntr and Zihpm
extensions.

The Zicntr standard extension comprises the first three of these counters (cycle, time, and instret),
which have dedicated functions (cycle count, real-time clock, and instructions retired, respectively). The
Zicntr extension depends on the Zicsr extension.

               We recommend provision of these basic counters in implementations as they are essential for
               basic performance analysis, adaptive and dynamic optimization, and to allow an application
               to work with real-time streams. Additional counters in the separate Zihpm extension can help
               diagnose performance problems and these should be made accessible from user-level
              application code with low overhead.

               Some execution environments might prohibit access to counters, for example, to impede timing
               side-channel attacks.

 31                                    20 19             15 14      12 11               7   6                      0
                   csr                           rs1          funct3            rd                   opcode
                  12                              5             3               5                      7
              RDCYCLE[H]                          0           CSRRS            dest                 SYSTEM
               RDTIME[H]                          0           CSRRS            dest                 SYSTEM
             RDINSTRET[H]                         0           CSRRS            dest                 SYSTEM

For base ISAs with XLEN≥64, CSR instructions can access the full 64-bit CSRs directly. In particular, the
RDCYCLE, RDTIME, and RDINSTRET pseudoinstructions read the full 64 bits of the cycle, time, and
instret counters.

               The counter pseudoinstructions are mapped to the read-only CSRRS rd, counter, x0 canonical
              form, but the other read-only CSR instruction forms (based on CSRRC/CSRRSI/CSRRCI) are
               also legal ways to read these CSRs.

For base ISAs with XLEN=32, the Zicntr extension enables the three 64-bit read-only counters to be
accessed in 32-bit pieces. The RDCYCLE, RDTIME, and RDINSTRET pseudoinstructions provide the lower
32 bits, and the RDCYCLEH, RDTIMEH, and RDINSTRETH pseudoinstructions provide the upper 32 bits
of the respective counters.

               We required the counters be 64 bits wide, even when XLEN=32, as otherwise it is very difficult
              for software to determine if values have overflowed. The sample code Listing 1 shows how the

                 full 64-bit width value can be safely read using the individual 32-bit width pseudoinstructions.

The RDCYCLE pseudoinstruction reads the low XLEN bits of the cycle CSR which holds a count of the
number of clock cycles executed by the processor core on which the hart is running from an arbitrary start
time in the past. RDCYCLEH is only present when XLEN=32 and reads bits 63-32 of the same cycle
counter. The underlying 64-bit counter should never overflow in practice. The rate at which the cycle
counter advances will depend on the implementation and operating environment. The execution
environment should provide a means to determine the current rate (cycles/second) at which the cycle
counter is incrementing.

                 RDCYCLE is intended to return the number of cycles executed by the processor core, not the
                 hart. Precisely defining what is a “core” is difficult given some implementation choices (e.g.,
                 AMD Bulldozer). Precisely defining what is a “clock cycle” is also difficult given the range of
                 implementations (including software emulations), but the intent is that RDCYCLE is used for
                 performance monitoring along with the other performance counters. In particular, where there
                 is one hart/core, one would expect cycle-count/instructions-retired to measure cycles-per-
                 instruction (CPI) for a hart.

                 Cores don’t have to be exposed to software at all, and an implementer might choose to pretend
                 multiple harts on one physical core are running on separate cores with one hart/core, and
                 provide separate cycle counters for each hart. This might make sense in a simple barrel
                 processor (e.g., CDC 6600 peripheral processors) where inter-hart timing interactions are
                 non-existent or minimal.

                 Where there is more than one hart/core and dynamic multithreading, it is not generally
                 possible to separate out cycles per hart (especially with SMT). It might be possible to define a
                 separate performance counter that tried to capture the number of cycles a particular hart was
                 running, but this definition would have to be very fuzzy to cover all the possible threading
                 implementations. For example, should we only count cycles for which any instruction was
                issued to execution for this hart, and/or cycles any instruction retired, or include cycles this
                 hart was occupying machine resources but couldn’t execute due to stalls while other harts
                 went into execution? Likely, “all of the above” would be needed to have understandable
                 performance stats. This complexity of defining a per-hart cycle count, and also the need in any
                 case for a total per-core cycle count when tuning multithreaded code led to just standardizing
                 the per-core cycle counter, which also happens to work well for the common single hart/core
                 case.

                 Standardizing what happens during “sleep” is not practical given that what “sleep” means is
                 not standardized across execution environments, but if the entire core is paused (entirely
                 clock-gated or powered-down in deep sleep), then it is not executing clock cycles, and the cycle
                 count shouldn’t be increasing per the spec. There are many details, e.g., whether clock cycles
                 required to reset a processor after waking up from a power-down event should be counted, and
                 these are considered execution-environment-specific details.

                 Even though there is no precise definition that works for all platforms, this is still a useful
                 facility for most platforms, and an imprecise, common, “usually correct” standard here is
                 better than no standard. The intent of RDCYCLE was primarily performance
                 monitoring/tuning, and the specification was written with that goal in mind.

The RDTIME pseudoinstruction reads the low XLEN bits of the time CSR, which counts wall-clock real
time that has passed from an arbitrary start time in the past. RDTIMEH is only present when XLEN=32
and reads bits 63-32 of the same real-time counter. The underlying 64-bit counter increments by one with
each tick of the real-time clock, and, for realistic real-time clock frequencies, should never overflow in
practice. The execution environment should provide a means of determining the period of a counter tick
(seconds/tick). The period should be constant within a small error bound. The environment should provide

a means to determine the accuracy of the clock (i.e., the maximum relative error between the nominal and
actual real-time clock periods).

                 On some simple platforms, cycle count might represent a valid implementation of RDTIME, in
                 which case RDTIME and RDCYCLE may return the same result.

                It is difficult to provide a strict mandate on clock period given the wide variety of possible
                 implementation platforms. The maximum error bound should be set based on the
                 requirements of the platform.

The real-time clocks of all harts must be synchronized to within one tick of the real-time clock.

                 As with other architectural mandates, it suffices to appear “as if” harts are synchronized to
                 within one tick of the real-time clock, i.e., software is unable to observe that there is a greater
                 delta between the real-time clock values observed on two harts.

                 If, for example, the real-time clock increments at a frequency of 1 GHz, then all harts must
                 appear to be synchronized to within 1 ns. But it is also acceptable for this example
                 implementation to only update the real-time clock at, say, a frequency of 100 MHz with
                 increments of 10 ticks. As long as software cannot observe this seeming violation of the above
                synchronization requirement, and software always observes time across harts to be
                 monotonically nondecreasing, then this implementation is compliant.

                 A platform spec may then, for example, specify an apparent real-time clock tick frequency (e.g.
                 1 GHz) and also a minimum update frequency (e.g. 100 MHz) at which updated time values are
                 guaranteed to be observable by software. Software may read time more frequently, but it
                 should only observe monotonically nondecreasing values and it should observe a new value at
                 least once every 10 ns (corresponding to the 100 MHz update frequency in this example).

The RDINSTRET pseudoinstruction reads the low XLEN bits of the instret CSR, which counts the
number of instructions retired by this hart from some arbitrary start point in the past. RDINSTRETH is
only present when XLEN=32 and reads bits 63-32 of the same instruction counter. The underlying 64-bit
counter should never overflow in practice.

                 Instructions that cause synchronous exceptions, including ECALL and EBREAK, are not
                considered to retire and hence do not increment the instret CSR.

The following code sequence will read a valid 64-bit cycle counter value into x3:x2, even if the counter
overflows its lower half between reading its upper and lower halves.

        again:
             rdcycleh           x3
             rdcycle            x2
             rdcycleh           x4
             bne                x3, x4, again

Listing 1. Sample code for reading the 64-bit cycle counter when XLEN=32.

4.4. Zihpm Extension for Hardware Performance Counters
The Zihpm extension comprises up to 29 additional unprivileged 64-bit hardware performance counters,
hpmcounter3-hpmcounter31. When XLEN=32, the upper 32 bits of these performance counters are
accessible via additional CSRs hpmcounter3h-hpmcounter31h. The Zihpm extension depends on the Zicsr

extension.

                   In some applications, it is important to be able to read multiple counters at the same instant
                   in time. When run under a multitasking environment, a user thread can suffer a context switch
                   while attempting to read the counters. One solution is for the user thread to read the real-time
                   counter before and after reading the other counters to determine if a context switch occurred
                  in the middle of the sequence, in which case the reads can be retried. We considered adding
                   output latches to allow a user thread to snapshot the counter values atomically, but this would
                   increase the size of the user context, especially for implementations with a richer set of
                   counters.

The implemented number and width of these additional counters, and the set of events they count, are
platform-specific. Accessing an unimplemented counter may cause an illegal-instruction exception or may
return a constant value. If the configuration used to select the events counted by a counter is
misconfigured, the counter may return a constant value.

The execution environment should provide a means to determine the number and width of the
implemented counters, and an interface to configure the events to be counted by each counter.

                   For execution environments implemented on RISC-V privileged platforms, the privileged
                   architecture manual describes privileged CSRs controlling access by lower privileged modes to
                   these counters, and to set the events to be counted.

                   Alternative execution environments (e.g., user-level-only software performance models) may
                  provide alternative mechanisms to configure the events counted by the performance counters.

                   It would be useful to eventually standardize event settings to count ISA-level metrics, such as
                   the number of floating-point instructions executed for example, and possibly a few common
                   microarchitectural metrics, such as “L1 instruction cache misses”.

4.5. M Extension for Integer Multiplication and Division
This chapter describes the standard integer multiplication and division instruction extension, which is
named M and contains instructions that multiply or divide values held in two integer registers.

                   We separate integer multiply and divide out from the base to simplify low-end
                  implementations, or for applications where integer multiply and divide operations are either
                   infrequent or better handled in attached accelerators.

4.5.1. Multiplication Operations

 31                      25 24                20 19                  15 14    12 11          7   6                0
          funct7                     rs2                  rs1            funct3        rd            opcode
            7                        5                    5            3               5               7
          MULDIV                 multiplier          multiplicandMUL/MULH[[S]U]       dest            OP
          MULDIV                 multiplier          multiplicand    MULW             dest           OP-32

MUL performs an XLEN-bit×XLEN-bit multiplication of rs1 by rs2 and places the lower XLEN bits in the
destination register. MULH, MULHU, and MULHSU perform the same multiplication but return the upper
XLEN bits of the full 2×XLEN-bit product, for signed×signed, unsigned×unsigned, and rs1×unsigned rs2
multiplication.

If both the high and low bits of the same product are required, the recommended code sequence is
MULH rdh, rs1, rs2 followed by MUL rdl, rs1, rs2. MULHU or MULHSU can be used instead of MULH if

appropriate. Note that the source register specifiers, rs1 and rs2, must be in same order and rdh cannot be
the same as rs1 or rs2. Microarchitectures can then fuse these into a single multiply operation instead of
performing two separate multiplies.

                   MULHSU is used in multi-word signed multiplication to multiply the most-significant word of
                  the multiplicand (which contains the sign bit) with the less-significant words of the multiplier
                   (which are unsigned).

MULW is an RV64 instruction that multiplies the lower 32 bits of the source registers, placing the sign
extension of the lower 32 bits of the result into the destination register.

                   In RV64, MUL can be used to obtain the upper 32 bits of the 64-bit product, but signed
                   arguments must be proper 32-bit signed values, whereas unsigned arguments must have their
                  upper 32 bits clear. If the arguments are not known to be sign- or zero-extended, an
                   alternative is to shift both arguments left by 32 bits, then use MULH, mulhu[] or mulhsu[].

4.5.2. Division Operations

 31                     25 24               20 19             15 14        12 11               7    6                       0
          funct7                   rs2                 rs1          funct3             rd                    opcode
          7                         5                    5           3                 5                       7
        MULDIV                   divisor             dividend DIV[U]/REM[U]           dest                    OP
        MULDIV                   divisor             dividend DIV[U]W/REM[U]W         dest                   OP-32

DIV and DIVU perform an XLEN bits by XLEN bits signed and unsigned integer division of rs1 by rs2,
rounding towards zero. REM and REMU provide the remainder of the corresponding division operation.
For REM, the sign of a nonzero result equals the sign of the dividend.

                   For both signed and unsigned division, except in the case of overflow, it holds that dividend =
                  divisor × quotient + remainder.

If both the quotient and remainder are required from the same division, the recommended code sequence
is DIV rdq, rs1, rs2 followed by rem[rdr,rs1,rs2]. DIVU and REMU can also be used if appropriate. Note that
rdq can not be the same as rs1 or rs2. Microarchitectures can then fuse these into a single divide operation
instead of performing two separate divides.

DIVW and DIVUW are RV64 instructions that divide the lower 32 bits of rs1 by the lower 32 bits of rs2,
treating them as signed and unsigned integers, placing the 32-bit quotient in rd, sign-extended to 64 bits.
REMW and REMUW are RV64 instructions that provide the corresponding signed and unsigned
remainder operations. Both REMW and REMUW always sign-extend the 32-bit result to 64 bits, including
on a divide by zero. The semantics for division by zero and division overflow are summarized in Table 22.
The quotient of division by zero has all bits set, and the remainder of division by zero equals the dividend.
Signed division overflow occurs only when the most-negative integer is divided by −1. The quotient of a
signed division with overflow is equal to the dividend, and the remainder is zero. Unsigned division
overflow cannot occur.

  Table 22. Semantics for division by zero and division overflow. L is the width of the operation in bits: XLEN for DIV,
                      DIVU, REM, and REMU, or 32 for DIVW, DIVUW, REMW, and REMUW.
Condition                        Dividend           Divisor    DIVU/DIVU REMU/REM                DIV/DIVW       REM/REMW
                                                                   W        UW
Division by zero                      x               0             2L-1              x                 −1             x
Overflow (signed only)              -2L-1             −1             —               —               -2L-1             0

                  We considered raising exceptions on integer divide by zero, with these exceptions causing a

                   trap in most execution environments. However, this would be the only arithmetic trap in the
                   standard ISA (floating-point exceptions set flags and write default values, but do not cause
                   traps) and would require language implementers to interact with the execution environment’s
                   trap handlers for this case. Further, where language standards mandate that a divide-by-zero
                   exception must cause an immediate control flow change, only a single branch instruction
                   needs to be added to each divide operation, and this branch instruction can be inserted after
                   the divide and should normally be very predictably not taken, adding little runtime overhead.

                   The value of all bits set is returned for both unsigned and signed divide by zero to simplify the
                   divider circuitry. The value of all 1s is both the natural value to return for unsigned divide,
                   representing the largest unsigned number, and also the natural result for simple unsigned
                   divider implementations. Signed division is often implemented using an unsigned division
                   circuit and specifying the same overflow result simplifies the hardware.

4.6. Zmmul Extension for Integer Multiplication
The Zmmul extension implements the multiplication subset of the M extension. It adds the following
instructions defined in M: MUL, MULH, MULHU, MULHSU, and (for RV64 only) MULW. The encodings
and semantics are identical to those of the corresponding instructions in M. M implies Zmmul.

                   The Zmmul extension enables low-cost implementations that require multiplication operations
                   but not division. For many microcontroller applications, division operations are too infrequent
                   to justify the cost of divider hardware. By contrast, multiplication operations are more
                  frequent, making the cost of multiplier hardware more justifiable. Simple FPGA soft cores
                   particularly benefit from eliminating division but retaining multiplication, since many FPGAs
                   provide hardwired multipliers but require dividers be implemented in soft logic.

4.7. Zicond Extension for Integer Conditional Operations
The Zicond extension defines two R-type instructions that support branchless conditional operations.

 RV32      RV64 Mnemonic                                Instruction
     ✓        ✓    czero.eqz rd, rs1, rs2               Conditional zero, if condition is equal to zero
     ✓        ✓    czero.nez rd, rs1, rs2               Conditional zero, if condition is nonzero

4.7.1. Instructions (in alphabetical order)

4.7.1.1. CZERO.EQZ

Synopsis
     Moves zero to a register rd, if the condition rs2 is equal to zero, otherwise moves rs1 to rd.

Mnemonic
     czero.eqz rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                       25 24               20 19             15 14         12 11             7   6                          0
 0    0   0   0   1   1   1          rs2                rs1           1   0   1         rd          0     1   1   0    0   1   1
           CZERO                  condition            value       CZERO.EQZ                                      OP

Description

If rs2 contains the value zero, this instruction writes the value zero to rd. Otherwise, this instruction copies
the contents of rs1 to rd.

This instruction carries a syntactic dependency from both rs1 and rs2 to rd.

Furthermore, if the Zkt extension is implemented, this instruction’s timing is independent of the data
values in rs1 and rs2.

SAIL code

    let condition = X(rs2);
    result : xlenbits = if (condition == zeros()) then zeros()
                                                                    else X(rs1);
    X(rd) = result;

4.7.1.2. CZERO.NEZ

Synopsis
     Moves zero to a register rd, if the condition rs2 is nonzero, otherwise moves rs1 to rd.

Mnemonic
     czero.nez rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                       25 24               20 19             15 14         12 11          7   6                        0
 0    0   0   0   1   1   1         rs2                 rs1           1   1   1       rd         0   1   1   0    0   1   1
           CZERO                  condition            value         CZERO.NEZ                               OP

Description

If rs2 contains a nonzero value, this instruction writes the value zero to rd. Otherwise, this instruction
copies the contents of rs1 to rd.

This instruction carries a syntactic dependency from both rs1 and rs2 to rd.

Furthermore, if the Zkt extension is implemented, this instruction’s timing is independent of the data
values in rs1 and rs2.

SAIL code

      let condition = X(rs2);
      result : xlenbits = if (condition != zeros()) then zeros()
                                                                              else X(rs1);
      X(rd) = result;

4.7.2. Usage examples

The instructions from this extension can be used to construct sequences that perform conditional-
arithmetic, conditional-bitwise-logical, and conditional-select operations.

4.7.2.1. Instruction sequences

Operation                                        Instruction sequence                               Length

Conditional add, if zero                         czero.nez     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc == 0) ? (rs1 + rs2) : rs1               add           rd, rs1, rd

Conditional add, if non-zero                     czero.eqz     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc != 0) ? (rs1 + rs2) : rs1               add           rd, rs1, rd

Conditional subtract, if zero                    czero.nez     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc == 0) ? (rs1 - rs2) : rs1               sub           rd, rs1, rd

Conditional subtract, if non-zero                czero.eqz     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc != 0) ? (rs1 - rs2) : rs1               sub           rd, rs1, rd
                                                                                                     2 insns
Conditional bitwise-or, if zero                  czero.nez     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc == 0) ? (rs1 | rs2) : rs1               or            rd, rs1, rd

Conditional bitwise-or, if non-zero              czero.eqz     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc != 0) ? (rs1 | rs2) : rs1               or            rd, rs1, rd

Conditional bitwise-xor, if zero                 czero.nez     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc == 0) ? (rs1 ^ rs2) : rs1               xor           rd, rs1, rd

Conditional bitwise-xor, if non-zero             czero.eqz     rd, rs2, rc
rd = (rc != 0) ? (rs1 ^ rs2) : rs1               xor           rd, rs1, rd

Conditional bitwise-and, if zero                 and           rd, rs1, rs2
rd = (rc == 0) ? (rs1 & rs2) : rs1               czero.eqz     rtmp, rs1, rc
                                                 or            rd, rd, rtmp

Conditional bitwise-and, if non-zero             and           rd, rs1, rs2
rd = (rc != 0) ? (rs1 & rs2) : rs1               czero.nez     rtmp, rs1, rc
                                                 or            rd, rd, rtmp                        3 insns
Conditional select, if zero                      czero.nez     rd, rs1, rc                  (requires 1 temporary)
rd = (rc == 0) ? rs1 : rs2                       czero.eqz     rtmp, rs2, rc
                                                 add           rd, rd, rtmp

Conditional select, if non-zero                  czero.eqz     rd, rs1, rc
rd = (rc != 0) ? rs1 : rs2                       czero.nez     rtmp, rs2, rc
                                                 add           rd, rd, rtmp

4.8. Zilsd Extension for Load/Store Pair Instructions
The Zilsd extension provides load/store pair instructions for RV32, reusing the existing RV64 doubleword
load/store instruction encodings.

Operands containing src for store instructions and dest for load instructions are held in aligned x-register
pairs, i.e., register numbers must be even. Use of misaligned (odd-numbered) registers for these operands is
reserved.

Regardless of endianness, the lower-numbered register holds the low-order bits, and the higher-numbered
register holds the high-order bits: e.g., bits 31:0 of an operand in Zilsd might be held in register x14, with
bits 63:32 of that operand held in x15.

The Zilsd extension adds the following RV32-only instructions:

 RV32     RV64 Mnemonic                                 Instruction
  yes         no   LD rd, offset(rs1)                   Load doubleword to register pair, 32-bit encoding
  yes         no   SD rs2, offset(rs1)                  Store doubleword from register pair, 32-bit encoding

As the access size is 64-bit, accesses are only considered naturally aligned for effective addresses that are a
multiple of 8. In this case, these instructions are guaranteed to not raise an address-misaligned exception.
Even if naturally aligned, the memory access might not be performed atomically.

If the effective address is a multiple of 4, then each word access is required to be performed atomically.

The following table summarizes the required behavior:

Alignment                                  Word accesses guaranteed atomic?         Can cause misaligned trap?
8B                                         yes                                      no
4 B not 8 B                                yes                                      yes
else                                       no                                       yes

To ensure resumable trap handling is possible for the load instructions, the base register must have its
original value if a trap is taken. The other register in the pair can have been updated. This affects x2 for the
stack pointer relative instruction and rs1 otherwise.

                   If an implementation performs a doubleword load access atomically and the register file
                   implements write-back for even/odd register pairs, the mentioned atomicity requirements are
                  inherently fulfilled. Otherwise, an implementation either needs to delay the write-back until the
                   write can be performed atomically, or order sequential writes to the registers to ensure the
                   requirement above is satisfied.

4.8.1. Use of x0 as operand

LD instructions with destination x0 are processed as any other load, but the result is discarded entirely and
x1 is not written.

If using x0 as src of SD, the entire 64-bit operand is zero — i.e., register x1 is not accessed.

4.8.2. Exception Handling

For the purposes of RVWMO and exception handling, LD and SD instructions are considered to be
misaligned loads and stores, with one additional constraint: an LD or SD instruction whose effective
address is a multiple of 4 gives rise to two 4-byte memory operations.

                   This definition permits LD and SD instructions giving rise to exactly one memory access,
                   regardless of alignment. If instructions with 4-byte-aligned effective address are decomposed
                   into two 32b operations, there is no constraint on the order in which the operations are
                  performed and each operation is guaranteed to be atomic. These decomposed sequences are
                   interruptible. Exceptions might occur on subsequent operations, making the effects of previous
                   operations within the same instruction visible.

                   Software should make no assumptions about the number or order of accesses these
                  instructions might give rise to, beyond the 4-byte constraint mentioned above. For example, an
                   interrupted store might overwrite the same bytes upon return from the interrupt handler.

4.8.3. Instructions

4.8.3.1. LD

Synopsis
   Load doubleword to even/odd register pair, 32-bit encoding

Mnemonic
   ld rd, offset(rs1)

Encoding (RV32)

 31                                  20 19            15 14       12 11               7   6                          0
                 imm[11:0]                     rs1        0   1   1           rd          0   0   0    0     0   1   1
                offset[11:0]                  base        width=D     dest, dest[0]=0                 LOAD

Description

Loads a 64-bit value into registers rd and rd+1. The effective address is obtained by adding register rs1 to
the sign-extended 12-bit offset.

Included in: Zilsd

4.8.3.2. SD

Synopsis
   Store doubleword from even/odd register pair, 32-bit encoding

Mnemonic
   sd rs2, offset(rs1)

Encoding (RV32)

 31                      25 24              20 19                 15 14       12 11                 7   6                       0
        imm[11:5]                   rs2                rs1           0    1   1        imm[4:0]         0   1   0   0   0   1   1
       offset[11:5]           src, src[0]=0            base          width=D          offset[4:0]               STORE

Description

Stores a 64-bit value from registers rs2 and rs2+1. The effective address is obtained by adding register rs1
to the sign-extended 12-bit offset.

Included in: Zilsd

4.9. Ziccif Extension for Instruction-Fetch Atomicity
                  This extension was ratified alongside the RVA20U64 profile. This chapter supplies an
                 operational definition for the extension and adds expository material.

If the Ziccif extension is implemented, main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability
PMAs must support instruction fetch, and any instruction fetches of naturally aligned power-of-2 sizes of
at most min(ILEN,XLEN) bits are atomic.

An implementation with the Ziccif extension fetches instructions in a manner equivalent to the following
state machine.

 1. Let M be the smallest power of 2 such that M ≥ min(ILEN,XLEN)/8. Let N be the pc modulo M. Atomically
    fetch M - N bytes from memory at address pc. Let T be the running total of bytes fetched, initially M - N.
 2. If the T bytes fetched begin with a complete instruction of length L ≤ T, then execute that instruction,
    discard the remaining T - L bytes fetched, and go back to step 1, using the updated pc. Otherwise,
    atomically fetch M bytes from memory at address pc + T, increment T by M, and repeat step 2.

                  The instruction-fetch atomicity rule supports concurrent code modification. When a hart
                  modifies instruction memory and either it or another hart executes the modified instructions
                  without first having executing a FENCE.I, the modifying hart should adhere to the following
                  rules to ensure predictable behavior:

                    ⚫ Modification stores must be single-copy atomic, hence must be naturally aligned.
                    ⚫ The modified instruction must not span an aligned M-byte boundary, unless it is replaced
                     with a shorter unconditional control transfer (e.g., C.EBREAK or C.J) that does not itself
                      span an M-byte boundary.
                    ⚫ Modification stores must alter a complete instruction or complete instructions that do not
                      collectively span an M-byte boundary, modulo the exception above that the first part of an
                      instruction may be replaced with an unconditional control transfer instruction.
                    ⚫ Modifications must not combine smaller instructions into a larger instruction but may
                      convert a larger instruction to some number of smaller instructions.

                ⚫ Modified instruction memory must have the coherence PMA.

               Other well-defined code-modification strategies exist, but these rules provide a safe harbor.

               Note that the software modifying the code need not know the value of M. Because ILEN must be
               at least the width of the instruction being modified, a lower bound on M can be inferred from
               the instruction’s width and XLEN.

Memory protection and executability PMAs are applied only to bytes that are not discarded by this
algorithm.

               For example, if M=8, N=0, and the PMP granularity is 4 bytes, then it is valid to fetch a 4-byte
               instruction at pc, even if fetching from pc + 4 would have been disallowed by PMP.
   
               For simplicity, implementations are likely to choose a PMP granularity no smaller than M.

4.10. Ziccid Extension for Instruction/Data Coherence and Consistency
The Ziccid extension mandates more stringent requirements for consistency between instruction fetches
and other memory accesses than those imposed by the base ISA. As described in detail in the next section,
Ziccid guarantees that a hart’s instruction fetches appear to occur in program order with respect to each
other, and that stores eventually become visible to all harts' instruction fetches.

               The primary intent of the Ziccid extension is to accelerate JIT compilation in multiprocessor
               systems.

               In straightforward implementations, maintaining coherence between instruction caches and
               the data-memory system suffices to satisfy this extension’s eventuality property. The Ziccid
               extension can be viewed as a means to codify the concept of instruction-cache coherence.
              The in-order fetch property, expected by some JIT compilers, is also provided naturally by most
               straightforward microarchitectures. An example of a technique that might violate this
               property, however, is an instruction buffer that is populated out of program order, e.g., while
               fetching down the predicted path following an instruction-cache miss. Example solutions
               include buffering instructions only in program order, or keeping the buffer coherent by making
               the coherent instruction cache inclusive of the buffer.

               Under Ziccid, stores eventually become visible to instruction fetches, even without executing a
               FENCE.I instruction. As a consequence of this requirement, the consumer thread in the
               following litmus test is guaranteed to terminate:

                 Producer:                                                             Consumer:

                 la t0, patch_me                                                    patch_me:
                 li t1, 0x4585                                                         c.li a1, 0
                sh t1, (t0)   # patch_me := c.li a1, 1                                beqz a1, patch_me

               As is the case without the Ziccid extension, software can make a store from the current hart
               visible to the hart’s instruction fetches immediately by executing a FENCE.I instruction.
               Software can make a store from the current hart visible to another hart’s instruction fetches by
               executing a FENCE W,O instruction, then sending an interprocessor interrupt to the remote
               hart, requesting that it execute a FENCE.I instruction. Alternatively, the current hart can

                 execute a FENCE W,W instruction, then write a flag in memory; upon observing the flag write,
                 the remote hart executes a FENCE.I instruction. In neither case is a data FENCE required on
                 the remote hart.

The Ziccid extension depends on the Ziccif extension.

                 Although instruction/data consistency and instruction-fetch atomicity are conceptually
                independent properties, the former is much more useful in conjunction with the latter.

4.10.1. Operational Model of the Ziccid Extension

An implementation with the Ziccid extension behaves in a manner consistent with the following
operational model. This model only applies to instruction fetches to memory regions with the cacheability
and coherence PMAs; instruction fetches to other memory regions proceed as though the Ziccid extension
were not implemented.

                 Informally, instructions in incoherent and/or uncacheable memory regions may be
                incoherently cached; this cache is flushed upon execution of a FENCE.I instruction.

Harts have two ordered operational stages: instruction fetch and execution. Each hart has an instruction
buffer of bounded capacity. Instructions are fetched from memory in program order, then inserted into the
instruction buffer in program order.

An instruction fetch is a memory read operation that appears in the global memory order, in program
order with respect to other instruction fetches from the same hart. For each instruction byte fetched from
memory, memory supplies the value written by the most recent store that precedes the read in global
memory order.

                 This property is distinct from than the load-value axiom, in that fetches do not observe the
                local hart’s stores before other harts' fetches can observe them.

Instruction fetches appear in the global memory order before any explicit memory accesses to which they
give rise.

                 Absent the execution of a FENCE.I instruction, there is no requirement that younger
                 instruction fetches appear in the global memory order later than older explicit memory
                 accesses. For example, if a program consists of two store instructions X and Y to distinct
                 addresses AX and AY, then the following global orders are valid:
                  ⚫ fetch X, fetch Y, store AX, store AY
                   ⚫ fetch X, fetch Y, store AY, store AX
                   ⚫ fetch X, store AX, fetch Y, store AY

After some amount of time, instructions are dequeued in program order from the instruction buffer and
executed.

                 Therefore, absent the execution of a FENCE.I instruction, stores do not necessarily become
                visibile immediately to subsequent instruction fetches, though they do eventually become
                 visible to subsequent instruction fetches.

Instructions are executed in program order, but instructions' explicit memory accesses may be reordered in
any manner consistent with RVWMO.

                Executing a FENCE w, w instruction between two store instructions, for example, suffices to

               guarantee that the second store will not become visible to any instruction fetch before the first
               store does.

The FENCE.I instruction performs the following operations sequentially:

 ⚫ All of the hart’s older explicit memory accesses become globally visible.
 ⚫ The instruction buffer is flushed.

               The FENCE.I instruction in Ziccid is specified such that software written for non-Ziccid
               machines is compatible with Ziccid machines. For cacheable and coherent memory regions,
              the combination of making older stores globally visible and flushing the instruction buffer on
               FENCE.I suffices to implement FENCE.I’s pre-Ziccid semantics for those regions.

4.11. Ziccrse Extension for Main Memory Reservability
If the Ziccrse extension is implemented, then main memory regions with both the coherence and
cacheability PMAs must support the RsrvEventual PMA.

4.12. Ziccamoa Extension for Main Memory Atomics
If the Ziccamoa extension is implemented, then main memory regions with both the coherence and
cacheability PMAs must provide AMOArithmetic-level PMA support as defined in Volume II, Section
3.6.3.1.

4.13. Ziccamoc Extension for Main Memory Compare-and-Swap
If the Ziccamoc extension is implemented, then main memory regions with both the coherence and
cacheability PMAs must provide AMOCASQ-level PMA support as defined in Volume II, Section 3.6.3.1.

4.14. Zicclsm Extension for Main Memory Misaligned Accesses
If the Zicclsm extension is implemented, then misaligned loads and stores to main memory regions with
both the coherence and cacheability PMAs must be supported.

               This definition includes vector memory accesses. It does not include any instructions in the
              various Za* extensions.

               Even though mandated, misaligned loads and stores might execute extremely slowly. Standard
              software distributions should assume their existence only for correctness, not for performance.

4.15. Zic64b Extension for 64-byte Cache Blocks
If the Zic64b extension is implemented, then cache blocks must be 64 bytes in size, naturally aligned in the
address space.

4.16. Zimop Extension for May-Be-Operations
This chapter defines the Zimop extension, which introduces the concept of instructions that may be
operations (MOPs). MOPs are initially defined to simply write zero to x[rd], but are designed to be
redefined by later extensions to perform some other action. The Zimop extension defines an encoding space

for 40 MOPs.

                   It is sometimes desirable to define instruction-set extensions whose instructions, rather than
                   raising illegal-instruction exceptions when the extension is not implemented, take no useful
                   action (beyond writing x[rd]). For example, programs with control-flow integrity checks can
                   execute correctly on implementations without the corresponding extension, provided the
                   checks are simply ignored. Implementing these checks as MOPs allows the same programs to

                  run on implementations with or without the corresponding extension.

                   Although similar in some respects to HINTs, MOPs cannot be encoded as HINTs, because
                   unlike HINTs, MOPs are allowed to alter architectural state.

                   Because MOPs may be redefined by later extensions, standard software should not execute a
                   MOP unless it is deliberately targeting an extension that has redefined that MOP.

The Zimop extension defines 32 MOP instructions named MOP.R.n, where n is an integer between 0 and 31,
inclusive. Unless redefined by another extension, these instructions simply write 0 to x[rd]. Their
encoding allows future extensions to define them to read x[rs1], as well as write x[rd].

 31   30 29   28   27   26 25            22    21   20   19         15 14       12 11        7   6                            0
 1 n[4] 0     0    n[3:2]   0   1    1   1     n[1:0]         rs1      1    0   0       rd       1   1   1     0      0   1   1
                                                                                                             SYSTEM

The Zimop extension additionally defines 8 MOP instructions named MOP.RR.n, where n is an integer
between 0 and 7, inclusive. Unless redefined by another extension, these instructions simply write 0 to
x[rd]. Their encoding allows future extensions to define them to read x[rs1] and x[rs2], as well as write
x[rd].

 31   30 29   28   27   26 25   24                  20   19         15 14       12 11        7   6                            0
 1 n[2] 0     0    n[1:0]   1            rs2                  rs1      1    0   0       rd       1   1   1     0      0   1   1
                                                                                                             SYSTEM

                   The recommended assembly syntax for MOP.R.n is MOP.R.n rd, rs1, with any x-register
                   specifier being valid for either argument. Similarly for MOP.RR.n, the recommended syntax is
                  MOP.RR.n rd, rs1, rs2. The extension that redefines a MOP may define an alternate assembly
                   mnemonic.

                   These MOPs are encoded in the SYSTEM major opcode in part because it is expected their
                  behavior will be modulated by privileged CSR state.

                   These MOPs are defined to write zero to x[rd], rather than performing no operation, to
                  simplify instruction decoding and to allow testing the presence of features by branching on the
                   zeroness of the result.

The MOPs defined in the Zimop extension do not carry a syntactic dependency from x[rs1] or x[rs2] to
x[rd], though an extension that redefines the MOP may impose such a requirement.

                   Not carrying a syntactic dependency relieves straightforward implementations of reading
                  x[rs1] and x[rs2].

4.17. Control-Flow Integrity (CFI)
Control-flow integrity (CFI) capabilities help defend against Return-Oriented Programming (ROP) and
Call/Jump-Oriented Programming (COP/JOP) style control-flow subversion attacks. These attack
methodologies use code sequences in authorized modules, with at least one instruction in the sequence
being a control transfer instruction that depends on attacker-controlled data either in the return stack or in

memory used to obtain the target address for a call or jump. Attackers stitch these sequences together by
diverting the control flow instructions (e.g., JALR, C.JR, C.JALR), from their original target address to a new
target via modification in the return stack or in the memory used to obtain the jump/call target address.

RV32/RV64 provides two types of control transfer instructions - unconditional jumps and conditional
branches. Conditional branches encode an offset in the immediate field of the instruction and are thus
direct branches that are not susceptible to control-flow subversion. Unconditional direct jumps using JAL
transfer control to a target that is in a ±1 MiB range from the current pc. Unconditional indirect jumps
using the JALR obtain their branch target by adding the sign extended 12-bit immediate encoded in the
instruction to the rs1 register.

The RV32I/RV64I does not have a dedicated instruction for calling a procedure or returning from a
procedure. A JAL or JALR may be used to perform a procedure call and JALR to return from a procedure.
The RISC-V ABI however defines the convention that a JAL/JALR where rd (i.e. the link register) is x1 or x5
is a procedure call, and a JALR where rs1 is the conventional link register (i.e. x1 or x5) is a return from
procedure. The architecture allows for using these hints and conventions to support return address
prediction (See Table 2).

The Zca standard extension for compressed instructions provides unconditional jump and conditional
branch instructions. The C.J and C.JAL instructions encode an offset in the immediate field of the
instruction and thus are not susceptible to control-flow subversion. The C.JR and C.JALR instructions
perform an unconditional control transfer to the address in register rs1. The C.JALR additionally writes the
address of the instruction following the jump (pc+2) to the link register x1 and is a procedure call. The C.JR
is a return from procedure if rs1 is a conventional link register (i.e. x1 or x5); else it is an indirect jump.

The term call is used to refer to a JAL, JALR or C.JAL instruction with a link register as destination, i.e., rd
≠x0. Conventionally, the link register is x1 or x5. A call using JAL or C.JAL is termed a direct call. A C.JALR
expands to JALR x1, 0(rs1) and thus it is a call. A call using JALR or C.JALR is termed an indirect call.

The term return is used to refer to a JALR instruction with rd=x0 and with rs1=x1 or rs1=x5. A C.JR
instruction expands to JALR x0, 0(rs1) and is a return if rs1=x1 or rs1=x5.

The term indirect jump is used to refer to a JALR instruction with rd=x0 and where the rs1 is not x1 or x5
(i.e., not a return). A C.JR instruction where rs1 is not x1 or x5 (i.e., not a return) is an indirect jump.

The Zicfiss and Zicfilp extensions build on these conventions and hints and provide backward-edge and
forward-edge CFI respectively.

The Unprivileged ISA for Zicfilp extension is specified in Section 4.17.1 and for the Unprivileged ISA for
Zicfiss extension is specified in Section 4.17.2. The Privileged ISA for Zicfilp extension is specified in
Volume II, Section 6.9.1 and for the Privileged ISA for Zicfiss extension is specified in Volume II, Section
6.9.2.

4.17.1. Zicfilp for Landing Pad

To enforce forward-edge CFI, the Zicfilp extension introduces a landing pad (LPAD) instruction. The
LPAD instruction must be placed at the program locations that are valid targets of indirect jumps or calls.
The LPAD instruction (See Section 4.17.1.2) is encoded using the AUIPC major opcode with rd=x0.

Compilers emit a landing pad instruction as the first instruction of an address-taken function, as well as at
any indirect jump targets. A landing pad instruction is not required in functions that are only reached
using a direct call or direct jump.

The landing pad is designed to provide integrity to control transfers performed using indirect calls and
jumps, and this is referred to as forward-edge protection. When the Zicfilp is active, the hart tracks an

expected landing pad (ELP) state that is updated by an indirect call or indirect jump to require a landing
pad instruction at the target of the branch. If the instruction at the target is not a landing pad, then a
software-check exception is raised.

A landing pad may be optionally associated with a 20-bit label. With labeling enabled, the number of
landing pads that can be reached from an indirect call or jump sites can be defined using programming
language-based policies. Labeling of the landing pads enables software to achieve greater precision in
pairing up indirect call/jump sites with valid targets. When labeling of landing pads is used, indirect call or
indirect jump site can specify the expected label of the landing pad and thereby constrain the set of landing
pads that may be reached from each indirect call or indirect jump site in the program.

In the simplest form, a program can be built with a single label value to implement a coarse-grained
version of forward-edge CFI. By constraining gadgets to be preceded by a landing pad instruction that
marks the start of indirect callable functions, the program can significantly reduce the available gadget
space. A second form of label generation may generate a signature, such as a MAC, using the prototype of
the function. Programs that use this approach would further constrain the gadgets accessible from a call
site to only indirectly callable functions that match the prototype of the called functions. Another approach
to label generation involves analyzing the control-flow graph (CFG) of the program, which can lead to even
more stringent constraints on the set of reachable gadgets. Such programs may further use multiple labels
per function, which means that if a function is called from two or more call sites, the functions can be
labeled as being reachable from each of the call sites. For instance, consider two call sites A and B, where A
calls the functions X and Y, and B calls the functions Y and Z. In a single label scheme, functions X, Y, and
Z would need to be assigned the same label so that both call sites A and B can invoke the common function
Y. This scheme would allow call site A to also call function Z and call site B to also call function X. However,
if function Y was assigned two labels - one corresponding to call site A and the other to call site B, then Y
can be invoked by both call sites, but X can only be invoked by call site A and Z can only be invoked by call
site B. To support multiple labels, the compiler could generate a call-site-specific entry point for shared
functions, with each entry point having its own landing pad instruction followed by a direct branch to the
start of the function. This would allow the function to be labeled with multiple labels, each corresponding
to a specific call site. A portion of the label space may be dedicated to labeled landing pads that are only
valid targets of an indirect jump (and not an indirect call).

The LPAD instruction uses the code points defined as HINTs for the AUIPC opcode. When Zicfilp is not
active at a privilege level or when the extension is not implemented, the landing pad instruction executes
as a no-op. A program that is built with LPAD instructions can thus continue to operate correctly, but
without forward-edge CFI, on processors that do not support the Zicfilp extension or if the Zicfilp
extension is not active.

Compilers and linkers should provide an attribute flag to indicate if the program has been compiled with
the Zicfilp extension and use that to determine if the Zicfilp extension should be activated. The dynamic
loader should activate the use of Zicfilp extension for an application only if all executables (the
application and the dependent dynamically linked libraries) used by that application use the Zicfilp
extension.

When Zicfilp extension is not active or not implemented, the hart does not require landing pad
instructions at the targets of indirect calls/jumps, and the landing instructions revert to being no-ops. This
allows a program compiled with landing pad instructions to operate correctly but without forward-edge
CFI.

The Zicfilp extensions may be activated for use individually and independently for each privilege mode.

The Zicfilp extension depends on the Zicsr extension.

4.17.1.1. Landing Pad Enforcement

To enforce that the target of an indirect call or indirect jump must be a valid landing pad instruction, the
hart maintains an expected landing pad (ELP) state to determine if a landing pad instruction is required at
the target of an indirect call or an indirect jump. The ELP state can be one of:

 ⚫ 0 - NO_LP_EXPECTED
 ⚫ 1 - LP_EXPECTED

The ELP state is initialized to NO_LP_EXPECTED by the hart upon reset.

The Zicfilp extension, when enabled, determines if an indirect call or an indirect jump must land on a
landing pad, as specified in Listing 2. If is_lp_expected is 1, then the hart updates the ELP to LP_EXPECTED.

     is_lp_expected = ( (JALR || C.JR || C.JALR) &&
                        (rs1 != x1) && (rs1 != x5) && (rs1 != x7) ) ? 1 : 0;

Listing 2. Landing pad expected determination

An indirect branch using JALR, C.JALR, or C.JR with rs1 as x7 is termed a software-guarded branch. Such
branches do not need to land on a LPAD instruction and thus do not set ELP to LP_EXPECTED.

                When the register source is a link register and the register destination is x0, then it’s a return
                from a procedure and does not require a landing pad at the target.

                When the register source and register destination are both link registers, then it is a
                semantically direct call. For example, the CALL offset pseudoinstruction may expand to a two
                instruction sequence composed of a LUI ra, imm20 or a AUIPC ra, imm20 instruction followed
                by a JALR ra, imm12(ra) instruction where ra is the link register (either x1 or x5). Since the
                address of the procedure was not explicitly taken and the computed address is not obtained
                from mutable memory, such semantically direct calls do not require a landing pad to be placed
                at the target. Compilers and JITers must use the semantically direct calls only if the rs1 was
                computed as a PC-relative or an absolute offset to the symbol.
    
                The TAIL offset pseudoinstruction used to tail call a far-away procedure may also be expanded
                to a two instruction sequence composed of a LUI x7, imm20 or AUIPC x7, imm20 followed by a
                JALR x0, x7. Since the address of the procedure was not explicitly taken and the computed
                address is not obtained from mutable memory, such semantically direct tail calls do not
                require a landing pad to be placed at the target.

                Software guarded branches may also be used by compilers to generate code for constructs like
                switch-cases. When using the software-guarded branches, the compiler is required to ensure it
                has full control on the possible jump targets (e.g., by obtaining the targets from a read-only
                table in memory and performing bounds checking on the index into the table, etc.).

The landing pad may be labeled. Zicfilp extension designates the register x7 for use as the landing pad
label register. To support labeled landing pads, the indirect call/jump sites establish an expected landing
pad label (e.g., using the LUI instruction) in the bits 31:12 of the x7 register. The LPAD instruction is
encoded with a 20-bit immediate value called the landing-pad-label (LPL) that is matched to the expected
landing pad label. When LPL is encoded as zero, the LPAD instruction does not perform the label check and
in programs built with this single label mode of operation the indirect call/jump sites do not need to
establish an expected landing pad label value in x7.

When ELP is set to LP_EXPECTED, if the next instruction in the instruction stream is not 4-byte aligned, or is

not LPAD, or if the landing pad label encoded in LPAD is not zero and does not match the expected landing
pad label in bits 31:12 of the x7 register, then a software-check exception (cause=18) with xtval set to
“landing pad fault (code=2)” is raised else the ELP is updated to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

                   The tracking of ELP and the requirement for a landing pad instruction at the target of indirect
                   call and jump enables a processor implementation to significantly reduce or to prevent
                   speculation to non-landing-pad instructions. Constraining speculation using this technique,
                   greatly reduces the gadget space and increases the difficulty of using techniques such as
                   branch-target-injection, also known as Spectre (Kocher et al., 2019) variant 2, which use
                   speculative execution to leak data through side channels.

                  The LPAD requires a 4-byte alignment to address the concatenation of two instructions A and
                   B accidentally forming an unintended landing pad in the program. For example, consider a
                   32-bit instruction where the bytes 3 and 2 have a pattern of 0x?017 (for example, the
                   immediate fields of a LUI, AUIPC, or a JAL instruction), followed by a 16-bit or a 32-bit
                   instruction. When patterns that can accidentally form a valid landing pad are detected, the
                   assembler or linker can force instruction A to be aligned to a 4-byte boundary to force the
                   unintended LPAD pattern to become misaligned, and thus not a valid landing pad, or may use
                   an alternate register allocation to prevent the accidental landing pad.

4.17.1.2. Landing Pad Instruction

When Zicfilp is enabled, LPAD is the only instruction allowed to execute when the ELP state is
LP_EXPECTED. If Zicfilp is not enabled then the instruction is a no-op. If Zicfilp is enabled, the LPAD
instruction causes a software-check exception with xtval set to “landing pad fault (code=2)” if any of the
following conditions are true:

 ⚫ The pc is not 4-byte aligned and ELP is LP_EXPECTED.
 ⚫ The ELP is LP_EXPECTED and the LPL is not zero and the LPL does not match the expected landing pad
   label in bits 31:12 of the x7 register.

If a software-check exception is not caused then the ELP is updated to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

 31                                                               12 11               7   6                        0
                                    LPL                                       rd                    opcode
                                                                            00000                    AUIPC

The operation of the LPAD instruction is as follows:

  if (xLPE == 1 && ELP == LP_EXPECTED)
       // If PC not 4-byte aligned then software-check exception
       if pc[1:0] != 0
             raise software-check exception
       // If landing pad label not matched -> software-check exception
       else if (inst.LPL != x7[31:12] && inst.LPL != 0)
             raise software-check exception
       else
             ELP = NO_LP_EXPECTED
  else
      no-op
  endif

Listing 3. LPAD operation

4.17.2. Shadow Stack (Zicfiss)

The Zicfiss extension introduces a shadow stack to enforce backward-edge CFI. A shadow stack is a
second stack used to store a shadow copy of the return address in the link register if it needs to be spilled.

The shadow stack is designed to provide integrity to control transfers performed using a return, where the
return may be from a procedure invoked using an indirect call or a direct call, and this is referred to as
backward-edge protection.

A program using backward-edge CFI has two stacks: a regular stack and a shadow stack. The shadow stack
is used to spill the link register, if required, by non-leaf functions. An additional register, shadow-stack-
pointer (ssp), is introduced in the architecture to hold the address of the top of the active shadow stack.

The shadow stack, similar to the regular stack, grows downwards, from higher addresses to lower addresses.
Each entry on the shadow stack is XLEN wide and holds the link register value. The ssp points to the top of
the shadow stack, which is the address of the last element stored on the shadow stack.

The shadow stack is architecturally protected from inadvertent corruptions and modifications, as detailed
in the Privileged specification.

The Zicfiss extension provides instructions to store and load the link register to/from the shadow stack
and to check the integrity of the return address. The extension provides instructions to support common
stack maintenance operations such as stack unwinding and stack switching.

When Zicfiss is enabled, each function that needs to spill the link register, typically non-leaf functions,
store the link register value to the regular stack and a shadow copy of the link register value to the shadow
stack when the function is entered (the prologue). When such a function returns (the epilogue), the
function loads the link register from the regular stack and the shadow copy of the link register from the
shadow stack. Then, the link register value from the regular stack and the shadow link register value from
the shadow stack are compared. A mismatch of the two values is indicative of a subversion of the return
address control variable and causes a software-check exception.

The Zicfiss instructions, except SSAMOSWAP.W and SSAMOSWAP.D, are encoded using a subset of
May-Be-Operation instructions defined by the Zimop and Zcmop extensions. This subset of instructions
revert to their Zimop- or Zcmop-defined behavior when the Zicfiss extension is not implemented or if the
extension has not been activated. A program that is built with Zicfiss instructions can thus continue to
operate correctly, but without backward-edge CFI, on processors that do not support the Zicfiss extension
or if the Zicfiss extension is not active. The Zicfiss extension may be activated for use individually and
independently for each privilege mode.

Compilers should flag each object file (for example, using flags in the ELF attributes) to indicate if the
object file has been compiled with the Zicfiss instructions. The linker should flag (for example, using flags
in the ELF attributes) the binary/executable generated by linking objects as being compiled with the
Zicfiss instructions only if all the object files that are linked have the same Zicfiss attributes.

The dynamic loader should activate the use of Zicfiss extension for an application only if all executables
(the application and the dependent dynamically-linked libraries) used by that application use the Zicfiss
extension.

An application that has the Zicfiss extension active may request the dynamic loader at runtime to load a
new dynamic shared object (using dlopen() for example). If the requested object does not have the Zicfiss
attribute then the dynamic loader, based on its policy (e.g., established by the operating system or the
administrator) configuration, could either deny the request or deactivate the Zicfiss extension for the
application. It is strongly recommended that the policy enforces a strict security posture and denies the
request.

The Zicfiss extension depends on the Zicsr, Zimop and Zaamo extensions. Furthermore, if the Zcmop
extension is implemented, the Zicfiss extension also provides the C.SSPUSH and C.SSPOPCHK
instructions. Moreover, use of Zicfiss in U-mode requires S-mode to be implemented. Use of Zicfiss in
M-mode is not supported.

4.17.2.1. Zicfiss Instructions Summary

The Zicfiss extension introduces the following instructions:

 ⚫ Push to the shadow stack (See Section 4.17.2.4)
     ⚫ SSPUSH x1 and SSPUSH x5 - encoded using MOP.RR.7
     ⚫ C.SSPUSH x1 - encoded using C.MOP.1
 ⚫ Pop from the shadow stack (See Section 4.17.2.5)
     ⚫ SSPOPCHK x1 and SSPOPCHK x5 - encoded using MOP.R.28
     ⚫ C.SSPOPCHK x5 - encoded using C.MOP.5
 ⚫ Read the value of ssp into a register (See Section 4.17.2.6)
     ⚫ SSRDP - encoded using MOP.R.28
 ⚫ Perform an atomic swap from a shadow stack location (See Section 4.17.2.7)
     ⚫ SSAMOSWAP.W and SSAMOSWAP.D

Zicfiss does not use all encodings of MOP.RR.7 or MOP.R.28. When a MOP.RR.7 or MOP.R.28 encoding is
not used by the Zicfiss extension, the corresponding instruction adheres to its Zimop-defined behavior,
unless redefined by another extension.

4.17.2.2. Shadow Stack Pointer (ssp)

The ssp CSR is an unprivileged read-write (URW) CSR that reads and writes XLEN low order bits of the
shadow stack pointer. The CSR address is 0x011. There is no high CSR defined as the ssp is always as wide
as the XLEN of the current privilege mode. The bits 1:0 of ssp are read-only zero. If the UXLEN or SXLEN
may never be 32, then the bit 2 is also read-only zero.

4.17.2.3. Zicfiss Instructions

4.17.2.4. Push to the Shadow Stack

A shadow stack push operation is defined as decrement of the ssp by XLEN/8 followed by a store of the
value in the link register to memory at the new top of the shadow stack.

 31                        25       24            20   19                  15 14            12 11            7   6                         0
           1100111                        rs2                    rs1               funct3            rd                  opcode
          SSPUSH x1                      00001                  00000               100             00000                SYSTEM
          SSPUSH x5                      00101

   15                 13    12           11      10                    8     7         6                             2       1         0
           011                  0        0             n[3:1]                1                       00000                        op
        C.SSPUSH x1                                     000                                                                       C1

Only x1 and x5 registers are supported as rs2 for SSPUSH. Zicfiss provides a 16-bit version of the
SSPUSH x1 instruction using the Zcmop defined C.MOP.1 encoding. The C.SSPUSH x1 expands to
SSPUSH x1.

The SSPUSH instruction and its compressed form C.SSPUSH can be used to push a link register on the
shadow stack. The SSPUSH and C.SSPUSH instructions perform a store identically to the existing store
instructions, with the difference that the base is implicitly ssp and the width is implicitly XLEN.

The operation of the SSPUSH and C.SSPUSH instructions is as follows:

  if (xSSE == 1)
         mem[ssp - (XLEN/8)] = X(src)                           # Store src value to ssp - XLEN/8
      ssp = ssp - (XLEN/8)                                      # decrement ssp by XLEN/8
  endif

Listing 4. SSPUSH and C.SSPUSH operation

The ssp is decremented by SSPUSH and C.SSPUSH only if the store to the shadow stack completes
successfully.

4.17.2.5. Pop from the Shadow Stack

A shadow stack pop operation is defined as an XLEN wide read from the current top of the shadow stack
followed by an increment of the ssp by XLEN/8.

 31                                        20   19                  15 14            12 11              7   6                            0
                  110011011100                            rs1               funct3             rd                      opcode
                   SSPOPCHK x1                           00001               100             00000                     SYSTEM
                   SSPOPCHK x5                           00101                               00000

  15                   13   12    11     10                     8     7         6                                  2       1         0
           011              0     0             n[3:1]                1                        00000                            op
       C.SSPOPCHK x5                             010                                                                            C1

Only x1 and x5 registers are supported as rs1 for SSPOPCHK. Zicfiss provides a 16-bit version of the
SSPOPCHK x5 using the Zcmop defined C.mop.5 encoding. The C.SSPOPCHK x5 expands to SSPOPCHK x5.

Programs with a shadow stack push the return address onto the regular stack as well as the shadow stack in
the prologue of non-leaf functions. When returning from these non-leaf functions, such programs pop the
link register from the regular stack and pop a shadow copy of the link register from the shadow stack. The
two values are then compared. If the values do not match, it is indicative of a corruption of the return
address variable on the regular stack.

The SSPOPCHK instruction, and its compressed form C.SSPOPCHK, can be used to pop the shadow return
address value from the shadow stack and check that the value matches the contents of the link register, and
if not cause a software-check exception with xtval set to “shadow stack fault (code=3)”.

While any register may be used as link register, conventionally the x1 or x5 registers are used. The shadow
stack instructions are designed to be most efficient when the x1 and x5 registers are used as the link
register.

                   Return-address prediction stacks are a common feature of high-performance instruction-fetch
                   units, but they require accurate detection of instructions used for procedure calls and returns
                   to be effective. For RISC-V, hints as to the instructions' usage are encoded implicitly via the
                   register numbers used. The return-address stack (RAS) actions to pop and/or push onto the
                   RAS are specified in Table 2.

                  Using x1 or x5 as the link register allows a program to benefit from the return-address
                   prediction stacks. Additionally, since the shadow stack instructions are designed around the
                   use of x1 or x5 as the link register, using any other register as a link register would incur the
                   cost of additional register movements.

                   Compilers, when generating code with backward-edge CFI, must protect the link register, e.g.,
                   x1 and/or x5, from arbitrary modification by not emitting unsafe code sequences.

                   Storing the return address on both stacks preserves the call stack layout and the ABI, while
                   also allowing for the detection of corruption of the return address on the regular stack. The
                   prologue and epilogue of a non-leaf function that uses shadow stacks is as follows:

                            function_entry:
                                  addi sp,sp,-8       # push link register x1
                                  sd x1,(sp)          # on regular stack
                                  sspush x1           # push link register x1 on shadow stack
                                    :
                                  ld x1,(sp)          # pop link register x1 from regular stack

                                 addi sp,sp,8
                                  sspopchk x1         # fault if x1 not equal to shadow
                                                      # return address
                                  ret

                   This example illustrates the use of x1 register as the link register. Alternatively, the x5 register
                   may also be used as the link register.

                   A leaf function, a function that does not itself make function calls, does not need to spill the
                   link register. Consequently, the return value may be held in the link register itself for the
                   duration of the leaf function’s execution.

The SSPOPCHK and C.SSPOPCHK instructions perform a load identically to the existing load instructions,
with the difference that the base is implicitly ssp and the width is implicitly XLEN.

The operation of the SSPOPCHK and C.SSPOPCHK instructions is as follows:

  if (xSSE == 1)
        temp = mem[ssp]                         # Load temp from address in ssp and
        if temp != X(src)                       # Compare temp to value in src and
                                                # cause a software-check exception
                                                # if they are not bitwise equal.
                                                # Only x1 and x5 may be used as src
             raise software-check exception
        else
             ssp = ssp + (XLEN/8)               # increment ssp by XLEN/8.
      endif
  endif

Listing 5. SSPOPCHK and C.SSPOPCHK operation

If the value loaded from the address in ssp does not match the value in rs1, a software-check exception
(cause=18) is raised with xtval set to “shadow stack fault (code=3)”. The software-check exception caused
by SSPOPCHK or C.SSPOPCHK is lower in priority than a load/store/AMO access-fault exception.

The ssp is incremented by SSPOPCHK and C.SSPOPCHK only if the load from the shadow stack completes
successfully and no software-check exception is raised.

    The use of the compressed instruction C.SSPUSH x1 to push on the shadow stack is most
    efficient when the ABI uses x1 as the link register, as the link register may then be pushed
    without needing a register-to-register move in the function prologue. To use the compressed
    instruction C.SSPOPCHK x5, the function should pop the return address from regular stack
    into the alternate link register x5 and use the C.SSPOPCHK x5 to compare the return address
    to the shadow copy stored on the shadow stack. The function then uses C.JR x5 to jump to the
    return address.

           function_entry:
                c.addi sp,sp,-8        # push link register x1
               c.sd x1,(sp)           # on regular stack
                c.sspush x1            # push link register x1 on shadow stack
                 :
                c.ld x5,(sp)           # pop link register x5 from regular
      stack
                c.addi sp,sp,8
                c.sspopchk x5          # fault if x5 not equal to shadow return
      address
                c.jr x5

    Store-to-load forwarding is a common technique employed by high-performance processor
    implementations. Zicfiss implementations may prevent forwarding from a non-shadow-
    stack store to SSPOPCHK or C.SSPOPCHK. A non-shadow-stack store causes a fault if done to
   a page mapped as a shadow stack. However, such determination may be delayed till the PTE
    has been examined and thus may be used to transiently forward the data from such stores to
    SSPOPCHK or to C.SSPOPCHK.

4.17.2.6. Read ssp into a Register

The SSRDP instruction is provided to move the contents of ssp to a destination register.

 31                                            20   19           15 14            12 11         7   6            0
                  110011011100                           00000           funct3           rd            opcode
                      SSRDP                                               100             dst           SYSTEM

Encoding rd as x0 is not supported for SSRDP.

The operation of the SSRDP instructions is as follows:

  if (xSSE == 1)
         X(dst) = ssp
  else
      X(dst) = 0
  endif

Listing 6. SSRDP operation

                   The property of ZIMOP writing 0 to the rd when the extension using ZIMOP is not
                   implemented or not active may be used by to determine if ZICFISS extension is active. For
                   example, functions that unwind shadow stacks may skip over the unwind actions by
                   dynamically detecting if the ZICFISS extension is active.

                   An example sequence such as the following may be used:

                              ssrdp t0                                     # mv ssp to t0
                              beqz t0, zicfiss_not_active                  # zero is not a valid shadow
                     stack
                                                                           # pointer by convention
                              # Zicfiss is active
                              :
                          :
                      zicfiss_not_active:

                   To assist with the use of such code sequences, operating systems and runtimes must not locate
                   shadow stacks at address 0.

    A common operation performed on stacks is to unwind them to support constructs like
    setjmp/longjmp, C++ exception handling, etc. A program that uses shadow stacks must
    unwind the shadow stack in addition to the stack used to store data. The unwind function
    must verify that it does not accidentally unwind past the bounds of the shadow stack. Shadow
    stacks are expected to be bounded on each end using guard pages. A guard page for a stack is
    a page that is not accessible by the process that owns the stack. To detect if the unwind occurs
    past the bounds of the shadow stack, the unwind may be done in maximal increments of 4 KiB,
    testing whether the ssp is still pointing to a shadow stack page or has unwound into the guard
    page. The following examples illustrate the use of shadow stack instructions to unwind a
    shadow stack. This example assumes that the setjmp function itself does not push on to the
    shadow stack (being a leaf function, it is not required to).

      setjmp() {
           :
           :
           // read and save the shadow stack pointer to jmp_buf
           asm("ssrdp %0" : "=r"(cur_ssp):);
           jmp_buf->saved_ssp = cur_ssp;
           :
           :
      }

     longjmp() {
           :
           // Read current shadow stack pointer and
           // compute number of call frames to unwind
           asm("ssrdp %0" : "=r"(cur_ssp):);
           // Skip the unwind if backward-edge CFI not active
           asm("beqz %0, back_cfi_not_active" : "=r"(cur_ssp):);
           // Unwind the frames in a loop
           while ( jmp_buf->saved_ssp > cur_ssp ) {
                 // advance by a maximum of 4K at a time to avoid
                 // unwinding past bounds of the shadow stack
                 cur_ssp = ( (jmp_buf->saved_ssp - cur_ssp) >= 4096 ) ?
                               (cur_ssp + 4096) : jmp_buf->saved_ssp;
                 asm("csrw ssp, %0" : :           "r" (cur_ssp));
                 // Test if unwound past the shadow stack bounds
                 asm("sspush x5");
                 asm("sspopchk x5");
           }
      back_cfi_not_active:
           :
      }

4.17.2.7. Atomic Swap from a Shadow Stack Location

 31                 27   26 25     24          20   19          15 14            12 11          7   6            0
         01001           aq   rl        rs2              rs1            funct3            rd            opcode
      SSAMOSWAP.W                       src              addr            010             dest           AMO
      SSAMOSWAP.D                                                        011

For RV32, SSAMOSWAP.W atomically loads a 32-bit data value from address of a shadow stack location in
rs1, puts the loaded value into register rd, and stores the 32-bit value held in rs2 to the original address in
rs1. SSAMOSWAP.D (RV64 only) is similar to SSAMOSWAP.W but operates on 64-bit data values.

       if privilege_mode != M && menvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise illegal-instruction exception
       else if S-mode not implemented
            raise illegal-instruction exception
       else if privilege_mode == U && senvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise illegal-instruction exception
       else if privilege_mode == VS && henvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise virtual-instruction exception
       else if privilege_mode == VU && senvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise virtual-instruction exception
       else
            X(rd) = mem[X(rs1)]
           mem[X(rs1)] = X(rs2)
       endif

Listing 7. SSAMOSWAP.W for RV32 and SSAMOSWAP.D (RV64 only) operation

For RV64, SSAMOSWAP.W atomically loads a 32-bit data value from address of a shadow stack location in
rs1, sign-extends the loaded value and puts it in rd, and stores the lower 32 bits of the value held in rs2 to
the original address in rs1.

       if privilege_mode != M && menvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise illegal-instruction exception
       else if S-mode not implemented
            raise illegal-instruction exception
       else if privilege_mode == U && senvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise illegal-instruction exception
       else if privilege_mode == VS && henvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise virtual-instruction exception
       else if privilege_mode == VU && senvcfg.SSE == 0
            raise virtual-instruction exception
       else
            temp[31:0] = mem[X(rs1)]
            X(rd) = SignExtend(temp[31:0])
           mem[X(rs1)] = X(rs2)[31:0]
       endif

Listing 8. SSAMOSWAP.W for RV64

Just as for AMOs in the A extension, SSAMOSWAP.W or SSAMOSWAP.D requires that the address held in
rs1 be naturally aligned to the size of the operand (i.e., 8-byte aligned for doublewords, and 4-byte aligned

for words). The same exception options apply if the address is not naturally aligned.

Just as for AMOs in the Zaamo extension, SSAMOSWAP.W or SSAMOSWAP.D optionally provides release
consistency semantics, using the aq and rl bits, to help implement multiprocessor synchronization. An
SSAMOSWAP.W or SSAMOSWAP.D operation has acquire semantics if aq=1 and release semantics if rl=1.

               Stack switching is a common operation in user programs as well as supervisor programs.
               When a stack switch is performed the stack pointer of the currently active stack is saved into a
               context data structure and the new stack is made active by loading a new stack pointer from a
               context data structure.

              When shadow stacks are active for a program, the program needs to additionally switch the
               shadow stack pointer. If the pointer to the top of the deactivated shadow stack is held in a
               context data structure, then it may be susceptible to memory corruption vulnerabilities. To
               protect the pointer value, the program may store it at the top of the deactivated shadow stack
               itself and thereby create a checkpoint. A legal checkpoint is defined as one that holds a value
               of X, where X is the address at which the checkpoint is positioned on the shadow stack.

               An example sequence to restore the shadow stack pointer from the new shadow stack and save
               the old shadow stack pointer on the old shadow stack is as follows:

                 # a0 hold pointer to top of new shadow stack to switch to
                 stack_switch:
                     ssrdp ra
                     beqz ra, 2f                                # skip if Zicfiss not active
                     ssamoswap.d ra, x0,          (a0)          # ra=*[a0] and *[a0]=0
                     beq              ra, a0,     1f            # [a0] must be == [ra]
                     unimp                                      # else crash
                 1: addi              ra, ra,     XLEN/8        # pop the checkpoint
                     csrrw            ra, ssp, ra       # swap ssp: ra=ssp, ssp=ra
                     addi             ra, ra, -(XLEN/8) # checkpoint = "old ssp -
                XLEN/8"
                    ssamoswap.d x0, ra,           (ra)          # Save checkpoint at "old ssp -
                 XLEN/8"
                 2:

               This sequence uses the ra register. If the privilege mode at which this sequence is executed can
               be interrupted, then the trap handler should save the ra on the shadow stack itself. There it is
               guarded against tampering and can be restored prior to returning from the trap.

               When a new shadow stack is created by the supervisor, it needs to store a checkpoint at the
               highest address on that stack. This enables the shadow stack pointer to be switched using the
               process outlined in this note. The SSAMOSWAP.W or SSAMOSWAP.D instruction can be used
               to store this checkpoint. When the old value at the memory location operated on by
               SSAMOSWAP.W or SSAMOSWAP.D is not required, rd can be set to x0.

4.18. Zihintntl Extension for Non-Temporal Locality Hints
The NTL instructions are HINTs that indicate that the explicit memory accesses of the immediately
subsequent instruction (henceforth `target instruction`") exhibit poor temporal locality of reference. The
NTL instructions do not change architectural state, nor do they alter the architecturally visible effects of

the target instruction. Four variants are provided:

The NTL.P1 instruction indicates that the target instruction does not exhibit temporal locality within the
capacity of the innermost level of private cache in the memory hierarchy. NTL.P1 is encoded as
ADD x0, x0, x2.

The NTL.PALL instruction indicates that the target instruction does not exhibit temporal locality within
the capacity of any level of private cache in the memory hierarchy. NTL.PALL is encoded as
ADD x0, x0, x3.

The NTL.S1 instruction indicates that the target instruction does not exhibit temporal locality within the
capacity of the innermost level of shared cache in the memory hierarchy. NTL.S1 is encoded as
ADD x0, x0, x4.

The NTL.ALL instruction indicates that the target instruction does not exhibit temporal locality within the
capacity of any level of cache in the memory hierarchy. NTL.ALL is encoded as ADD x0, x0, x5.

                 The NTL instructions can be used to avoid cache pollution when streaming data or traversing
                 large data structures, or to reduce latency in producer-consumer interactions.

                 A microarchitecture might use the NTL instructions to inform the cache replacement policy, or
                 to decide which cache to allocate into, or to avoid cache allocation altogether. For example,
                 NTL.P1 might indicate that an implementation should not allocate a line in a private L1 cache,
                 but should allocate in L2 (whether private or shared). In another implementation, NTL.P1
                 might allocate the line in L1, but in the least-recently used state.

                 NTL.ALL will typically inform implementations not to allocate anywhere in the cache
                hierarchy. Programmers should use NTL.ALL for accesses that have no exploitable temporal
                 locality.

                 Like any HINTs, these instructions may be freely ignored. Hence, although they are described
                 in terms of cache-based memory hierarchies, they do not mandate the provision of caches.

                 Some implementations might respect these HINTs for some memory accesses but not others:
                 e.g., implementations that implement LR/SC by acquiring a cache line in the exclusive state in
                 L1 might ignore NTL instructions on LR and SC, but might respect NTL instructions for AMOs
                 and regular loads and stores.

Table 23 lists several software use cases and the recommended NTL variant that portable software—i.e.,
software not tuned for any specific implementation’s memory hierarchy—should use in each case.

               Table 23. Recommended NTL variant for portable software to employ in various scenarios.
         Scenario                                                           Recommended NTL variant
         Access to a working set between 64 KiB and 256 KiB in size         NTL.P1
         Access to a working set between 256 KiB and 1 MiB in size          NTL.PALL
         Access to a working set greater than 1 MiB in size                 NTL.S1
         Access with no exploitable temporal locality (e.g., streaming)     NTL.ALL
         Access to a contended synchronization variable                     NTL.PALL

                 The working-set sizes listed in Table 23 are not meant to constrain implementers' cache-sizing
                decisions. Cache sizes will obviously vary between implementations, and so software writers
                 should only take these working-set sizes as rough guidelines.

Table 24 lists several sample memory hierarchies and recommends how each NTL variant maps onto each
cache level. The table also recommends which NTL variant that implementation-tuned software should
use to avoid allocating in a particular cache level. For example, for a system with a private L1 and a shared
L2, it is recommended that NTL.P1 and NTL.PALL indicate that temporal locality cannot be exploited by
the L1, and that NTL.S1 and NTL.ALL indicate that temporal locality cannot be exploited by the L2.
Furthermore, software tuned for such a system should use NTL.P1 to indicate a lack of temporal locality
exploitable by the L1, or should use NTL.ALL indicate a lack of temporal locality exploitable by the L2.

If the C or Zca extension is provided, compressed variants of these HINTs are also provided: C.NTL.P1 is
encoded as C.ADD x0, x2; C.NTL.PALL is encoded as C.ADD x0, x3; C.NTL.S1 is encoded as C.ADD x0, x4;
and C.NTL.ALL is encoded as C.ADD x0, x5.

The NTL instructions affect all memory-access instructions except the cache-management instructions in
the Zicbom extension.

               As of this writing, there are no other exceptions to this rule, and so the NTL instructions affect
               all memory-access instructions defined in the base ISAs and the A, F, D, Q, C, and V standard
               extensions, as well as those defined within the hypervisor extension in Volume II, Chapter 5.
              The NTL instructions can affect cache-management operations other than those in the Zicbom
               extension. For example, NTL.PALL followed by CBO.ZERO might indicate that the line should
               be allocated in L3 and zeroed, but not allocated in L1 or L2.

                            Table 24. Mapping of NTL variants to various memory hierarchies.
    Memory hierarchy                        Recommended mapping of NTL          Recommended NTL variant for
                                              variant to actual cache level      explicit cache management
                                             P1      PALL        S1    ALL       L1       L2          L3    L4/L5
                                                    Common Scenarios
    No caches                                                —                                 none
    Private L1 only                          L1        L1        L1     L1      ALL       —           —      —
    Private L1; shared L2                    L1        L1        L2     L2       P1      ALL          —      —
    Private L1; shared L2/L3                 L1        L1        L2     L3       P1       S1          ALL    —
    Private L1/L2                            L1        L2        L2     L2       P1      ALL          —      —
    Private L1/L2; shared L3                 L1        L2        L3     L3       P1      PALL         ALL    —
    Private L1/L2; shared L3/L4              L1        L2        L3     L4       P1      PALL         S1    ALL
                                                  Uncommon Scenarios
    Private L1/L2/L3; shared L4              L1        L3        L4     L4       P1       P1      PALL      ALL
    Private L1; shared L2/L3/L4              L1        L1        L2     L4       P1       S1          ALL   ALL
    Private L1/L2; shared L3/L4/L5           L1        L2        L3     L5       P1      PALL         S1    ALL
    Private L1/L2/L3; shared L4/L5           L1        L3        L4     L5       P1       P1      PALL      ALL

When an NTL instruction is applied to a prefetch hint in the Zicbop extension, it indicates that a cache line
should be prefetched into a cache that is outer from the level specified by the NTL.

                 For example, in a system with a private L1 and shared L2, NTL.P1 followed by PREFETCH.R
                 might prefetch into L2 with read intent.

                 To prefetch into the innermost level of cache, do not prefix the prefetch instruction with an
                NTL instruction.

                 In some systems, NTL.ALL followed by a prefetch instruction might prefetch into a cache or
                 prefetch buffer internal to a memory controller.

Software is discouraged from following an NTL instruction with an instruction that does not explicitly
access memory. Nonadherence to this recommendation might reduce performance but otherwise has no
architecturally visible effect.

In the event that a trap is taken on the target instruction, implementations are discouraged from applying
the NTL to the first instruction in the trap handler. Instead, implementations are recommended to ignore
the HINT in this case.

                 If an interrupt occurs between the execution of an NTL instruction and its target instruction,
                 execution will normally resume at the target instruction. The NTL instruction being not re-
                 executed does not change the semantics of the program.

                Some implementations might prefer not to process the NTL instruction until the target
                 instruction is seen (e.g., so that the NTL can be fused with the memory access it modifies).
                 Such implementations might preferentially take the interrupt before the NTL, rather than
                 between the NTL and the memory access.

                 Since the NTL instructions are encoded as ADDs, they can be used within LR/SC loops without
                voiding the forward-progress guarantee. However, since using other loads and stores within an
                 LR/SC loop does void the forward-progress guarantee, the only reason to use an NTL within

               such a loop is to modify the LR or the SC.

4.19. Zihintpause Extension for Pause Hint
The PAUSE instruction is a HINT that indicates the current hart’s rate of instruction retirement should be
temporarily reduced or paused. The duration of its effect must be bounded and may be zero.

               Software can use the PAUSE instruction to reduce energy consumption while executing spin-
               wait code sequences. Multithreaded cores might temporarily relinquish execution resources to
               other harts when PAUSE is executed. It is recommended that a PAUSE instruction generally be
               included in the code sequence for a spin-wait loop.

               The duration of a PAUSE instruction’s effect may vary significantly within and among
               implementations. In typical implementations this duration should be much less than the time
              to perform a context switch, probably more on the rough order of an on-chip cache miss
               latency or a cacheless access to main memory.

               A series of PAUSE instructions can be used to create a cumulative delay loosely proportional to
               the number of PAUSE instructions. In spin-wait loops in portable code, however, only one
               PAUSE instruction should be used before re-evaluating loop conditions, else the hart might
               stall longer than optimal on some implementations, degrading system performance.

PAUSE is encoded as a FENCE instruction with pred=W, succ=0, fm=0, rd=x0, and rs1=x0.

               PAUSE is encoded as a hint within the FENCE opcode because some implementations are
               expected to deliberately stall the PAUSE instruction until outstanding memory transactions
               have completed. Because the successor set is null, however, PAUSE does not mandate any
               particular memory ordering—hence, it truly is a HINT.

              Like other FENCE instructions, PAUSE cannot be used within LR/SC sequences without
               voiding the forward-progress guarantee.

               The choice of a predecessor set of W is arbitrary, since the successor set is null. Other HINTs
               similar to PAUSE might be encoded with other predecessor sets.

4.20. Cache Management Operations (CMOs)

4.20.1. Introduction

Cache management operation (CMO) instructions perform operations on copies of data in the memory
hierarchy. In general, CMO instructions operate on cached copies of data, but in some cases, a CMO
instruction may operate on memory locations directly. Furthermore, CMO instructions are grouped by
operation into the following classes:

 ⚫ A management instruction manipulates cached copies of data with respect to a set of agents that can
   access the data
 ⚫ A zero instruction zeros out a range of memory locations, potentially allocating cached copies of data in
   one or more caches
 ⚫ A prefetch instruction indicates to hardware that data at a given memory location may be accessed in
   the near future, potentially allocating cached copies of data in one or more caches

This chapter introduces a base set of CMO ISA extensions that operate specifically on cache blocks or the

memory locations corresponding to a cache block; these are known as cache-block operation (CBO)
instructions. Each of the above classes of instructions represents an extension in this specification:

 ⚫ The Zicbom extension defines a set of cache-block management instructions: CBO.INVAL, CBO.CLEAN,
   and CBO.FLUSH
 ⚫ The Zicboz extension defines a cache-block zero instruction: CBO.ZERO
 ⚫ The Zicbop extension defines a set of cache-block prefetch instructions: PREFETCH.R, PREFETCH.W,
   and PREFETCH.I

The execution behavior of the above instructions is also modified by CSR state added by this specification.

The remainder of this chapter provides general background information on CMO instructions and
describes each of the above ISA extensions. The semantics of instructions is expressed in a SAIL-like
syntax.

                 The term CMO encompasses all operations on caches or resources related to caches. The term
                CBO represents a subset of CMOs that operate only on cache blocks. The first CMO extensions
                 only define CBOs.

4.20.2. Background

This chapter provides information common to all CMO extensions.

4.20.2.1. Memory and Caches

A memory location is a physical resource in a system uniquely identified by a physical address. An agent is a
logic block, such as a RISC-V hart, accelerator, I/O device, etc., that can access a given memory location.

                 A given agent may not be able to access all memory locations in a system, and two different
                agents may or may not be able to access the same set of memory locations.

A load operation (or store operation) is performed by an agent to consume (or modify) the data at a given
memory location. Load and store operations are performed as a result of explicit memory accesses to that
memory location. Additionally, a read transfer from memory fetches the data at the memory location, while
a write transfer to memory updates the data at the memory location.

A cache is a structure that buffers copies of data to reduce average memory latency. Any number of caches
may be interspersed between an agent and a memory location, and load and store operations from an agent
may be satisfied by a cache instead of the memory location.

                 Load and store operations are decoupled from read and write transfers by caches. For
                 example, a load operation may be satisfied by a cache without performing a read transfer from
                memory, or a store operation may be satisfied by a cache that first performs a read transfer
                 from memory.

Caches organize copies of data into cache blocks, each of which represents a contiguous, naturally aligned
power-of-two (NAPOT) range of memory locations. A cache block is identified by any of the physical
addresses corresponding to the underlying memory locations. The capacity and organization of a cache
and the size of a cache block are both implementation-specific, and the execution environment provides
software a means to discover information about the caches and cache blocks in a system. In the initial set
of CMO extensions, the size of a cache block shall be uniform throughout the system.

                In future CMO extensions, the requirement for a uniform cache block size may be relaxed.

Implementation techniques such as speculative execution or hardware prefetching may cause a given
cache to allocate or deallocate a copy of a cache block at any time, provided the corresponding physical
addresses are accessible according to the supported access type PMA and are cacheable according to the
cacheability PMA. Allocating a copy of a cache block results in a read transfer from another cache or from
memory, while deallocating a copy of a cache block may result in a write transfer to another cache or to
memory depending on whether the data in the copy were modified by a store operation. Additional details
are discussed in Coherent Agents and Caches.

4.20.2.2. Cache-Block Operations

A CBO instruction causes one or more operations to be performed on the cache blocks identified by the
instruction. In general, a CBO instruction may identify one or more cache blocks; however, in the initial set
of CMO extensions, CBO instructions identify a single cache block only.

A cache-block management instruction performs one of the following operations, relative to the copy of a
given cache block allocated in a given cache:

 ⚫ An invalidate operation deallocates the copy of the cache block
 ⚫ A clean operation performs a write transfer to another cache or to memory if the data in the copy of the
   cache block have been modified by a store operation
 ⚫ A flush operation atomically performs a clean operation followed by an invalidate operation

Additional details, including the actual operation performed by a given cache-block management
instruction, are described in Zicbom.

A cache-block zero instruction performs a set of store operations that write zeros to the set of bytes
corresponding to a cache block. Unless specified otherwise, the store operations generated by a cache-block
zero instruction have the same general properties and behaviors that other store instructions in the
architecture have. An implementation may or may not update the entire set of bytes atomically with a
single store operation. Additional details are described in Zicboz.

A cache-block prefetch instruction is a HINT to the hardware that software expects to perform a particular
type of memory access in the near future. Additional details are described in Zicbop.

4.20.3. Coherent Agents and Caches

For a given memory location, a set of coherent agents consists of the agents for which all of the following
hold:

 ⚫ Store operations from all agents in the set appear to be serialized with respect to each other
 ⚫ Store operations from all agents in the set eventually appear to all other agents in the set
 ⚫ A load operation from an agent in the set returns data from a store operation from an agent in the set
   (or from the initial data in memory)

The coherent agents within such a set shall access a given memory location with the same physical address
and the same physical memory attributes; however, if the coherence PMA for a given agent indicates a
given memory location is not coherent, that agent shall not be a member of a set of coherent agents with
any other agent for that memory location and shall be the sole member of a set of coherent agents
consisting of itself.

An agent who is a member of a set of coherent agents is said to be coherent with respect to the other agents
in the set. On the other hand, an agent who is not a member is said to be non-coherent with respect to the

agents in the set.

Caches introduce the possibility that multiple copies of a given cache block may be present in a system at
the same time. An implementation-specific mechanism keeps these copies coherent with respect to the load
and store operations from the agents in the set of coherent agents. Additionally, if a coherent agent in the
set executes a CBO instruction that specifies the cache block, the resulting operation shall apply to any and
all of the copies in the caches that can be accessed by the load and store operations from the coherent
agents.

                 An operation from a CBO instruction is defined to operate only on the copies of a cache block
                 that are cached in the caches accessible by the explicit memory accesses performed by the set
                of coherent agents. This includes copies of a cache block in caches that are accessed only
                 indirectly by load and store operations, e.g. coherent instruction caches.

The set of caches subject to the above mechanism form a set of coherent caches, and each coherent cache
has the following behaviors, assuming all operations are performed by the agents in a set of coherent
agents:

 ⚫ A coherent cache is permitted to allocate and deallocate copies of a cache block and perform read and
   write transfers as described in Memory and Caches
 ⚫ A coherent cache is permitted to perform a write transfer to memory provided that a store operation
   has modified the data in the cache block since the most recent invalidate, clean, or flush operation on
   the cache block
 ⚫ At least one coherent cache is responsible for performing a write transfer to memory once a store
   operation has modified the data in the cache block until the next invalidate, clean, or flush operation
   on the cache block, after which no coherent cache is responsible (or permitted) to perform a write
   transfer to memory until the next store operation has modified the data in the cache block
 ⚫ A coherent cache is required to perform a write transfer to memory if a store operation has modified
   the data in the cache block since the most recent invalidate, clean, or flush operation on the cache
   block and if the next clean or flush operation requires a write transfer to memory

                 The above restrictions ensure that a “clean” copy of a cache block, fetched by a read transfer
                from memory and unmodified by a store operation, cannot later overwrite the copy of the cache
                 block in memory updated by a write transfer to memory from a non-coherent agent.

A non-coherent agent may initiate a cache-block operation that operates on the set of coherent caches
accessed by a set of coherent agents. The mechanism to perform such an operation is implementation-
specific.

4.20.3.1. Memory Ordering

Preserved Program Order

The preserved program order (PPO) rules are defined by the RVWMO memory ordering model. How the
operations resulting from CMO instructions fit into these rules is described below.

For cache-block management instructions, the resulting invalidate, clean, and flush operations behave as
stores in the PPO rules subject to one additional overlapping address rule. Specifically, if a precedes b in
program order, then a will precede b in the global memory order if:

 ⚫ a is an invalidate, clean, or flush, b is a load, and a and b access overlapping memory addresses

                The above rule ensures that a subsequent load in program order never appears in the global

                   memory order before a preceding invalidate, clean, or flush operation to an overlapping
                   address.

Additionally, invalidate, clean, and flush operations are classified as W or O (depending on the physical
memory attributes for the corresponding physical addresses) for the purposes of predecessor and successor
sets in FENCE instructions. These operations are not ordered by other instructions that order stores, e.g.
FENCE.I and SFENCE.VMA.

For cache-block zero instructions, the resulting store operations behave as stores in the PPO rules and are
ordered by other instructions that order stores.

Finally, for cache-block prefetch instructions, the resulting operations are not ordered by the PPO rules nor
are they ordered by any other ordering instructions.

Load Values

An invalidate operation may change the set of values that can be returned by a load. In particular, an
additional condition is added to the Load Value Axiom:

 ⚫ If an invalidate operation i precedes a load r and operates on a byte x returned by r, and no store to x
   appears between i and r in program order or in the global memory order, then r returns any of the
   following values for x:
      1. If no clean or flush operations on x precede i in the global memory order, either the initial value of
         x or the value of any store to x that precedes i
      2. If no store to x precedes a clean or flush operation on x in the global memory order and if the clean
         or flush operation on x precedes i in the global memory order, either the initial value of x or the
         value of any store to x that precedes i
      3. If a store to x precedes a clean or flush operation on x in the global memory order and if the clean or
         flush operation on x precedes i in the global memory order, either the value of the latest store to x
         that precedes the latest clean or flush operation on x or the value of any store to x that both
         precedes i and succeeds the latest clean or flush operation on x that precedes i
      4. The value of any store to x by a non-coherent agent regardless of the above conditions

                   The first three bullets describe the possible load values at different points in the global memory
                  order relative to clean or flush operations. The final bullet implies that the load value may be
                   produced by a non-coherent agent at any time.

4.20.3.2. Traps

Execution of certain CMO instructions may result in traps due to CSR state, described in the Control and
Status Register State section, or due to the address translation and protection mechanisms. The trapping
behavior of CMO instructions is described in the following sections.

Illegal-Instruction and Virtual-Instruction Exceptions

Cache-block management instructions and cache-block zero instructions may raise illegal-instruction
exceptions or virtual-instruction exceptions depending on the current privilege mode and the state of the
CMO control registers described in the Control and Status Register State section.

Cache-block prefetch instructions raise neither illegal-instruction exceptions nor virtual-instruction
exceptions.

Page-Fault, Guest-Page-Fault, and Access-Fault Exceptions

Similar to load and store instructions, CMO instructions are explicit memory access instructions that
compute an effective address. The effective address is ultimately translated into a physical address based
on the privilege mode and the enabled translation mechanisms, and the CMO extensions impose the
following constraints on the physical addresses in a given cache block:

 ⚫ The PMP access control bits shall be the same for all physical addresses in the cache block, and if write
   permission is granted by the PMP access control bits, read permission shall also be granted
 ⚫ The PMAs shall be the same for all physical addresses in the cache block, and if write permission is
   granted by the supported access type PMAs, read permission shall also be granted

If the above constraints are not met, the behavior of a CBO instruction is UNSPECIFIED.

                  This specification assumes that the above constraints will typically be met for main memory
                 regions and may be met for certain I/O regions.

                  The access size for CMO instructions is equal to the size of the cache block, however in some
                  cases that access can be decomposed into multiple memory operations. PMP checks are
                  applied to each memory operation independently. For example a 64-byte CBO.ZERO that
                 spans two 32-byte PMP regions would succeed if it was decomposed into two 32-byte memory
                  operations (and the PMP access control bits are the same in both regions), but if performed as
                  a single 64-byte memory operation it would cause an access fault.

The Zicboz extension introduces an additional supported access type PMA for cache-block zero
instructions. Main memory regions are required to support accesses by cache-block zero instructions;
however, I/O regions may specify whether accesses by cache-block zero instructions are supported.

A cache-block management instruction is permitted to access the specified cache block whenever a load
instruction or store instruction is permitted to access the corresponding physical addresses. If neither a
load instruction nor store instruction is permitted to access the physical addresses, but an instruction fetch
is permitted to access the physical addresses, whether a cache-block management instruction is permitted
to access the cache block is UNSPECIFIED. If access to the cache block is not permitted, a cache-block
management instruction raises a store page-fault or store guest-page-fault exception if address translation
does not permit any access or raises a store access-fault exception otherwise. During address translation,
the instruction also checks the accessed bit and may either raise an exception or set the bit as required.

                  The interaction between cache-block management instructions and instruction fetches will be
                  specified in a future extension.
                 As implied by omission, a cache-block management instruction does not check the dirty bit
                  and neither raises an exception nor sets the bit.

A cache-block zero instruction is permitted to access the specified cache block whenever a store instruction
is permitted to access the corresponding physical addresses and when the PMAs indicate that cache-block
zero instructions are a supported access type. If access to the cache block is not permitted, a cache-block
zero instruction raises a store page-fault or store guest-page-fault exception if address translation does not
permit write access or raises a store access-fault exception otherwise. During address translation, the
instruction also checks the accessed and dirty bits and may either raise an exception or set the bits as
required.

A cache-block prefetch instruction is permitted to access the specified cache block whenever a load
instruction, store instruction, or instruction fetch is permitted to access the corresponding physical
addresses. If access to the cache block is not permitted, a cache-block prefetch instruction does not raise
any exceptions and shall not access any caches or memory. During address translation, the instruction

does not check the accessed and dirty bits and neither raises an exception nor sets the bits.

When a page-fault, guest-page-fault, or access-fault exception is taken, the relevant *tval CSR is written
with the faulting effective address (i.e. the value of rs1).

                 Like a load or store instruction, a CMO instruction may or may not be permitted to access a
                 cache block based on the states of the MPRV, MPV and MPP bits in mstatus and the SUM and MXR
                 bits in mstatus, sstatus, and vsstatus.
                This specification expects that implementations will process cache-block management
                 instructions like store/AMO instructions, so store/AMO exceptions are appropriate for these
                 instructions, regardless of the permissions required.

Address-Misaligned Exceptions

CMO instructions do not generate address-misaligned exceptions.

Breakpoint Exceptions and Debug Mode Entry

Unless otherwise defined by the debug architecture specification, the behavior of trigger modules with
respect to CMO instructions is UNSPECIFIED.

                 For the Zicbom, Zicboz, and Zicbop extensions, this specification recommends the following
                 common trigger module behaviors:

                   ⚫ Type 6 address match triggers, i.e. tdata1.⁠TYPE=6 and mcontrol6.⁠SELECT=0, should be
                     supported
                   ⚫ Type 2 address/data match triggers, i.e. tdata1.⁠TYPE=2, should be unsupported
                   ⚫ The size of a memory access equals the size of the cache block accessed, and the compare
                     values follow from the addresses of the NAPOT memory region corresponding to the cache
                     block containing the effective address
                   ⚫ Unless an encoding for a cache block is added to the mcontrol6.⁠SIZE field, an address
                     trigger should only match a memory access from a CBO instruction if mcontrol6.⁠SIZE=0

                 If the Zicbom extension is implemented, this specification recommends the following
                 additional trigger module behaviors:

                  ⚫ Implementing address match triggers should be optional
                   ⚫ Type 6 data match triggers, i.e. tdata1.⁠TYPE=6 and mcontrol6.⁠SELECT=1, should be
                     unsupported
                   ⚫ Memory accesses are considered to be stores, i.e. an address trigger matches only if
                     mcontrol6.⁠STORE=1

                 If the Zicboz extension is implemented, this specification recommends the following
                 additional trigger module behaviors:

                   ⚫ Implementing address match triggers should be mandatory
                   ⚫ Type 6 data match triggers, i.e. tdata1.⁠TYPE=6 and mcontrol6.⁠SELECT=1, should be
                     supported, and implementing these triggers should be optional
                   ⚫ Memory accesses are considered to be stores, i.e. an address trigger matches only if
                     mcontrol6.⁠STORE=1

                  If the Zicbop extension is implemented, this specification recommends the following
                  additional trigger module behaviors:

                   ⚫ Implementing address match triggers should be optional
                   ⚫ Type 6 data match triggers, i.e. tdata1.⁠TYPE=6 and mcontrol6.⁠SELECT=1, should be
                     unsupported
                   ⚫ Memory accesses may be considered to be loads or stores depending on the
                     implementation, i.e. whether an address trigger matches on these instructions when
                     mcontrol6.⁠LOAD=1 or mcontrol6.⁠STORE=1 is implementation-specific

                  This specification also recommends that the behavior of trigger modules with respect to the
                  Zicboz extension should be defined in version 1.0 of the debug architecture specification. The
                  behavior of trigger modules with respect to the Zicbom and Zicbop extensions is expected to
                  be defined in future extensions.

Hypervisor Extension

For the purposes of writing the mtinst or htinst register on a trap, the following standard transformation
is defined for cache-block management instructions and cache-block zero instructions:

 31                                        20 19                 15 14    12 11               7   6            0
                  operation                     0   0   0    0   0   funct3   0   0   0   0   0       opcode

The operation field corresponds to the 12 most significant bits of the trapping instruction.

                  As described in the hypervisor extension, a zero may be written into mtinst or htinst instead
                 of the standard transformation defined above.

4.20.3.3. Effects on Constrained LR/SC Loops

The following event is added to the list of events that satisfy the eventuality guarantee provided by
constrained LR/SC loops, as defined in the Zalrsc extension:

 ⚫ Some other hart executes a cache-block management instruction or a cache-block zero instruction to
   the reservation set of the LR instruction in H's constrained LR/SC loop.

                  The above event has been added to accommodate cache coherence protocols that cannot
                  distinguish between invalidations for stores and invalidations for cache-block management
                  operations.

                  Aside from the above event, CMO instructions neither change the properties of constrained
                 LR/SC loops nor modify the eventuality guarantee provided by them. For example, executing a
                  CMO instruction may cause a constrained LR/SC loop on any hart to fail periodically or may
                  cause a unconstrained LR/SC sequence on the same hart to fail always. Additionally,
                  executing a cache-block prefetch instruction does not impact the eventuality guarantee
                  provided by constrained LR/SC loops executed on any hart.

4.20.3.4. Software Discovery

The initial set of CMO extensions requires the following information to be discovered by software:

 ⚫ The size of the cache block for management and prefetch instructions

 ⚫ The size of the cache block for zero instructions
 ⚫ CBIE support at each privilege level

Other general cache characteristics may also be specified in the discovery mechanism.

4.20.4. CSR controls for CMO instructions

The envcfg registers control CBO instruction execution based on the current privilege mode and the state
of the appropriate CSRs, as detailed below.

A CBO.INVAL instruction executes or raises either an illegal-instruction exception or a virtual-instruction
exception based on the state of the envcfg.⁠CBIE fields:

  // illegal-instruction exceptions
  if (((priv_mode != M) && (menvcfg.CBIE == 00)) ||
          ((priv_mode == U) && (senvcfg.CBIE == 00)))
  {
      <raise illegal-instruction exception>
  }
  // virtual-instruction exceptions
  else if (((priv_mode == VS) && (henvcfg.CBIE == 00)) ||
               ((priv_mode == VU) && ((henvcfg.CBIE == 00) || (senvcfg.CBIE == 00))))
  {
      <raise virtual-instruction exception>
  }
  // execute instruction
  else
  {
      if (((priv_mode != M) && (menvcfg.CBIE == 01)) ||
            ((priv_mode == U) && (senvcfg.CBIE == 01)) ||
            ((priv_mode == VS) && (henvcfg.CBIE == 01)) ||
            ((priv_mode == VU) && ((henvcfg.CBIE == 01) || (senvcfg.CBIE == 01))))
      {
          <execute CBO.INVAL and perform flush operation>
      }
      else
      {
          <execute CBO.INVAL and perform invalidate operation>
      }
  }

                Until a modified cache block has updated memory, a CBO.INVAL instruction may expose stale
                data values in memory if the CSRs are programmed to perform an invalidate operation. This
                behavior may result in a security hole if lower privileged level software performs an invalidate
                operation and accesses sensitive information in memory.
               To avoid such holes, higher privileged level software must perform either a clean or flush
                operation on the cache block before permitting lower privileged level software to perform an
                invalidate operation on the block. Alternatively, higher privileged level software may program
                the CSRs so that CBO.INVAL either traps or performs a flush operation in a lower privileged

                 level.

A CBO.CLEAN or CBO.FLUSH instruction executes or raises an illegal-instruction or virtual-instruction
exception based on the state of the envcfg.⁠CBCFE bits:

  // illegal-instruction exceptions
  if (((priv_mode != M) && !menvcfg.CBCFE) ||
        ((priv_mode == U) && !senvcfg.CBCFE))
  {
      <raise illegal-instruction exception>
  }
  // virtual-instruction exceptions
  else if (((priv_mode == VS) && !henvcfg.CBCFE) ||
               ((priv_mode == VU) && !(henvcfg.CBCFE && senvcfg.CBCFE)))
  {
      <raise virtual-instruction exception>
  }
  // execute instruction
  else
  {
      <execute CBO.CLEAN or CBO.FLUSH>
  }

Finally, a CBO.ZERO instruction executes or raises an illegal-instruction or virtual-instruction exception
based on the state of the envcfg.⁠CBZE bits:

  // illegal-instruction exceptions
  if (((priv_mode != M) && !menvcfg.CBZE) ||
        ((priv_mode == U) && !senvcfg.CBZE))
  {
      <raise illegal-instruction exception>
  }
  // virtual-instruction exceptions
  else if (((priv_mode == VS) && !henvcfg.CBZE) ||
               ((priv_mode == VU) && !(henvcfg.CBZE && senvcfg.CBZE)))
  {
      <raise virtual-instruction exception>
  }
  // execute instruction
  else
  {
      <execute CBO.ZERO>
  }

The CBIE/CBCFE/CBZE fields in each envcfg register do not affect the read and write behavior of the same
fields in the other envcfg registers.

Each envcfg register is WARL; however, software should determine the legal values from the execution

environment discovery mechanism.

4.20.5. Zicbom Extension for Cache-Block Management

Cache-block management instructions enable software running on a set of coherent agents to
communicate with a set of non-coherent agents by performing one of the following operations:

 ⚫ An invalidate operation makes data from store operations performed by a set of non-coherent agents
   visible to the set of coherent agents at a point common to both sets by deallocating all copies of a cache
   block from the set of coherent caches up to that point
 ⚫ A clean operation makes data from store operations performed by the set of coherent agents visible to a
   set of non-coherent agents at a point common to both sets by performing a write transfer of a copy of a
   cache block to that point provided a coherent agent performed a store operation that modified the data
   in the cache block since the previous invalidate, clean, or flush operation on the cache block
 ⚫ A flush operation atomically performs a clean operation followed by an invalidate operation

In the Zicbom extension, the instructions operate to a point common to all agents in the system. In other
words, an invalidate operation ensures that store operations from all non-coherent agents visible to agents
in the set of coherent agents, and a clean operation ensures that store operations from coherent agents
visible to all non-coherent agents.

               The Zicbom extension does not prohibit agents that fall outside of the above architectural
               definition; however, software cannot rely on the defined cache operations to have the desired
               effects with respect to those agents.
   
               Future extensions may define different sets of agents for the purposes of performance
               optimization.

These instructions operate on the cache block whose effective address is specified in rs1. The effective
address is translated into a corresponding physical address by the appropriate translation mechanisms.

The following instructions comprise the Zicbom extension:

 RV32    RV64 Mnemonic                         Instruction
  ✓       ✓    CBO.CLEAN base                  Cache Block Clean
  ✓       ✓    CBO.FLUSH base                  Cache Block Flush
  ✓       ✓    CBO.INVAL base                  Cache Block Invalidate

               Cache-block management instructions ignore cacheability attributes and operate on the cache
              block irrespective of the PMA cacheable attribute and any Page-Based Memory Type (PBMT)
               downgrade from cacheable to non-cacheable.

4.20.6. Zicboz Extension for Cache-Block Zero

Cache-block zero instructions store zeros to the set of bytes corresponding to a cache block. An
implementation may update the bytes in any order and with any granularity and atomicity, including
individual bytes.

               Cache-block zero instructions store zeros independently of whether data from the underlying
              memory locations are cacheable. In addition, this specification does not constrain how the
               bytes are written.

These instructions operate on the cache block, or the memory locations corresponding to the cache block,
whose effective address is specified in rs1. The effective address is translated into a corresponding physical
address by the appropriate translation mechanisms.

The following instructions comprise the Zicboz extension:

 RV32     RV64 Mnemonic                               Instruction
     ✓        ✓   CBO.ZERO base                       Cache Block Zero

4.20.7. Zicbop Extension for Cache-Block Prefetch

Cache-block prefetch instructions are HINTs to the hardware to indicate that software intends to perform a
particular type of memory access in the near future. The types of memory accesses are instruction fetch,
data read (i.e. load), and data write (i.e. store).

These instructions operate on the cache block whose effective address is the sum of the base address
specified in rs1 and the sign-extended offset encoded in imm[11:0], where imm[4:0] shall equal 0b00000. The
effective address is translated into a corresponding physical address by the appropriate translation
mechanisms.

                  Cache-block prefetch instructions are encoded as ORI instructions with rd equal to 0b00000;
                 however, for the purposes of effective address calculation, this field is also interpreted as
                  imm[4:0] like a store instruction.

The following instructions comprise the Zicbop extension:

 RV32     RV64 Mnemonic                               Instruction
     ✓        ✓   PREFETCH.I offset(base)             Cache Block Prefetch for Instruction Fetch
     ✓        ✓   PREFETCH.R offset(base)             Cache Block Prefetch for Data Read
     ✓        ✓   PREFETCH.W offset(base)             Cache Block Prefetch for Data Write

4.20.8. Instructions

4.20.8.1. CBO.CLEAN

Synopsis
     Perform a clean operation on a cache block

Mnemonic
     CBO.CLEAN offset(base)

Encoding

 31                                           20 19           15 14           12 11               7   6                       0
 0    0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1       rs1           0    1    0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   1   1   1
                  CBO.CLEAN                           base              CBO                                   MISC-MEM

Description
     A CBO.CLEAN instruction performs a clean operation on the cache block whose effective address is the
     base address specified in rs1. The offset operand may be omitted; otherwise, any expression that
     computes the offset shall evaluate to zero. The instruction operates on the set of coherent caches

     accessed by the agent executing the instruction.

                  When executing a CBO.CLEAN instruction, an implementation may instead perform a flush
                  operation, since the result of that operation is indistinguishable from the sequence of
                 performing a clean operation just before deallocating all cached copies in the set of coherent
                  caches.

4.20.8.2. CBO.FLUSH

Synopsis
     Perform a flush operation on a cache block

Mnemonic
     CBO.FLUSH offset(base)

Encoding

 31                                           20 19          15 14         12 11               7   6                       0
 0    0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   0       rs1       0     1    0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   1   1   1
                  CBO.FLUSH                           base           CBO                                   MISC-MEM

Description
     A CBO.FLUSH instruction performs a flush operation on the cache block that contains the address
     specified in rs1. It is not required that rs1 is aligned to the size of a cache block. On faults, the faulting
     virtual address is considered to be the value in rs1, rather than the base address of the cache block. The
     instruction operates on the set of coherent caches accessed by the agent executing the instruction.

The assembly offset operand may be omitted. If it isn’t then any expression that computes the offset shall
evaluate to zero.

4.20.8.3. CBO.INVAL

Synopsis
     Perform an invalidate operation on a cache block

Mnemonic
     CBO.INVAL offset(base)

Encoding

 31                                           20 19          15 14         12 11               7   6                       0
 0    0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0       rs1       0     1    0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   1   1   1
                  CBO.INVAL                           base           CBO                                   MISC-MEM

Description
     A CBO.INVAL instruction performs an invalidate operation on the cache block that contains the
     address specified in rs1. It is not required that rs1 is aligned to the size of a cache block. On faults, the
     faulting virtual address is considered to be the value in rs1, rather than the base address of the cache
     block. The instruction operates on the set of coherent caches accessed by the agent executing the
     instruction.

Depending on CSR programming, the instruction may perform a flush operation instead of an invalidate
operation.

The assembly offset operand may be omitted. If it isn’t then any expression that computes the offset shall
evaluate to zero.

                   When executing a CBO.INVAL instruction, an implementation may instead perform a flush
                  operation, since the result of that operation is indistinguishable from the sequence of
                   performing a write transfer to memory just before performing an invalidate operation.

4.20.8.4. CBO.ZERO

Synopsis
     Store zeros to the full set of bytes corresponding to a cache block

Mnemonic
     CBO.ZERO offset(base)

Encoding

 31                                               20 19          15 14         12 11                 7   6                       0
 0    0    0   0   0     0   0   0    0   1   0   0       rs1       0     1    0   0    0   0   0    0   0   0   0   1   1   1   1
                   CBO.ZERO                               base           CBO                                     MISC-MEM

Description
     A CBO.ZERO instruction performs stores of zeros to the full set of bytes corresponding to the cache
     block that contains the address specified in rs1. It is not required that rs1 is aligned to the size of a cache
     block. On faults, the faulting virtual address is considered to be the value in rs1, rather than the base
     address of the cache block. An implementation may or may not update the entire set of bytes
     atomically.

The assembly offset operand may be omitted. If it isn’t then any expression that computes the offset shall
evaluate to zero.

4.20.8.5. PREFETCH.I

Synopsis
     Provide a HINT to hardware that a cache block is likely to be accessed by an instruction fetch in the
     near future

Mnemonic
     PREFETCH.I offset(base)

Encoding

 31                          25 24                20 19          15 14         12 11                 7   6                       0
           imm[11:5]             0    0   0   0   0       rs1       1     1    0   0    0   0   0    0   0   0   1   0   0   1   1
          offset[11:5]               PREFETCH.I           base           ORI           offset[4:0]                OP-IMM

Description

A PREFETCH.I instruction indicates to hardware that the cache block whose effective address is the sum of
the base address specified in rs1 and the sign-extended offset encoded in imm[11:0], where imm[4:0] equals
0b00000, is likely to be accessed by an instruction fetch in the near future.

                   An implementation may opt to cache a copy of the cache block in a cache accessed by an
      

               instruction fetch in order to improve memory access latency, but this behavior is not required.

4.20.8.6. PREFETCH.R

Synopsis
   Provide a HINT to hardware that a cache block is likely to be accessed by a data read in the near future

Mnemonic
   PREFETCH.R offset(base)

Encoding

31                   25 24                20 19          15 14         12 11                 7   6                       0
       imm[11:5]         0    0   0   0   1       rs1       1    1     0   0    0   0   0    0   0   0   1   0   0   1   1
      offset[11:5]           PREFETCH.R           base           ORI           offset[4:0]               OP-IMM

Description

A PREFETCH.R instruction indicates to hardware that the cache block whose effective address is the sum
of the base address specified in rs1 and the sign-extended offset encoded in imm[11:0], where imm[4:0]
equals 0b00000, is likely to be accessed by a data read (i.e. load) in the near future.

               An implementation may opt to cache a copy of the cache block in a cache accessed by a data
              read in order to improve memory access latency, but this behavior is not required.

4.20.8.7. PREFETCH.W

Synopsis
   Provide a HINT to hardware that a cache block is likely to be accessed by a data write in the near future

Mnemonic
   PREFETCH.W offset(base)

Encoding

31                   25 24                20 19          15 14         12 11                 7   6                       0
       imm[11:5]         0    0   0   1   1       rs1       1    1     0   0    0   0   0    0   0   0   1   0   0   1   1
      offset[11:5]           PREFETCH.W           base           ORI           offset[4:0]               OP-IMM

Description

A PREFETCH.W instruction indicates to hardware that the cache block whose effective address is the sum
of the base address specified in rs1 and the sign-extended offset encoded in imm[11:0], where imm[4:0]
equals 0b00000, is likely to be accessed by a data write (i.e. store) in the near future.

               An implementation may opt to cache a copy of the cache block in a cache accessed by a data
              write in order to improve memory access latency, but this behavior is not required.

