5.1. A Extension for Atomic Instructions | Page 114

Chapter 5. Atomic Instructions
                   This chapter is currently being restructured. Its contents are normative, but the presentation
                  might appear disjoint.

RISC-V provides several extensions that atomically read-modify-write memory to support synchronization
between multiple RISC-V harts running in the same memory space. The two forms of atomic instruction
provided are load-reserved/store-conditional instructions and atomic fetch-and-op memory instructions.
Both types of atomic instruction support various memory consistency orderings including unordered,
acquire, release, and sequentially consistent semantics. These instructions allow RISC-V to support the
release consistency with sequentially consistent synchronization operations (RCsc) memory consistency model
(Gharachorloo et al., 1990).

                   After much debate, the language community and architecture community appear to have
                  finally settled on release consistency as the standard memory consistency model and so the
                   RISC-V atomic support is built around this model.

Specifying Ordering of Atomic Instructions
The base RISC-V ISA has a relaxed memory model, RVWMO, with the FENCE instruction for additional
ordering constraints. The address space is divided by the execution environment into memory and I/O
domains, and the FENCE instruction provides options to order accesses to one or both of these two address
domains.

To provide more efficient support for release consistency, each atomic instruction has two bits, aq and rl,
used to specify additional memory ordering constraints as viewed by other RISC-V harts. The bits order
accesses to one of the two address domains, memory or I/O, depending on which address domain the
atomic instruction is accessing. No ordering constraint is implied to accesses to the other domain, and a
FENCE instruction should be used to order across both domains.

If both bits are clear, no additional ordering constraints are imposed on the atomic memory operation. If
only the aq bit is set, the atomic memory operation is treated as an acquire access, i.e., no following memory
operations on this RISC-V hart can be observed to take place before the acquire memory operation. If only
the rl bit is set, the atomic memory operation is treated as a release access, i.e., the release memory
operation cannot be observed to take place before any earlier memory operations on this RISC-V hart. If
both the aq and rl bits are set, the atomic memory operation is sequentially consistent and cannot be
observed to happen before any earlier memory operations or after any later memory operations in the
same RISC-V hart and to the same address domain.

5.1. A Extension for Atomic Instructions
The A extension comprises the Zalrsc and Zaamo extensions, which are defined in the following sections.

                   The instructions in the A extension can be used to provide sequentially consistent loads and
                   stores, but this constrains hardware reordering of memory accesses more than necessary.

                   A C++ sequentially consistent load can be implemented as an LR with aq set. However, the
                   LR/SC eventual success guarantee may slow down concurrent loads from the same effective
                  address.

                   A sequentially consistent store can be implemented as an AMOSWAP that writes the old value
                   to x0 and has rl set. However the superfluous load may impose ordering constraints that are
                   unnecessary for this use case.

                                        5.2. Zalrsc Extension for Load-Reserved/Store-Conditional Instructions | Page 115

                Specific compilation conventions may require both the aq and rl bits to be set in either or both
                the LR and AMOSWAP instructions.

                The Zalasr extension provides load-acquire and store-release instructions without the
                aforementioned drawbacks.

5.2. Zalrsc Extension for Load-Reserved/Store-Conditional Instructions
 31            27 26 25 24             20 19              15 14       12 11               7   6                      0
      funct5      aq rl         rs2               rs1          funct3             rd                  opcode
         5        1 1            5                5               3              5                       7
      LR.W/D     ordering        0               addr           width           dest                    AMO
      SC.W/D     ordering       src              addr           width           dest                    AMO

Complex atomic memory operations on a single memory word or doubleword are performed with the load-
reserved (LR) and store-conditional (SC) instructions. LR.W loads a word from the address in rs1, places the
sign-extended value in rd, and registers a reservation set: a set of bytes that subsumes the bytes in the
addressed word. SC.W conditionally writes a word in rs2 to the address in rs1: the SC.W succeeds only if the
reservation is still valid and the reservation set contains the bytes being written. If the SC.W succeeds, the
instruction writes the word in rs2 to memory, and it writes zero to rd. If the SC.W fails, the instruction does
not write to memory, and it writes a nonzero value to rd. No SC.W instruction shall retire unless it passes
memory permission checks, but it is UNSPECIFIED whether any side effects of implicit address translation
and protection memory accesses (such as setting a page-table entry D bit) occur on a failed SC.W. For the
purposes of memory protection, a failed SC.W may be treated like a store. Regardless of success or failure,
executing an SC.W instruction invalidates any reservation held by this hart. LR.D and SC.D act analogously
on doublewords and are only available on RV64. For RV64, LR.W and SC.W sign-extend the value placed in
rd.

                Both compare-and-swap (CAS) and LR/SC can be used to build lock-free data structures.
                After extensive discussion, we opted for LR/SC for several reasons: 1) CAS suffers from the
                ABA problem, which LR/SC avoids because it monitors all writes to the address rather than
                only checking for changes in the data value; 2) CAS would also require a new integer
                instruction format to support three source operands (address, compare value, swap value) as
                well as a different memory system message format, which would complicate
                microarchitectures; 3) Furthermore, to avoid the ABA problem, other systems provide a double-
                wide CAS (DW-CAS) to allow a counter to be tested and incremented along with a data word.
                This requires reading five registers and writing two in one instruction, and also a new larger
                memory system message type, further complicating implementations; 4) LR/SC provides a
                more efficient implementation of many primitives as it only requires one load as opposed to
                two with CAS (one load before the CAS instruction to obtain a value for speculative
               computation, then a second load as part of the CAS instruction to check if value is unchanged
                before updating).

                The main disadvantage of LR/SC over CAS is livelock, which we avoid, under certain
                circumstances, with an architected guarantee of eventual forward progress as described
                below. Another concern is whether the influence of the current x86 architecture, with its DW-
                CAS, will complicate porting of synchronization libraries and other software that assumes
                DW-CAS is the basic machine primitive. A possible mitigating factor is the recent addition of
                transactional memory instructions to x86, which might cause a move away from DW-CAS.

                More generally, a multi-word atomic primitive is desirable, but there is still considerable
                debate about what form this should take, and guaranteeing forward progress adds complexity
                to a system.

The failure code with value 1 encodes an unspecified failure. Other failure codes are reserved at this time.

5.2. Zalrsc Extension for Load-Reserved/Store-Conditional Instructions | Page 116

Portable software should only assume the failure code will be non-zero.

                  We reserve a failure code of 1 to mean ''unspecified'' so that simple implementations may
                 return this value using the existing multiplexer required for the SLT/SLTU instructions. More
                  specific failure codes might be defined in future versions or extensions to the ISA.

For LR and SC, the Zalrsc extension requires that the address held in rs1 be naturally aligned to the size of
the operand (i.e., eight-byte aligned for doublewords and four-byte aligned for words). If the address is not
naturally aligned, an address-misaligned exception or an access-fault exception will be generated. The
access-fault exception can be generated for a memory access that would otherwise be able to complete
except for the misalignment, if the misaligned access should not be emulated.

                  Emulating misaligned LR/SC sequences is impractical in most systems.

                 Misaligned LR/SC sequences also raise the possibility of accessing multiple reservation sets at
                  once, which present definitions do not provide for.

An implementation can register an arbitrarily large reservation set on each LR, provided the reservation set
includes all bytes of the addressed data word or doubleword. An SC can only pair with the most recent LR
in program order. An SC may succeed only if no store from another hart to the reservation set can be
observed to have occurred between the LR and the SC, and if there is no other SC between the LR and itself
in program order. An SC may succeed only if no write from a device other than a hart to the bytes accessed
by the LR instruction can be observed to have occurred between the LR and SC. Note this LR might have
had a different effective address and data size, but reserved the SC's address as part of the reservation set.

                  Following this model, in systems with memory translation, an SC is allowed to succeed if the
                  earlier LR reserved the same location using an alias with a different virtual address, but is also
                  allowed to fail if the virtual address is different.

                 To accommodate legacy devices and buses, writes from devices other than RISC-V harts are
                  only required to invalidate reservations when they overlap the bytes accessed by the LR. These
                  writes are not required to invalidate the reservation when they access other bytes in the
                  reservation set.

The SC must fail if the address is not within the reservation set of the most recent LR in program order.
The SC must fail if a store to the reservation set from another hart can be observed to occur between the LR
and SC. The SC must fail if a write from some other device to the bytes accessed by the LR can be observed
to occur between the LR and SC. (If such a device writes the reservation set but does not write the bytes
accessed by the LR, the SC may or may not fail.) An SC must fail if there is another SC (to any address)
between the LR and the SC in program order. The precise statement of the atomicity requirements for
successful LR/SC sequences is defined by the Atomicity Axiom in Section 3.1.1.

                  The platform should provide a means to determine the size and shape of the reservation set.

                  A platform specification may constrain the size and shape of the reservation set.

                  A store-conditional instruction to a scratch word of memory should be used to forcibly
                  invalidate any existing load reservation:

                  ⚫ during a preemptive context switch, and
                   ⚫ if necessary when changing virtual to physical address mappings, such as when migrating
                     pages that might contain an active reservation.

                  The invalidation of a hart’s reservation when it executes an LR or SC imply that a hart can only
                  hold one reservation at a time, and that an SC can only pair with the most recent LR, and LR

                                       5.2. Zalrsc Extension for Load-Reserved/Store-Conditional Instructions | Page 117

               with the next following SC, in program order. This is a restriction to the Atomicity Axiom in
               Section 3.1.1 that ensures software runs correctly on expected common implementations that
               operate in this manner.

An SC instruction can never be observed by another RISC-V hart before the LR instruction that established
the reservation.

               The LR/SC sequence can be given acquire semantics by setting the aq bit on the LR instruction.
               The LR/SC sequence can be given release semantics by setting the rl bit on the SC instruction.
               Assuming suitable mappings for other atomic operations, setting the aq bit on the LR
               instruction, and setting the rl bit on the SC instruction makes the LR/SC sequence sequentially
               consistent in the C++ memory_order_seq_cst sense. Such a sequence does not act as a fence
               for ordering ordinary load and store instructions before and after the sequence. Specific
              instruction mappings for other C++ atomic operations, or stronger notions of sequential
               consistency, may require both bits to be set on either or both of the LR or SC instruction.

               If neither bit is set on either LR or SC, the LR/SC sequence can be observed to occur before or
               after surrounding memory operations from the same RISC-V hart. This can be appropriate
               when the LR/SC sequence is used to implement a parallel reduction operation.

Software should not set the rl bit on an LR instruction unless the aq bit is also set, nor should software set
the aq bit on an SC instruction unless the rl bit is also set. LR.RL and SC.AQ instructions are not guaranteed
to provide any stronger ordering than those with both bits clear, but may result in lower performance.

5.2.1. Eventual Success of Store-Conditional Instructions

The Zalrsc extension defines constrained LR/SC loops, which have the following properties:

 ⚫ The loop comprises only an LR/SC sequence and code to retry the sequence in the case of failure, and
   must comprise at most 16 instructions placed sequentially in memory.
 ⚫ An LR/SC sequence begins with an LR instruction and ends with an SC instruction. The dynamic code
   executed between the LR and SC instructions can only contain instructions from the I or E base
   instruction set, excluding loads, stores, backward jumps, taken backward branches, JALR, FENCE, and
   SYSTEM instructions. Compressed forms of the aforementioned I or E instructions in the C (hence Zca)
   and Zcb extensions are also permitted.
 ⚫ The code to retry a failing LR/SC sequence can contain backwards jumps and/or branches to repeat the
   LR/SC sequence, but otherwise has the same constraint as the code between the LR and SC.
 ⚫ The LR and SC addresses must lie within a memory region with the LR/SC eventuality property. The
   execution environment is responsible for communicating which regions have this property.
 ⚫ The SC must be to the same effective address and of the same data size as the latest LR executed by the
   same hart.

LR/SC sequences that do not lie within constrained LR/SC loops are unconstrained. Unconstrained LR/SC
sequences might succeed on some attempts on some implementations, but might never succeed on other
implementations.

               We restricted the length of LR/SC loops to fit within 64 contiguous instruction bytes in the
               base ISA to avoid undue restrictions on instruction cache and TLB size and associativity.
               Similarly, we disallowed other loads and stores within the loops to avoid restrictions on data-
              cache associativity in simple implementations that track the reservation within a private
               cache. The restrictions on branches and jumps limit the time that can be spent in the
               sequence. Floating-point operations and integer multiply/divide were disallowed to simplify

5.3. Za128rs Extension for Reservation-Set Size | Page 118

                  the operating system’s emulation of these instructions on implementations lacking
                  appropriate hardware support.

                  Software is not forbidden from using unconstrained LR/SC sequences, but portable software
                  must detect the case that the sequence repeatedly fails, then fall back to an alternate code
                  sequence that does not rely on an unconstrained LR/SC sequence. Implementations are
                  permitted to unconditionally fail any unconstrained LR/SC sequence.

If a hart H enters a constrained LR/SC loop, the execution environment must guarantee that one of the
following events eventually occurs:

 ⚫ H or some other hart executes a successful SC to the reservation set of the LR instruction in H's
   constrained LR/SC loops.
 ⚫ Some other hart executes an unconditional store or AMO instruction to the reservation set of the LR
   instruction in H's constrained LR/SC loop, or some other device in the system writes to that reservation
   set.
 ⚫ H executes a branch or jump that exits the constrained LR/SC loop.
 ⚫ H traps.

                  Note that these definitions permit an implementation to fail an SC instruction occasionally for
                  any reason, provided the aforementioned guarantee is not violated.

                  As a consequence of the eventuality guarantee, if some harts in an execution environment are
                  executing constrained LR/SC loops, and no other harts or devices in the execution
                  environment execute an unconditional store or AMO to that reservation set, then at least one
                  hart will eventually exit its constrained LR/SC loop. By contrast, if other harts or devices
                  continue to write to that reservation set, it is not guaranteed that any hart will exit its LR/SC
                  loop.

                  Loads and load-reserved instructions do not by themselves impede the progress of other harts'
                  LR/SC sequences. We note this constraint implies, among other things, that loads and load-
                  reserved instructions executed by other harts (possibly within the same core) cannot impede
                  LR/SC progress indefinitely. For example, cache evictions caused by another hart sharing the
                 cache cannot impede LR/SC progress indefinitely. Typically, this implies reservations are
                  tracked independently of evictions from any shared cache. Similarly, cache misses caused by
                  speculative execution within a hart cannot impede LR/SC progress indefinitely.

                  These definitions admit the possibility that SC instructions may spuriously fail for
                  implementation reasons, provided progress is eventually made.

                  One advantage of CAS is that it guarantees that some hart eventually makes progress,
                  whereas an LR/SC atomic sequence could livelock indefinitely on some systems. To avoid this
                  concern, we added an architectural guarantee of livelock freedom for certain LR/SC
                  sequences.

                  Earlier versions of this specification imposed a stronger starvation-freedom guarantee.
                  However, the weaker livelock-freedom guarantee is sufficient to implement the C11 and C++11
                  languages, and is substantially easier to provide in some microarchitectural styles.

5.3. Za128rs Extension for Reservation-Set Size
The Za128rs extension requires that the reservation sets used by the instructions in the Zalrsc extension
be contiguous, naturally aligned, and at most 128 bytes in size.

                                                                5.4. Za64rs Extension for Reservation-Set Size | Page 119

5.4. Za64rs Extension for Reservation-Set Size
The Za64rs extension requires that the reservation sets used by the instructions in the Zalrsc extension be
contiguous, naturally aligned, and at most 64 bytes in size.

The Za64rs extension implies the Za128rs extension.

5.5. Zawrs Extension for Wait-on-Reservation-Set instructions
The Zawrs extension defines a pair of WRS (wait-on-reservation-set) instructions to be used in polling
loops that allows a core to enter a low-power state and wait on a store to a memory location. Waiting for a
memory location to be updated is a common pattern in many use cases such as:

 1. Contenders for a lock waiting for the lock variable to be updated.
 2. Consumers waiting on the tail of an empty queue for the producer to queue work/data. The producer
    may be code executing on a RISC-V hart, an accelerator device, an external I/O agent.
 3. Code waiting on a flag to be set in memory indicative of an event occurring. For example, software on a
    RISC-V hart may wait on a “done” flag to be set in memory by an accelerator device indicating
    completion of a job previously submitted to the device.

Such use cases involve polling on memory locations, and such busy loops can be a wasteful expenditure of
energy. To mitigate the wasteful looping in such usages, a WRS.NTO (WRS-with-no-timeout) instruction is
provided. Instead of polling for a store to a specific memory location, software registers a reservation set
that includes all the bytes of the memory location using the LR instruction. Then a subsequent WRS.NTO
instruction would cause the hart to temporarily stall execution in a low-power state until a store occurs to
the reservation set or an interrupt is observed.

Sometimes the program waiting on a memory update may also need to carry out a task at a future time or
otherwise place an upper bound on the wait. To support such use cases a second instruction WRS.STO
(WRS-with-short-timeout) is provided that works like WRS.NTO but bounds the stall duration to an
implementation-defined short timeout such that the stall is terminated on the timeout if no other
conditions have occurred to terminate the stall. The program using this instruction may then determine if
its deadline has been reached.

               The instructions in the Zawrs extension are only useful in conjunction with the LR instruction,
              which is provided by the Zalrsc component of the A extension.

5.5.1. Wait-on-Reservation-Set Instructions

The WRS.NTO and WRS.STO instructions cause the hart to temporarily stall execution in a low-power
state as long as the reservation set is valid and no locally enabled interrupts at any privilege level are
pending, regardless of the global interrupt enable at each privilege level. For WRS.STO the stall duration is
bounded by an implementation defined short timeout. These instructions are available in all privilege
modes.

 31                                   20   19           15 14            12 11           7   6                        0
                 funct12                         rs1            funct3           rd                    opcode
              WRS.NTO(0x0d)                      0                0              0                  SYSTEM(0x73)
              WRS.STO(0x1d)

5.6. Zaamo Extension for Atomic Memory Operations | Page 120

Hart execution may be stalled while the following conditions are all satisfied:

 a. The reservation set is valid
 b. If WRS.STO, a “short” duration since start of stall has not elapsed
 c. No locally enabled interrupt at any privilege level is pending (see the rules below)

While stalled, an implementation is permitted to occasionally terminate the stall and complete execution
for any reason.

WRS.NTO and WRS.STO instructions follow the rules of the WFI instruction for resuming execution on a
locally enabled pending interrupt.

When the TW (timeout wait) bit in mstatus is set and WRS.NTO is executed in any privilege mode other
than M-mode, and it does not complete within an implementation-specific bounded time limit, the
WRS.NTO instruction will cause an illegal-instruction exception.

When executing in VS- or VU-mode, if the VTW bit is set in hstatus, the TW bit in mstatus is clear, and the
WRS.NTO does not complete within an implementation-specific bounded time limit, the WRS.NTO
instruction will cause a virtual-instruction exception.

                 Since the WRS.STO and WRS.NTO instructions can complete execution for reasons other than
                 stores to the reservation set, software will likely need a means of looping until the required
                 stores have occurred.

                 The duration of a WRS.STO instruction’s timeout may vary significantly within and among
                 implementations. In typical implementations this duration should be roughly in the range of
                10 to 100 times an on-chip cache miss latency or a cacheless access to main memory.

                 WRS.NTO, unlike WFI, is not specified to cause an illegal-instruction exception if executed in
                 U-mode when the governing TW bit is 0. WFI is typically not expected to be used in U-mode and
                 on many systems may promptly cause an illegal-instruction exception if used at U-mode.
                 Unlike WFI, WRS.NTO is expected to be used by software in U-mode when waiting on memory
                 but without a deadline for that wait.

5.6. Zaamo Extension for Atomic Memory Operations
 31             27 26 25 24                20 19               15 14    12 11          7   6                  0
      funct5        aq rl          rs2                rs1          funct3        rd              opcode
     5        1         1           5                 5              3           5                 7
 AMOSWAP.W/D                       src               addr          width        dest              AMO
 AMOADD.W/D                        src               addr          width        dest              AMO
 AMOAND.W/D                        src               addr          width        dest              AMO
  AMOOR.W/D                        src               addr          width        dest              AMO
 AMOXOR.W/D                        src               addr          width        dest              AMO
AMOMAX[U].W/D                      src               addr          width        dest              AMO
AMOMIN[U].W/D                      src               addr          width        dest              AMO

The atomic memory operation (AMO) instructions perform read-modify-write operations for
multiprocessor synchronization and are encoded with an R-type instruction format. These AMO
instructions atomically load a data value from the address in rs1, place the value into register rd, apply a
binary operator to the loaded value and the original value in rs2, then store the result back to the original
address in rs1. AMOs can either operate on doublewords (RV64 only) or words in memory. For RV64, 32-bit
AMOs always sign-extend the value placed in rd, and ignore the upper 32 bits of the original value of rs2.

For AMOs, the Zaamo extension requires that the address held in rs1 be naturally aligned to the size of the
operand (i.e., eight-byte aligned for doublewords and four-byte aligned for words). If the address is not

naturally aligned, an address-misaligned exception or an access-fault exception will be generated. The
access-fault exception can be generated for a memory access that would otherwise be able to complete
except for the misalignment, if the misaligned access should not be emulated.

The misaligned atomicity granule PMA, defined in Volume II, Section 3.6.4, optionally relaxes this
alignment requirement. If present, the misaligned atomicity granule PMA specifies the size of a misaligned
atomicity granule, a power-of-two number of bytes. The misaligned atomicity granule PMA applies only to
AMOs; loads and stores defined in the base ISAs; loads and stores of no more than XLEN bits defined in the
F, D, and Q extensions; the load-acquire and store-release instructions defined in the Zalasr extension; and
compressed encodings of the foregoing loads and stores. For an instruction in that set, if all accessed bytes
lie within the same misaligned atomicity granule, the instruction will not raise an exception for reasons of
address alignment, and the instruction will give rise to only one memory operation for the purposes of
RVWMO—i.e., it will execute atomically.

The operations supported are swap, integer add, bitwise AND, bitwise OR, bitwise XOR, and signed and
unsigned integer maximum and minimum. Without ordering constraints, these AMOs can be used to
implement parallel reduction operations, where typically the return value would be discarded by writing to
x0.

               We provided fetch-and-op style atomic primitives as they scale to highly parallel systems
               better than LR/SC or CAS. A simple microarchitecture can implement AMOs using the LR/SC
               primitives, provided the implementation can guarantee the AMO eventually completes. More
               complex implementations might also implement AMOs at memory controllers, and can
               optimize away fetching the original value when the destination is x0. Implementations that
               detect silent stores may reduce write traffic for AMOs when they do not change the value in
               memory (see silent stores).

              The set of AMOs was chosen to support the C11/C++11 atomic memory operations efficiently,
               and also to support parallel reductions in memory. Another use of AMOs is to provide atomic
               updates to memory-mapped device registers (e.g., setting, clearing, or toggling bits) in the I/O
               space.

               The Zaamo extension enables microcontroller class implementations to utilize atomic
               primitives from the AMO subset of the A extension. Typically such implementations do not
               have caches and thus may not be able to naturally support the LR/SC instructions provided by
               the Zalrsc extension.

To help implement multiprocessor synchronization, the AMOs optionally provide release consistency
semantics. If the aq bit is set, then no later memory operations in this RISC-V hart can be observed to take
place before the AMO. Conversely, if the rl bit is set, then other RISC-V harts will not observe the AMO
before memory accesses preceding the AMO in this RISC-V hart. Setting both the aq and the rl bit on an
AMO makes the sequence sequentially consistent, meaning that it cannot be reordered with earlier or later
memory operations from the same hart.

               The AMOs were designed to implement the C11 and C++11 memory models efficiently. Although
               the FENCE r, rw instruction suffices to implement the acquire operation and FENCE rw, w
              suffices to implement release, both imply additional unnecessary ordering as compared to
               AMOs with the corresponding aq or rl bit set.

5.7. Zalasr Extension for Atomic Load-Acquire and Store-Release Instructions
The Zalasr extension provides load-acquire and store-release instructions in RISC-V. These can be
important for high performance designs by enabling finer-grained synchronisation than is possible with
fences alone, by providing a unidirectional fence. Load-acquire and store-release are widely used in

language-level memory models: both the Java and C++ memory models make use of acquire-release
semantics, and C++'s atomic provides primitives that are meant to map directly to load-acquire and store-
release instructions.

The Zalasr extension builds on the atomic support provided by the Zaamo, Zalrsc, and Zabha extensions by
providing additional atomic operations, although it can be implemented independently of them. All of the
AMO operations in Zaamo and Zabha are read-modify-write operations that both load and store. The Zalrsc
extension provides operations that are only loads or stores. However, since it is designed to perform an
atomic operation on a single memory word or doubleword, the loads and stores provided by Zalrsc are
designed to be paired. The load-reserved implies that a future store-conditional will follow while store-
conditional requires that there was a previous load-reserved without other intervening loads or stores.
Therefore, the Zalrsc extension does not provide a general atomic and ordered load or store.

Zalasr fills this gap by offering truly standalone atomic and ordered loads and stores. The Zalasr
instructions are atomic loads and stores that support ordering annotations. All C++ atomic operations can
be supported with single instructions with the combination of Zaamo, Zabha, Zacas, and Zalasr.

5.7.1. Load-Acquire and Store-Release Instructions

The Zalasr instructions always sign-extend the value placed in rd and ignore the upper bits of the value of
rs2. The instructions in the Zalasr extension require that the address held in rs1 be naturally aligned to the
size in bytes (2width) of the operand. If the address is not naturally aligned, an address-misaligned exception
or an access-fault exception will be generated. The access-fault exception can be generated for a memory
access that would otherwise be able to complete except for the misalignment, if the misaligned access
should not be emulated.

The misaligned atomicity granule PMA, defined in Volume II, Section 3.6.4, optionally relaxes this
alignment requirement. If all accessed bytes lie within the same misaligned atomicity granule, the
instruction will not raise an exception for reasons of address alignment, and the instruction will give rise to
only one memory operation for the purposes of RVWMO—i.e., it will execute atomically.

5.7.2. Load Acquire

Synopsis
  The load-acquire instruction atomically loads a 2width-byte value from the address in rs1 and places the
  sign-extended value into the register rd, subject to the ordering annotations specified in the instruction.

Mnemonic

  LB.{AQ,AQRL} rd, (rs1)

  LH.{AQ,AQRL} rd, (rs1)

  LW.{AQ,AQRL} rd, (rs1)

  LD.{AQ,AQRL} rd, (rs1)

Encoding

31            27 26 25 24                 20 19               15 14       12 11               7   6                      0
     funct5        aq rl         rs2                  rs1           funct3            rd                   opcode
       5           1 1            5                   5               3              5                       7
  Load Acquire    ordering        0                  addr           width           dest                    AMO
     00110         1

Description
  This instruction loads 2width bytes of memory from rs1 atomically and writes the result into rd. If the size
  (2width+3) is less than XLEN, it is sign-extended to fill the destination register. This load must have the
  ordering annotation aq and may have ordering annotation rl encoded in the instruction. The instruction
  always has an acquire-RCsc annotation, and if the bit rl is set the instruction has a release-RCsc
  annotation.

  The versions without the aq bit set are RESERVED. LD.{AQ,AQRL} is RV64-only.

                 The aq bit is mandatory because the two encodings that would be produced are not seen as
                 useful at this time. The version with neither the aq nor the rl bit set would correspond to a load
                 with no ordering annotations that was guaranteed to be performed atomically. This can be
                achieved with ordinary load instructions by suitably aligning pointers. The version with only
                 the rl bit would correspond to load-release. Load-release has theoretical applications in
                 seqlocks, but is not supported in language-level memory models and so is not included.

5.7.3. Store Release

Synopsis
   The store-release instruction atomically stores the 2width-byte value from the low bits of register rs2 to
   the address in rs1, subject to the ordering annotations specified in the instruction.

Mnemonic

  SB.{RL,AQRL} rs2, (rs1)

  SH.{RL,AQRL} rs2, (rs1)

  SW.{RL,AQRL} rs2, (rs1)

  SD.{RL,AQRL} rs2, (rs1)

Encoding

31              27 26 25 24                 20 19              15 14       12 11               7   6                0
      funct5        aq rl          rs2                 rs1           funct3               rd           opcode
        5           1 1             5                  5               3                  5             7
  Store Release    ordering        src                addr           width                0            AMO
     00111               1

Description
   This instruction stores 2width bytes of memory from rs1 atomically. This store must have ordering
   annotation rl and may have ordering annotation aq encoded in the instruction. The instruction always
   has a release-RCsc annotation, and if the bit aq is set the instruction has an acquire-RCsc annotation.

   The versions without the rl bit set are RESERVED. SD.{RL,AQRL} is RV64-only.

                  The rl bit is mandatory because the two encodings that would be produced are not seen as
                  useful at this time. The version with neither the aq nor the rl bit set would correspond to a store
                  with no ordering annotations that was guaranteed to be performed atomically. This can be
                 achieved with ordinary store instructions by suitably aligned pointers. The version with only
                  the aq bit would correspond to store-acquire. Store-acquire has theoretical applications in
                  seqlocks, but is not supported in language-level memory models and so is not included.

                                            5.8. Zabha Extension for Byte and Halfword Atomic Memory Operations | Page 125

5.8. Zabha Extension for Byte and Halfword Atomic Memory Operations
The Zaamo and Zacas extensions offer atomic memory operation (AMO) instructions for words,
doublewords, and quadwords (only for AMOCAS). The absence of atomic operations for subword data types
necessitates emulation strategies. For bitwise operations, this emulation can be performed via word-sized
bitwise AMO* instructions. For non-bitwise operations, emulation is achievable using word-sized LR/SC
instructions.

Several limitations arise from this emulation approach:

 1. In systems with large-scale or Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) configurations, emulation based
    on LR/SC introduces issues related to scalability and fairness, particularly under conditions of high
    contention.
 2. Emulation of narrower AMOs through wider AMO* instructions on non-idempotent IO memory
    regions may result in unintended side effects.
 3. Utilizing wider AMO* instructions for emulating narrower AMOs risks activating extraneous
    breakpoints or watchpoints.
 4. In the absence of native support for subword atomics, compilers often resort to inlining code sequences
    to provide the required emulation. This practice contributes to an increase in code size, with
    consequent impacts on system performance and memory utilization.

The Zabha extension addresses these limitations by adding support for byte and halfword atomic memory
operations to the RISC-V Unprivileged ISA. The Zabha extension depends upon the Zaamo standard
extension.

5.8.1. Byte and Halfword Atomic Memory Operation Instructions

Zabha   extension provides the AMOADD.B/H, AMOAND.B/H, AMOOR.B/H, AMOXOR.B/H,
AMOSWAP.B/H, AMOMIN.B/H, AMOMINU.B/H, AMOMAX.B/H, and AMOMAXU.B/H instructions. If
Zacas extension is also implemented, Zabha further provides the AMOCAS.B/H instructions.

 31              27   26 25     24         20   19           15 14            12 11          7   6                      0
        funct5        aq   rl        rs2              rs1            funct3            rd                 opcode
   AMOSWAP.B/H    ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO
   AMOADD.B/H     ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO
   AMOAND.B/H     ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO
    AMOOR.B/H     ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO
   AMOXOR.B/H     ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO
  AMOMAX[U].B/H   ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO
  AMOMIN[U].B/H   ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO
    AMOCAS.B/H    ordering           src             addr         width=0/1           dest                 AMO

Byte and halfword AMOs always sign-extend the value placed in rd, and ignore the XLEN-1:2^{(width +
3)} bits of the original value in rs2. The AMOCAS.B/H instructions similarly ignore the XLEN-1:2^{(width
+ 3)} bits of the original value in rd.

Similar to the AMOs specified in the Zaamo extension, the Zabha extension mandates that the address
contained in the rs1 register must be naturally aligned to the size of the operand. The same exception
options as specified in the Zaamo extension are applicable in cases where the address is not naturally
aligned.

Similar to the AMOs specified in the Zaamo and Zacas extensions, the AMOs in the Zabha extension
optionally provide release consistency semantics, using the aq and rl bits, to help implement
multiprocessor synchronization.

                 Zabha omits byte and halfword support for LR and SC due to low utility.

5.9. Zacas Extension for Atomic Compare-and-Swap (CAS) Instructions | Page 126

5.9. Zacas Extension for Atomic Compare-and-Swap (CAS) Instructions
Compare-and-swap (CAS) provides an easy and typically faster way to perform thread synchronization
operations when supported as a hardware instruction. CAS is typically used by lock-free and wait-free
algorithms. This extension defines CAS instructions to operate on 32-bit, 64-bit, and 128-bit (RV64 only)
data values. The Zacas extension depends upon the Zaamo extension.

5.9.1. Word/Doubleword/Quadword CAS (AMOCAS.W/D/Q) Instructions

 31              27   26 25     24         20   19            15 14            12 11          7   6            0
       00101          aq   rl        rs2               rs1            funct3            rd            opcode
      AMOCAS.W                       src              addr             010             dest           AMO
      AMOCAS.D                                                         011
      AMOCAS.Q                                                         100

For RV32, AMOCAS.W atomically loads a 32-bit data value from address in rs1, compares the loaded value
to the 32-bit value held in rd, and if the comparison is bitwise equal, then stores the 32-bit value held in
rs2 to the original address in rs1. The value loaded from memory is placed into register rd. The operation
performed by AMOCAS.W for RV32 is as follows:

        temp = mem[X(rs1)]
        if ( temp == X(rd) )
            mem[X(rs1)] = X(rs2)
        X(rd) = temp

AMOCAS.D is similar to AMOCAS.W but operates on 64-bit data values.

For RV32, AMOCAS.D atomically loads 64-bits of a data value from address in rs1, compares the loaded
value to a 64-bit value held in a register pair consisting of rd and rd+1, and if the comparison is bitwise
equal, then stores the 64-bit value held in the register pair rs2 and rs2+1 to the original address in rs1. The
value loaded from memory is placed into the register pair rd and rd+1. The instruction requires the first
register in the pair to be even numbered; encodings with odd numbered registers specified in rs2 and rd
are reserved. When the first register of a source register pair is x0, then both halves of the pair read as zero.
When the first register of a destination register pair is x0, then the entire register result is discarded and
neither destination register is written. The operation performed by AMOCAS.D for RV32 is as follows:

                                        5.9. Zacas Extension for Atomic Compare-and-Swap (CAS) Instructions | Page 127

       temp0 = mem[X(rs1)+0]
       temp1 = mem[X(rs1)+4]
       comp0 = (rd == x0)         ? 0 : X(rd)
       comp1 = (rd == x0)         ? 0 : X(rd+1)
       swap0 = (rs2 == x0) ? 0 : X(rs2)
       swap1 = (rs2 == x0) ? 0 : X(rs2+1)
       if ( temp0 == comp0 ) && ( temp1 == comp1 )
             mem[X(rs1)+0] = swap0
             mem[X(rs1)+4] = swap1
       endif
       if ( rd != x0 )
             X(rd)     = temp0
           X(rd+1) = temp1
       endif

For RV64, AMOCAS.W atomically loads a 32-bit data value from address in rs1, compares the loaded value
to the lower 32 bits of the value held in rd, and if the comparison is bitwise equal, then stores the lower 32
bits of the value held in rs2 to the original address in rs1. The 32-bit value loaded from memory is sign-
extended and is placed into register rd. The operation performed by AMOCAS.W for RV64 is as follows:

       temp[31:0] = mem[X(rs1)]
       if ( temp[31:0] == X(rd)[31:0] )
           mem[X(rs1)] = X(rs2)[31:0]
       X(rd) = SignExtend(temp[31:0])

For RV64, AMOCAS.D atomically loads 64-bits of a data value from address in rs1, compares the loaded
value to a 64-bit value held in rd, and if the comparison is bitwise equal, then stores the 64-bit value held
in rs2 to the original address in rs1. The value loaded from memory is placed into register rd. The
operation performed by AMOCAS.D for RV64 is as follows:

       temp = mem[X(rs1)]
       if ( temp == X(rd) )
           mem[X(rs1)] = X(rs2)
       X(rd) = temp

AMOCAS.Q (RV64 only) atomically loads 128-bits of a data value from address in rs1, compares the loaded
value to a 128-bit value held in a register pair consisting of rd and rd+1, and if the comparison is bitwise
equal, then stores the 128-bit value held in the register pair rs2 and rs2+1 to the original address in rs1.
The value loaded from memory is placed into the register pair rd and rd+1. The instruction requires the
first register in the pair to be even numbered; encodings with odd numbered registers specified in rs2 and
rd are reserved. When the first register of a source register pair is x0, then both halves of the pair read as
zero. When the first register of a destination register pair is x0, then the entire register result is discarded
and neither destination register is written. The operation performed by AMOCAS.Q is as follows:

5.10. Zama16b Extension for 16-byte Misaligned Atomicity | Page 128

        temp0 = mem[X(rs1)+0]
        temp1 = mem[X(rs1)+8]
        comp0 = (rd == x0)            ? 0 : X(rd)
        comp1 = (rd == x0)            ? 0 : X(rd+1)
        swap0 = (rs2 == x0) ? 0 : X(rs2)
        swap1 = (rs2 == x0) ? 0 : X(rs2+1)
        if ( temp0 == comp0 ) && ( temp1 == comp1 )
              mem[X(rs1)+0] = swap0
              mem[X(rs1)+8] = swap1
        endif
        if ( rd != x0 )
              X(rd)       = temp0
            X(rd+1) = temp1
        endif

                 Some algorithms may load the previous data value of a memory location into the register used
                 as the compare data value source by a Zacas instruction. When using a Zacas instruction that
                 uses a register pair to source the compare value, the two registers may be loaded using two
                individual loads. The two individual loads may read an inconsistent pair of values but that is
                 not an issue since the AMOCAS operation itself uses an atomic load-pair from memory to
                 obtain the data value for its comparison.

Just as for AMOs in the Zaamo extension, AMOCAS.W/D/Q requires that the address held in rs1 be
naturally aligned to the size of the operand (i.e., 16-byte aligned for quadwords, eight-byte aligned for
doublewords, and four-byte aligned for words). And the same exception options apply if the address is not
naturally aligned.

Just as for AMOs in the Zaamo extension, the AMOCAS.W/D/Q optionally provide release consistency
semantics, using the aq and rl bits, to help implement multiprocessor synchronization. The memory
operation performed by an AMOCAS.W/D/Q, when successful, has acquire semantics if aq bit is 1 and has
release semantics if rl bit is 1. The memory operation performed by an AMOCAS.W/D/Q, when not
successful, has acquire semantics if aq bit is 1 but does not have release semantics, regardless of rl.

A FENCE instruction may be used to order the memory read access and, if produced, the memory write
access by an AMOCAS.W/D/Q instruction.

                 An unsuccessful AMOCAS.W/D/Q may either not perform a memory write or may write back
                 the old value loaded from memory. The memory write, if produced, does not have release
                semantics, regardless of rl. Irrespective of whether a write is actually performed, the
                 instruction is treated as an AMO for the purposes of the RVWMO PPO rules.

An AMOCAS.W/D/Q instruction always requires write permissions.

5.10. Zama16b Extension for 16-byte Misaligned Atomicity
If the Zama16b extension is implemented, then the misaligned atomicity granule in main memory regions
with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs is 16 bytes. Misaligned loads, stores and AMOs to those
regions that do not cross a naturally aligned 16-byte boundary are atomic.

