
Appendix B: Memory Model Supplemental Material
This appendix contains non-normative documentation that helps explain the rationale behind and the
workings of the RISC-V memory consistency models, including formal models of RVWMO.

B.1. RVWMO Explanatory Material
This section provides more explanation for RVWMO Section 3.1, using more informal language and
concrete examples. These are intended to clarify the meaning and intent of the axioms and preserved
program order rules. This appendix should be treated as commentary; all normative material is provided in
Section 3.1 and in the rest of the main body of the ISA specification. All currently known discrepancies are
listed in Appendix B.1.7. Any other discrepancies are unintentional.

B.1.1. Why RVWMO?

Memory consistency models fall along a loose spectrum from weak to strong. Weak memory models allow
more hardware implementation flexibility and deliver arguably better performance, performance per watt,
power, scalability, and hardware verification overheads than strong models, at the expense of a more
complex programming model. Strong models provide simpler programming models, but at the cost of
imposing more restrictions on the kinds of (non-speculative) hardware optimizations that can be
performed in the pipeline and in the memory system, and in turn imposing some cost in terms of power,
area overhead, and verification burden.

RISC-V has chosen the RVWMO memory model, a variant of release consistency. This places it in between
the two extremes of the memory model spectrum. The RVWMO memory model enables architects to build
simple implementations, aggressive implementations, implementations embedded deeply inside a much
larger system and subject to complex memory system interactions, or any number of other possibilities, all
while simultaneously being strong enough to support programming language memory models at high
performance.

To facilitate the porting of code from other architectures, some hardware implementations may choose to
implement the Ztso extension, which provides stricter RVTSO ordering semantics by default. Code written
for RVWMO is automatically and inherently compatible with RVTSO, but code written assuming RVTSO is
not guaranteed to run correctly on RVWMO implementations. In fact, most RVWMO implementations will
(and should) simply refuse to run RVTSO-only binaries. Each implementation must therefore choose
whether to prioritize compatibility with RVTSO code (e.g., to facilitate porting from x86) or whether to
instead prioritize compatibility with other RISC-V cores implementing RVWMO.

Some fences and/or memory ordering annotations in code written for RVWMO may become redundant
under RVTSO; the cost that the default of RVWMO imposes on Ztso implementations is the incremental
overhead of fetching those fences (e.g., FENCE R,RW and FENCE RW,W) which become no-ops on that
implementation. However, these fences must remain present in the code if compatibility with non-Ztso
implementations is desired.

B.1.2. Litmus Tests

The explanations in this chapter make use of litmus tests, or small programs designed to test or highlight
one particular aspect of a memory model. Litmus sample shows an example of a litmus test with two harts.
As a convention for this figure and for all figures that follow in this chapter, we assume that s0-s2 are pre-
set to the same value in all harts and that s0 holds the address labeled x, s1 holds y, and s2 holds z, where x,
y, and z are disjoint memory locations aligned to 8 byte boundaries. All other registers and all referenced
memory locations are presumed to be initialized to zero. Each figure shows the litmus test code on the left,

and a visualization of one particular valid or invalid execution on the right.

                            Table 68. A sample litmus test and one forbidden execution (a0=1).

                  Hart 0        Hart 1
                  ⋮                 ⋮
                  li t1,1           li t4,4
              (a) sw t1,0(s0) (e) sw t4,0(s0)
                  ⋮                 ⋮
                  li t2,2
              (b) sw t2,0(s0)
                  ⋮                 ⋮
              (c) lw a0,0(s0)
                  ⋮                 ⋮
                  li t3,3           li t5,5
              (d) sw t3,0(s0) (f) sw t5,0(s0)
                  ⋮                 ⋮

Litmus tests are used to understand the implications of the memory model in specific concrete situations.
For example, in the litmus test of Litmus sample, the final value of a0 in the first hart can be either 2, 4, or
5, depending on the dynamic interleaving of the instruction stream from each hart at runtime. However, in
this example, the final value of a0 in Hart 0 will never be 1 or 3; intuitively, the value 1 will no longer be
visible at the time the load executes, and the value 3 will not yet be visible by the time the load executes. We
analyze this test and many others below.

                         Table 69. A key for the litmus test diagrams drawn in this appendix
  Edge   Full Name (and explanation)
  rf     Reads From (from each store to the loads that return a value written by that store)
  co     Coherence (a total order on the stores to each address)
  fr     From-Reads (from each load to co-successors of the store from which the load returned a value)
  ppo    Preserved Program Order
  fence Orderings enforced by a FENCE instruction
  addr   Address Dependency
  ctrl   Control Dependency
  data   Data Dependency

The diagram shown to the right of each litmus test shows a visual representation of the particular
execution candidate being considered. These diagrams use a notation that is common in the memory
model literature for constraining the set of possible global memory orders that could produce the execution
in question. It is also the basis for the herd models presented in Appendix B.2.2. This notation is explained
in Table 69. Of the listed relations, rf edges between harts, co edges, fr edges, and ppo edges directly
constrain the global memory order (as do fence, addr, data, and some ctrl edges, via ppo). Other edges (such
as intra-hart rf edges) are informative but do not constrain the global memory order.

For example, in Litmus sample, a0=1 could occur only if one of the following were true:

 ⚫ (b) appears before (a) in global memory order (and in the coherence order co). However, this violates
   RVWMO PPO rule ppo:→st. The co edge from (b) to (a) highlights this contradiction.
 ⚫ (a) appears before (b) in global memory order (and in the coherence order co). However, in this case, the
   Load Value Axiom would be violated, because (a) is not the latest matching store prior to (c) in program
   order. The fr edge from (c) to (b) highlights this contradiction.

Since neither of these scenarios satisfies the RVWMO axioms, the outcome a0=1 is forbidden.

Beyond what is described in this appendix, a suite of more than seven thousand litmus tests is available at
github.com/litmus-tests/litmus-tests-riscv.

                The litmus tests repository also provides instructions on how to run the litmus tests on RISC-V
                hardware and how to compare the results with the operational and axiomatic models.
               In the future, we expect to adapt these memory model litmus tests for use as part of the RISC-
                V compliance test suite as well.

B.1.3. Explaining the RVWMO Rules

In this section, we provide explanation and examples for all of the RVWMO rules and axioms.

B.1.3.1. Preserved Program Order and Global Memory Order

Preserved program order represents the subset of program order that must be respected within the global
memory order. Conceptually, events from the same hart that are ordered by preserved program order must
appear in that order from the perspective of other harts and/or observers. Events from the same hart that
are not ordered by preserved program order, on the other hand, may appear reordered from the perspective
of other harts and/or observers.

Informally, the global memory order represents the order in which loads and stores perform. The formal
memory model literature has moved away from specifications built around the concept of performing, but
the idea is still useful for building up informal intuition. A load is said to have performed when its return
value is determined. A store is said to have performed not when it has executed inside the pipeline, but
rather only when its value has been propagated to globally visible memory. In this sense, the global
memory order also represents the contribution of the coherence protocol and/or the rest of the memory
system to interleave the (possibly reordered) memory accesses being issued by each hart into a single total
order agreed upon by all harts.

The order in which loads perform does not always directly correspond to the relative age of the values
those two loads return. In particular, a load b may perform before another load a to the same address (i.e., b
may execute before a, and b may appear before a in the global memory order), but a may nevertheless
return an older value than b. This discrepancy captures (among other things) the reordering effects of
buffering placed between the core and memory. For example, b may have returned a value from a store in
the store buffer, while a may have ignored that younger store and read an older value from memory
instead. To account for this, at the time each load performs, the value it returns is determined by the load
value axiom, not just strictly by determining the most recent store to the same address in the global
memory order, as described below.

B.1.3.2. Load value axiom

                  Section 3.1.1.4.1: Each byte of each load i returns the value written to that byte by the store that
                  is the latest in global memory order among the following stores:
                   1. Stores that write that byte and that precede i in the global memory order
                   2. Stores that write that byte and that precede i in program order

Preserved program order is not required to respect the ordering of a store followed by a load to an
overlapping address. This complexity arises due to the ubiquity of store buffers in nearly all
implementations. Informally, the load may perform (return a value) by forwarding from the store while the
store is still in the store buffer, and hence before the store itself performs (writes back to globally visible
memory). Any other hart will therefore observe the load as performing before the store.

Consider the Table 70. When running this program on an implementation with store buffers, it is possible
to arrive at the final outcome a0=1, a1=0, a2=1, a3=0 as follows:

                              Table 70. A store buffer forwarding litmus test (outcome permitted)

                  Hart 0               Hart 1
                   li t1, 1             li t1, 1
             (a) sw t1,0(s0)      (e) sw t1,0(s1)
             (b) lw a0,0(s0)      (f) lw a2,0(s1)
             (c) fence r,r        (g) fence r,r
             (d) lw a1,0(s1)      (h) lw a3,0(s0)
             Outcome: a0=1, a1=0, a2=1, a3=0

 ⚫ (a) executes and enters the first hart’s private store buffer
 ⚫ (b) executes and forwards its return value 1 from (a) in the store buffer
 ⚫ (c) executes since all previous loads (i.e., (b)) have completed
 ⚫ (d) executes and reads the value 0 from memory

 ⚫ (e) executes and enters the second hart’s private store buffer
 ⚫ (f) executes and forwards its return value 1 from (e) in the store buffer
 ⚫ (g) executes since all previous loads (i.e., (f)) have completed
 ⚫ (h) executes and reads the value 0 from memory
 ⚫ (a) drains from the first hart’s store buffer to memory
 ⚫ (e) drains from the second hart’s store buffer to memory

Therefore, the memory model must be able to account for this behavior.

To put it another way, suppose the definition of preserved program order did include the following
hypothetical rule: memory access a precedes memory access b in preserved program order (and hence also
in the global memory order) if a precedes b in program order and a and b are accesses to the same memory
location, a is a write, and b is a read. Call this “Rule X”. Then we get the following:

 ⚫ (a) precedes (b): by rule X
 ⚫ (b) precedes (d): by rule 4
 ⚫ (d) precedes (e): by the load value axiom. Otherwise, if (e) preceded (d), then (d) would be required to
   return the value 1. (This is a perfectly legal execution; it’s just not the one in question)
 ⚫ (e) precedes (f): by rule X
 ⚫ (f) precedes (h): by rule 4
 ⚫ (h) precedes (a): by the load value axiom, as above.

The global memory order must be a total order and cannot be cyclic, because a cycle would imply that
every event in the cycle happens before itself, which is impossible. Therefore, the execution proposed above
would be forbidden, and hence the addition of rule X would forbid implementations with store buffer
forwarding, which would clearly be undesirable.

Nevertheless, even if (b) precedes (a) and/or (f) precedes (e) in the global memory order, the only sensible
possibility in this example is for (b) to return the value written by (a), and likewise for (f) and (e). This
combination of circumstances is what leads to the second option in the definition of the load value axiom.
Even though (b) precedes (a) in the global memory order, (a) will still be visible to (b) by virtue of sitting in
the store buffer at the time (b) executes. Therefore, even if (b) precedes (a) in the global memory order, (b)
should return the value written by (a) because (a) precedes (b) in program order. Likewise for (e) and (f).

                     Table 71. The “PPOCA” store buffer forwarding litmus test (outcome permitted)

               Hart 0                 Hart 1
               li t1, 1            li t1, 1
           (a) sw t1,0(s0)         LOOP:
           (b) fence w,w     (d) lw a0,0(s1)
           (c) sw t1,0(s1)         beqz a0, LOOP
                             (e)      sw t1,0(s2)
                             (f)      lw a1,0(s2)
                                      xor a2,a1,a1
                                    add s0,s0,a2
                             (g)     lw a2,0(s0)
               Outcome: a0=1, a1=1, a2=0

Another test that highlights the behavior of store buffers is shown in Table 71. In this example, (d) is
ordered before (e) because of the control dependency, and (f) is ordered before (g) because of the address
dependency. However, (e) is not necessarily ordered before (f), even though (f) returns the value written by
(e). This could correspond to the following sequence of events:

 ⚫ (e) executes speculatively and enters the second hart’s private store buffer (but does not drain to
   memory)
 ⚫ (f) executes speculatively and forwards its return value 1 from (e) in the store buffer
 ⚫ (g) executes speculatively and reads the value 0 from memory
 ⚫ (a) executes, enters the first hart’s private store buffer, and drains to memory
 ⚫ (b) executes and retires
 ⚫ (c) executes, enters the first hart’s private store buffer, and drains to memory
 ⚫ (d) executes and reads the value 1 from memory
 ⚫ (e), (f), and (g) commit, since the speculation turned out to be correct
 ⚫ (e) drains from the store buffer to memory

B.1.3.3. Atomicity axiom

                   Atomicity Axiom (for Aligned Atomics): If r and w are paired load and store operations
                   generated by aligned LR and SC instructions in a hart h, s is a store to byte x, and r returns a
                  value written by s, then s must precede w in the global memory order, and there can be no store
                   from a hart other than h to byte x following s and preceding w in the global memory order.

The RISC-V architecture decouples the notion of atomicity from the notion of ordering. Unlike
architectures such as TSO, RISC-V atomics under RVWMO do not impose any ordering requirements by
default. Ordering semantics are only guaranteed by the PPO rules that otherwise apply.

RISC-V contains two types of atomics: AMOs and LR/SC pairs. These conceptually behave differently, in
the following way. LR/SC behave as if the old value is brought up to the core, modified, and written back to
memory, all while a reservation is held on that memory location. AMOs on the other hand conceptually
behave as if they are performed directly in memory. AMOs are therefore inherently atomic, while LR/SC
pairs are atomic in the slightly different sense that the memory location in question will not be modified
by another hart during the time the original hart holds the reservation.

Table 72. In all four (independent) instances, the final store-conditional instruction is permitted but not guaranteed to
                                                         succeed.
(a) lr.d a0, 0(s0)             (a) lr.d a0, 0(s0)            (a) lr.w a0, 0(s0)            (a) lr.w a0, 0(s0)
(b) sd t1, 0(s0)               (b) sw t1, 4(s0)              (b) sw t1, 4(s0)              (b) sw t1, 4(s0)
(c) sc.d t3, t2, 0(s0)         (c) sc.d t3, t2, 0(s0)        (c) sc.w t3, t2, 0(s0)        (c) addi s0, s0, 8
                                                                                           (d) sc.w t3, t2, 0(s0)

The atomicity axiom forbids stores from other harts from being interleaved in global memory order
between an LR and the SC paired with that LR. The atomicity axiom does not forbid loads from being
interleaved between the paired operations in program order or in the global memory order, nor does it
forbid stores from the same hart or stores to non-overlapping locations from appearing between the paired
operations in either program order or in the global memory order. For example, the SC instructions in
Table 72 may (but are not guaranteed to) succeed. None of those successes would violate the atomicity
axiom, because the intervening non-conditional stores are from the same hart as the paired load-reserved
and store-conditional instructions. This way, a memory system that tracks memory accesses at cache line

granularity (and which therefore will see the four snippets of Table 72 as identical) will not be forced to fail
a store-conditional instruction that happens to (falsely) share another portion of the same cache line as the
memory location being held by the reservation.

The atomicity axiom also technically supports cases in which the LR and SC touch different addresses
and/or use different access sizes; however, use cases for such behaviors are expected to be rare in practice.
Likewise, scenarios in which stores from the same hart between an LR/SC pair actually overlap the
memory location(s) referenced by the LR or SC are expected to be rare compared to scenarios where the
intervening store may simply fall onto the same cache line.

B.1.3.4. Progress axiom

                Progress Axiom: No memory operation may be preceded in the global memory order by an
               infinite sequence of other memory operations.

The progress axiom ensures a minimal forward progress guarantee. It ensures that stores from one hart will
eventually be made visible to other harts in the system in a finite amount of time, and that loads from
other harts will eventually be able to read those values (or successors thereof). Without this rule, it would be
legal, for example, for a spinlock to spin infinitely on a value, even with a store from another hart
unlocking the spinlock.

The progress axiom is intended not to impose any other notion of fairness, latency, or quality of service
onto the harts in a RISC-V implementation. Any stronger notions of fairness are up to the rest of the ISA
and/or up to the platform and/or device to define and implement.

The forward progress axiom will in almost all cases be naturally satisfied by any standard cache coherence
protocol. Implementations with non-coherent caches may have to provide some other mechanism to
ensure the eventual visibility of all stores (or successors thereof) to all harts.

B.1.3.5. Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)

                Rule 1: b is a store, and a and b access overlapping memory addresses

                Rule 2: a and b are loads, x is a byte read by both a and b, there is no store to x between a and
               b in program order, and a and b return values for x written by different memory operations

                Rule 3: a is generated by an AMO or SC instruction, b is a load, and b returns a value written
                by a

Same-address orderings where the latter is a store are straightforward: a load or store can never be
reordered with a later store to an overlapping memory location. From a microarchitecture perspective,
generally speaking, it is difficult or impossible to undo a speculatively reordered store if the speculation
turns out to be invalid, so such behavior is simply disallowed by the model. Same-address orderings from a
store to a later load, on the other hand, do not need to be enforced. As discussed in Appendix B.1.3.2, this
reflects the observable behavior of implementations that forward values from buffered stores to later loads.

Same-address load-load ordering requirements are far more subtle. The basic requirement is that a
younger load must not return a value that is older than a value returned by an older load in the same hart
to the same address. This is often known as “CoRR” (Coherence for Read-Read pairs), or as part of a broader
“coherence” or “sequential consistency per location” requirement. Some architectures in the past have
relaxed same-address load-load ordering, but in hindsight this is generally considered to complicate the
programming model too much, and so RVWMO requires CoRR ordering to be enforced. However, because
the global memory order corresponds to the order in which loads perform rather than the ordering of the
values being returned, capturing CoRR requirements in terms of the global memory order requires a bit of

indirection.

                              Table 73. A litmus test MP+fence.w.w+fri-rfi-addr (outcome permitted)

                   Hart 0               Hart 1
                   li t1, 1            li t2, 2
               (a) sw t1,0(s0) (d) lw a0,0(s1)
               (b) fence w, w      (e) sw t2,0(s1)
               (c) sw t1,0(s1)     (f) lw a1,0(s1)
                                   (g) xor t3,a1,a1
                                   (h) add s0,s0,t3
                                   (i) lw a2,0(s0)
                 Outcome: a0=1, a1=2, a2=0

Consider the litmus test of Table 73, which is one particular instance of the more general “fri-rfi” pattern.
The term “fri-rfi” refers to the sequence (d), (e), (f): (d) “from-reads” (i.e., reads from an earlier write than)
(e) which is the same hart, and (f) reads from (e) which is in the same hart.

From a microarchitectural perspective, outcome a0=1, a1=2, a2=0 is legal (as are various other less subtle
outcomes). Intuitively, the following would produce the outcome in question:

 ⚫ (d) stalls (for whatever reason; perhaps it’s stalled waiting for some other preceding instruction)
 ⚫ (e) executes and enters the store buffer (but does not yet drain to memory)
 ⚫ (f) executes and forwards from (e) in the store buffer
 ⚫ (g), (h), and (i) execute
 ⚫ (a) executes and drains to memory, (b) executes, and (c) executes and drains to memory
 ⚫ (d) unstalls and executes
 ⚫ (e) drains from the store buffer to memory

This corresponds to a global memory order of (f), (i), (a), (c), (d), (e). Note that even though (f) performs
before (d), the value returned by (f) is newer than the value returned by (d). Therefore, this execution is
legal and does not violate the CoRR requirements.

Likewise, if two back-to-back loads return the values written by the same store, then they may also appear
out-of-order in the global memory order without violating CoRR. Note that this is not the same as saying
that the two loads return the same value, since two different stores may write the same value.

                                         Table 74. Litmus test RSW (outcome permitted)

                Hart 0           Hart 1
                 li t1, 1       (d) lw
                                    a0,0(s1
                                    )
                (a) sw           (e) xor
                    t1,0(s0          t2,a0,a
                    )                0
                (b) fence        (f) add
                    w, w             s4,s2,t2
                (c) sw           (g) lw
                    t1,0(s1)         a1,0(s4)
                                (h) lw
                                    a2,0(s2
                                    )
                                 (i) xor
                                     t3,a2,a
                                     2
                                 (j) add
                                     s0,s0,t
                                     3
                                 (k) lw
                                     a3,0(s
                                     0)
            Outcome: a0=1, a1=v, a2=v, a3=0

Consider the litmus test of Table 74. The outcome a0=1, a1=v, a2=v, a3=0 (where v is some value written by
another hart) can be observed by allowing (g) and (h) to be reordered. This might be done speculatively,
and the speculation can be justified by the microarchitecture (e.g., by snooping for cache invalidations and
finding none) because replaying (h) after (g) would return the value written by the same store anyway.
Hence assuming a1 and a2 would end up with the same value written by the same store anyway, (g) and (h)
can be legally reordered. The global memory order corresponding to this execution would be
(h),(k),(a),(c),(d),(g).

Executions of the test in Table 74 in which a1 does not equal a2 do in fact require that (g) appears before (h)
in the global memory order. Allowing (h) to appear before (g) in the global memory order would in that case
result in a violation of CoRR, because then (h) would return an older value than that returned by (g).
Therefore, rule 2 forbids this CoRR violation from occurring. As such, rule 2 strikes a careful balance
between enforcing CoRR in all cases while simultaneously being weak enough to permit “RSW” and “fri-rfi”
patterns that commonly appear in real microarchitectures.

There is one more overlapping-address rule: rule 3 simply states that a value cannot be returned from an
AMO or SC to a subsequent load until the AMO or SC has (in the case of the SC, successfully) performed
globally. This follows somewhat naturally from the conceptual view that both AMOs and SC instructions
are meant to be performed atomically in memory. However, notably, rule 3 states that hardware may not
even non-speculatively forward the value being stored by an AMOSWAP to a subsequent load, even though
for AMOSWAP that store value is not actually semantically dependent on the previous value in memory, as
is the case for the other AMOs. The same holds true even when forwarding from SC store values that are
not semantically dependent on the value returned by the paired LR.

The three PPO rules above also apply when the memory accesses in question only overlap partially. This
can occur, for example, when accesses of different sizes are used to access the same object. Note also that
the base addresses of two overlapping memory operations need not necessarily be the same for two

memory accesses to overlap. When misaligned memory accesses are being used, the overlapping-address
PPO rules apply to each of the component memory accesses independently.

B.1.3.6. Fences (Rule 4)

                Rule 4: There is a FENCE instruction that orders a before b

By default, the FENCE instruction ensures that all memory accesses from instructions preceding the fence
in program order (the “predecessor set”) appear earlier in the global memory order than memory accesses
from instructions appearing after the fence in program order (the “successor set”). However, fences can
optionally further restrict the predecessor set and/or the successor set to a smaller set of memory accesses
in order to provide some speedup. Specifically, fences have PR, PW, SR, and SW bits which restrict the
predecessor and/or successor sets. The predecessor set includes loads (resp. stores) if and only if PR (resp.
PW) is set. Similarly, the successor set includes loads (resp. stores) if and only if SR (resp. SW) is set.

The FENCE encoding currently has nine non-trivial combinations of the four bits PR, PW, SR, and SW,
plus one extra encoding FENCE.TSO which facilitates mapping of “acquire+release” or RVTSO semantics.
The remaining seven combinations have empty predecessor and/or successor sets and hence are no-ops.
Of the ten non-trivial options, six are commonly used in practice:

 ⚫ FENCE RW,RW
 ⚫ FENCE.TSO
 ⚫ FENCE RW,W
 ⚫ FENCE R,RW
 ⚫ FENCE R,R
 ⚫ FENCE W,W

FENCE instructions using other combinations of PR, PW, SR, and SW are not normally used in the Linux
or C++ memory models but are otherwise well defined.

Finally, we note that since RISC-V uses a multi-copy atomic memory model, programmers can reason
about fences bits in a thread-local manner. Fences in RISC-V are not cumulative, as they are in some non-
multi-copy-atomic memory models.

B.1.3.7. Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)

                 Rule 5: a has an acquire annotation

                 Rule 6: b has a release annotation
                Rule 7: a and b both have RCsc annotations

                 Rule 8: a is paired with b

An acquire operation, as would be used at the start of a critical section, requires all memory operations
following the acquire in program order to also follow the acquire in the global memory order. This ensures,
for example, that all loads and stores inside the critical section are up to date with respect to the
synchronization variable being used to protect it. Acquire ordering can be enforced in one of two ways:
with an acquire annotation, which enforces ordering with respect to just the synchronization variable
itself, or with a FENCE R,RW, which enforces ordering with respect to all previous loads.

   1                 sd              x1, (a1)        # Arbitrary unrelated store
   2                 ld              x2, (a2)        # Arbitrary unrelated load
   3                 li              t0, 1           # Initialize swap value.
   4           again:
   5                 amoswap.w.aq t0, t0, (a0) # Attempt to acquire lock.
   6                 bnez            t0, again       # Retry if held.
   7                 # ...
   8                 # Critical section.
   9                 # ...
  10                 amoswap.w.rl x0, x0, (a0) # Release lock by storing 0.
  11                 sd              x3, (a3)        # Arbitrary unrelated store
  12                 ld              x4, (a4)        # Arbitrary unrelated load

Listing 9. A spinlock with atomics

Consider Example 1. Because this example uses aq, the loads and stores in the critical section are
guaranteed to appear in the global memory order after the AMOSWAP used to acquire the lock. However,
assuming a0, a1, and a2 point to different memory locations, the loads and stores in the critical section may
or may not appear after the “Arbitrary unrelated load” at the beginning of the example in the global
memory order.

   1                 sd              x1, (a1)        # Arbitrary unrelated store
   2                 ld              x2, (a2)        # Arbitrary unrelated load
   3                 li              t0, 1           # Initialize swap value.
   4           again:
   5                 amoswap.w       t0, t0, (a0) # Attempt to acquire lock.
   6                 fence           r, rw           # Enforce "acquire" memory ordering
   7                 bnez            t0, again       # Retry if held.
   8                 # ...
   9                 # Critical section.
  10                 # ...
  11                 fence           rw, w           # Enforce "release" memory ordering
  12                 amoswap.w       x0, x0, (a0) # Release lock by storing 0.
  13                 sd              x3, (a3)        # Arbitrary unrelated store
  14                 ld              x4, (a4)        # Arbitrary unrelated load

Listing 10. A spinlock with fences

Now, consider the alternative in Example 2. In this case, even though the AMOSWAP does not enforce
ordering with an aq bit, the fence nevertheless enforces that the acquire AMOSWAP appears earlier in the
global memory order than all loads and stores in the critical section. Note, however, that in this case, the
fence also enforces additional orderings: it also requires that the “Arbitrary unrelated load” at the start of
the program appears earlier in the global memory order than the loads and stores of the critical section.
(This particular fence does not, however, enforce any ordering with respect to the “Arbitrary unrelated
store” at the start of the snippet.) In this way, fence-enforced orderings are slightly coarser than orderings
enforced by .aq.

Release orderings work exactly the same as acquire orderings, just in the opposite direction. Release
semantics require all loads and stores preceding the release operation in program order to also precede the
release operation in the global memory order. This ensures, for example, that memory accesses in a critical
section appear before the lock-releasing store in the global memory order. Just as for acquire semantics,

release semantics can be enforced using release annotations or with a FENCE RW,W operation. Using the
same examples, the ordering between the loads and stores in the critical section and the “Arbitrary
unrelated store” at the end of the code snippet is enforced only by the FENCE RW,W in Example 2, not by
the rl in Example 1.

With RCpc annotations alone, store-release-to-load-acquire ordering is not enforced. This facilitates the
porting of code written under the TSO and/or RCpc memory models. To enforce store-release-to-load-
acquire ordering, the code must use store-release-RCsc and load-acquire-RCsc operations so that PPO rule
7 applies. RCpc alone is sufficient for many use cases in C/C++ but is insufficient for many other use cases
in C/C++, Java, and Linux, to name just a few examples; see Memory Porting for details.

PPO rule 8 indicates that an SC must appear after its paired LR in the global memory order. This will
follow naturally from the common use of LR/SC to perform an atomic read-modify-write operation due to
the inherent data dependency. However, PPO rule 8 also applies even when the value being stored does not
syntactically depend on the value returned by the paired LR.

Lastly, we note that, as with fences, ordering annotations are not cumulative.

B.1.3.8. Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)

                  Rule 9: b has a syntactic address dependency on a

                 Rule 10: b has a syntactic data dependency on a

                  Rule 11: b is a store, and b has a syntactic control dependency on a

Dependencies from a load to a later memory operation in the same hart are respected by the RVWMO
memory model. The Alpha memory model was notable for choosing not to enforce the ordering of such
dependencies, but most modern hardware and software memory models consider allowing dependent
instructions to be reordered too confusing and counterintuitive. Furthermore, modern code sometimes
intentionally uses such dependencies as a particularly lightweight ordering enforcement mechanism.

The terms in Section 3.1.1.2 work as follows. Instructions are said to carry dependencies from their source
register(s) to their destination register(s) whenever the value written into each destination register is a
function of the source register(s). For most instructions, this means that the destination register(s) carry a
dependency from all source register(s). However, there are a few notable exceptions. In the case of memory
instructions, the value written into the destination register ultimately comes from the memory system
rather than from the source register(s) directly, and so this breaks the chain of dependencies carried from
the source register(s). In the case of unconditional jumps, the value written into the destination register
comes from the current pc (which is never considered a source register by the memory model), and so
likewise, JALR (the only jump with a source register) does not carry a dependency from rs1 to rd.

  1 (a) fadd f3,f1,f2
  2 (b) fadd f6,f4,f5
  3 (c) csrrs a0,fflags,x0

Listing 11. (c) has a syntactic dependency on both (a) and (b) via fflags, a destination register that both (a) and (b)
implicitly accumulate into

The notion of accumulating into a destination register rather than writing into it reflects the behavior of
CSRs such as fflags. In particular, an accumulation into a register does not clobber any previous writes or
accumulations into the same register. For example, in Listing 11, (c) has a syntactic dependency on both (a)
and (b).

Like other modern memory models, the RVWMO memory model uses syntactic rather than semantic
dependencies. In other words, this definition depends on the identities of the registers being accessed by
different instructions, not the actual contents of those registers. This means that an address, control, or
data dependency must be enforced even if the calculation could seemingly be optimized away. This choice
ensures that RVWMO remains compatible with code that uses these false syntactic dependencies as a
lightweight ordering mechanism.

  1 ld a1,0(s0)
  2 xor a2,a1,a1
  3 add s1,s1,a2
  4 ld a5,0(s1)

Listing 12. A syntactic address dependency

For example, there is a syntactic address dependency from the memory operation generated by the first
instruction to the memory operation generated by the last instruction in Listing 12, even though a1 XOR a1
is zero and hence has no effect on the address accessed by the second load.

The benefit of using dependencies as a lightweight synchronization mechanism is that the ordering
enforcement requirement is limited only to the specific two instructions in question. Other non-dependent
instructions may be freely reordered by aggressive implementations. One alternative would be to use a
load-acquire, but this would enforce ordering for the first load with respect to all subsequent instructions.
Another would be to use a FENCE R,R, but this would include all previous and all subsequent loads,
making this option more expensive.

  1 lw x1,0(x2)
  2 bne x1,x0,next
  3 sw x3,0(x4)
  4 next: sw x5,0(x6)

Listing 13. A syntactic control dependency

Control dependencies behave differently from address and data dependencies in the sense that a control
dependency always extends to all instructions following the original target in program order. Consider
Listing 13 the instruction at next will always execute, but the memory operation generated by that last
instruction nevertheless still has a control dependency from the memory operation generated by the first
instruction.

  1 lw x1,0(x2)
  2 bne x1,x0,next
  3 next: sw x3,0(x4)

Listing 14. Another syntactic control dependency

Likewise, consider Listing 14. Even though both branch outcomes have the same target, there is still a
control dependency from the memory operation generated by the first instruction in this snippet to the
memory operation generated by the last instruction. This definition of control dependency is subtly
stronger than what might be seen in other contexts (e.g., C++), but it conforms with standard definitions of
control dependencies in the literature.

Notably, PPO rules 9-11 are also intentionally designed to respect dependencies that originate from the
output of a successful store-conditional instruction. Typically, an SC instruction will be followed by a

conditional branch checking whether the outcome was successful; this implies that there will be a control
dependency from the store operation generated by the SC instruction to any memory operations following
the branch. PPO rule 11 in turn implies that any subsequent store operations will appear later in the global
memory order than the store operation generated by the SC. However, since control, address, and data
dependencies are defined over memory operations, and since an unsuccessful SC does not generate a
memory operation, no order is enforced between unsuccessful SC and its dependent instructions.
Moreover, since SC is defined to carry dependencies from its source registers to rd only when the SC is
successful, an unsuccessful SC has no effect on the global memory order.

                               Table 75. A variant of the LB litmus test (outcome forbidden)

               Initial values: 0(s0)=1; 0(s2)=1

                   Hart 0             Hart 1
             (a) ld a0,0(s0)      (e) ld a3,0(s2)
             (b) lr a1,0(s1)      (f) sd a3,0(s0)
             (c) sc a2,a0,0(s1)
             (d) sd a2,0(s2)
                   Outcome: a0=0, a3=0

In addition, the choice to respect dependencies originating at store-conditional instructions ensures that
certain out-of-thin-air-like behaviors will be prevented. Consider Table 75. Suppose a hypothetical
implementation could occasionally make some early guarantee that a store-conditional operation will
succeed. In this case, (c) could return 0 to a2 early (before actually executing), allowing the sequence (d),
(e), (f), (a), and then (b) to execute, and then (c) might execute (successfully) only at that point. This would
imply that (c) writes its own success value to 0(s1)! Fortunately, this situation and others like it are
prevented by the fact that RVWMO respects dependencies originating at the stores generated by successful
SC instructions.

We also note that syntactic dependencies between instructions only have any force when they take the
form of a syntactic address, control, and/or data dependency. For example: a syntactic dependency
between two F instructions via one of the accumulating CSRs in Section 3.1.3 does not imply that the two F
instructions must be executed in order. Such a dependency would only serve to ultimately set up later a
dependency from both F instructions to a later CSR instruction accessing the CSR flag in question.

B.1.3.9. Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)

                 Rule 12: b is a load, and there exists some store m between a and b in program order such that
                 m has an address or data dependency on a, and b returns a value written by m
                Rule 13: b is a store, and there exists some instruction m between a and b in program order
                 such that m has an address dependency on a

Table 76. Because of PPO rule 12 and the data dependency from (d) to (e), (d) must also precede (f) in the global memory
                                              order (outcome forbidden)

                Hart 0        Hart 1
                li t1, 1      (d) lw a0, 0(s1)
            (a) sw t1,0(s0) (e) sw a0, 0(s2)
            (b) fence w, w (f) lw a1, 0(s2)
            (c) sw t1,0(s1)       xor a2,a1,a1
                                  add s0,s0,a2
                              (g) lw a3,0(s0)
                  Outcome: a0=1, a3=0

PPO rules 12 and 13 reflect behaviors of almost all real processor pipeline implementations. Rule 12 states
that a load cannot forward from a store until the address and data for that store are known. Consider Table
76 (f) cannot be executed until the data for (e) has been resolved, because (f) must return the value written
by (e) (or by something even later in the global memory order), and the old value must not be clobbered by
the write-back of (e) before (d) has had a chance to perform. Therefore, (f) will never perform before (d) has
performed.

  Table 77. Because of the extra store between (e) and (g), (d) no longer necessarily precedes (g) (outcome permitted)

                Hart 0        Hart 1
                 li t1, 1          li t1, 1
            (a) sw t1,0(s0) (d) lw a0, 0(s1)
            (b) fence w, w (e) sw a0, 0(s2)
            (c) sw t1,0(s1)   (f) sw t1, 0(s2)
                              (g) lw a1, 0(s2)
                                  xor a2,a1,a1
                                  add s0,s0,a2
                              (h) lw a3,0(s0)
                  Outcome: a0=1, a3=0

If there were another store to the same address in between (e) and (f), as in Table 78, then (f) would no
longer be dependent on the data of (e) being resolved, and hence the dependency of (f) on (d), which
produces the data for (e), would be broken.

Rule 13 makes a similar observation to the previous rule: a store cannot be performed at memory until all
previous loads that might access the same address have themselves been performed. Such a load must
appear to execute before the store, but it cannot do so if the store were to overwrite the value in memory
before the load had a chance to read the old value. Likewise, a store generally cannot be performed until it
is known that preceding instructions will not cause an exception due to failed address resolution, and in
this sense, rule 13 can be seen as somewhat of a special case of rule 11.

        Table 78. Because of the address dependency from (d) to (e), (d) also precedes (f) (outcome forbidden)

                  Hart 0            Hart 1
                                     li t1, 1
              (a) lw a0,0(s0) (d) lw a1, 0(s1)
             (b) fence rw,rw (e) lw a2, 0(a1)
              (c) sw s2,0(s1)   (f) sw t1, 0(s0)
                   Outcome: a0=1, a1=t

Consider Table 78 (f) cannot be executed until the address for (e) is resolved, because it may turn out that
the addresses match; i.e., that a1=s0. Therefore, (f) cannot be sent to memory before (d) has executed and
confirmed whether the addresses do indeed overlap.

B.1.4. Beyond Main Memory

RVWMO does not currently attempt to formally describe how FENCE.I, SFENCE.VMA, I/O fences, and
PMAs behave. All of these behaviors will be described by future formalizations. In the meantime, the
behavior of FENCE.I is described in Zifencei, the behavior of SFENCE.VMA is described in Volume II,
Section 4.2.1, and the behavior of I/O fences and the effects of PMAs are described below.

B.1.4.1. Coherence and Cacheability

The RISC-V Privileged ISA defines Physical Memory Attributes (PMAs) which specify, among other things,
whether portions of the address space are coherent and/or cacheable. See the RISC-V Privileged ISA
Specification for the complete details. Here, we simply discuss how the various details in each PMA relate
to the memory model:

 ⚫ Main memory vs.I/O, and I/O memory ordering PMAs: the memory model as defined applies to main
   memory regions. I/O ordering is discussed below.
 ⚫ Supported access types and atomicity PMAs: the memory model is simply applied on top of whatever
   primitives each region supports.
 ⚫ Cacheability PMAs: the cacheability PMAs in general do not affect the memory model. Non-cacheable
   regions may have more restrictive behavior than cacheable regions, but the set of allowed behaviors
   does not change regardless. However, some platform-specific and/or device-specific cacheability
   settings may differ.
 ⚫ Coherence PMAs: The memory consistency model for memory regions marked as non-coherent in
   PMAs is currently platform-specific and/or device-specific: the load-value axiom, the atomicity axiom,
   and the progress axiom all may be violated with non-coherent memory. Note however that coherent
   memory does not require a hardware cache coherence protocol. The RISC-V Privileged ISA
   Specification suggests that hardware-incoherent regions of main memory are discouraged, but the
   memory model is compatible with hardware coherence, software coherence, implicit coherence due to
   read-only memory, implicit coherence due to only one agent having access, or otherwise.
 ⚫ Idempotency PMAs: Idempotency PMAs are used to specify memory regions for which loads and/or
   stores may have side effects, and this in turn is used by the microarchitecture to determine, e.g.,
   whether prefetches are legal. This distinction does not affect the memory model.

B.1.4.2. I/O Ordering

For I/O, the load value axiom and atomicity axiom in general do not apply, as both reads and writes might
have device-specific side effects and may return values other than the value “written” by the most recent
store to the same address. Nevertheless, the following preserved program order rules still generally apply
for accesses to I/O memory: memory access a precedes memory access b in global memory order if a
precedes b in program order and one or more of the following holds:

 1. a precedes b in preserved program order as defined in Section 3.1, with the exception that acquire and
    release ordering annotations apply only from one memory operation to another memory operation and
    from one I/O operation to another I/O operation, but not from a memory operation to an I/O nor vice
    versa
 2. a and b are accesses to overlapping addresses in an I/O region
 3. a and b are accesses to the same strongly ordered I/O region
 4. a and b are accesses to I/O regions, and the channel associated with the I/O region accessed by either a
    or b is channel 1
 5. a and b are accesses to I/O regions associated with the same channel (except for channel 0)

Note that the FENCE instruction distinguishes between main memory operations and I/O operations in its
predecessor and successor sets. To enforce ordering between I/O operations and main memory operations,
code must use a FENCE with PI, PO, SI, and/or SO, plus PR, PW, SR, and/or SW. For example, to enforce
ordering between a write to main memory and an I/O write to a device register, a FENCE W,O or stronger is
needed.

  1 sd t0, 0(a0)
  2 fence w,o
  3 sd a0, 0(a1)

Listing 15. Ordering memory and I/O accesses

When a fence is in fact used, implementations must assume that the device may attempt to access memory
immediately after receiving the MMIO signal, and subsequent memory accesses from that device to
memory must observe the effects of all accesses ordered prior to that MMIO operation. In other words, in
Listing 15, suppose 0(a0) is in main memory and 0(a1) is the address of a device register in I/O memory. If
the device accesses 0(a0) upon receiving the MMIO write, then that load must conceptually appear after
the first store to 0(a0) according to the rules of the RVWMO memory model. In some implementations, the
only way to ensure this will be to require that the first store does in fact complete before the MMIO write is
issued. Other implementations may find ways to be more aggressive, while others still may not need to do
anything different at all for I/O and main memory accesses. Nevertheless, the RVWMO memory model
does not distinguish between these options; it simply provides an implementation-agnostic mechanism to
specify the orderings that must be enforced.

Many architectures include separate notions of “ordering” and “completion” fences, especially as it relates
to I/O (as opposed to regular main memory). Ordering fences simply ensure that memory operations stay
in order, while completion fences ensure that predecessor accesses have all completed before any
successors are made visible. RISC-V does not explicitly distinguish between ordering and completion
fences. Instead, this distinction is simply inferred from different uses of the FENCE bits.

For implementations that conform to the RISC-V Unix Platform Specification, I/O devices and DMA
operations are required to access memory coherently and via strongly ordered I/O channels. Therefore,
accesses to regular main memory regions that are concurrently accessed by external devices can also use
the standard synchronization mechanisms. Implementations that do not conform to the Unix Platform

Specification and/or in which devices do not access memory coherently will need to use mechanisms
(which are currently platform-specific or device-specific) to enforce coherency.

I/O regions in the address space should be considered non-cacheable regions in the PMAs for those
regions. Such regions can be considered coherent by the PMA if they are not cached by any agent.

The ordering guarantees in this section may not apply beyond a platform-specific boundary between the
RISC-V cores and the device. In particular, I/O accesses sent across an external bus (e.g., PCIe) may be
reordered before they reach their ultimate destination. Ordering must be enforced in such situations
according to the platform-specific rules of those external devices and buses.

B.1.5. Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines

                             Table 79. Mappings from TSO operations to RISC-V operations
                 x86/TSO Operation        RVWMO Mapping
                 Load                     l{b|h|w|d}; fence r,rw

                 Store                    fence rw,w; s{b|h|w|d}

                 Atomic RMW               amo<op>.{w|d}.aqrl OR
                                          loop:lr.{w|d}.aq; <op>; sc.{w|d}.aqrl; bnez loop

                 Fence                    fence rw,rw

Table 79 provides a mapping from TSO memory operations onto RISC-V memory instructions. Normal
x86 loads and stores are all inherently acquire-RCpc and release-RCpc operations: TSO enforces all load-
load, load-store, and store-store ordering by default. Therefore, under RVWMO, all TSO loads must be
mapped onto a load followed by FENCE R,RW, and all TSO stores must be mapped onto FENCE RW,W
followed by a store. TSO atomic read-modify-writes and x86 instructions using the LOCK prefix are fully
ordered and can be implemented either via an AMO with both aq and rl set, or via an LR with aq set, the
arithmetic operation in question, an SC with both aq and rl set, and a conditional branch checking the
success condition. In the latter case, the rl annotation on the LR turns out (for non-obvious reasons) to be
redundant and can be omitted.

Alternatives to Table 79 are also possible. A TSO store can be mapped onto AMOSWAP with rl set. However,
since RVWMO PPO Rule 3 forbids forwarding of values from AMOs to subsequent loads, the use of
AMOSWAP for stores may negatively affect performance. A TSO load can be mapped using LR with aq set:
all such LR instructions will be unpaired, but that fact in and of itself does not preclude the use of LR for
loads. However, again, this mapping may also negatively affect performance if it puts more pressure on the
reservation mechanism than was originally intended.

                            Table 80. Mappings from Power operations to RISC-V operations
                                      Power Operation        RVWMO Mapping
                                      Load                   l{b|h|w|d}

                                      Load-Reserve           lr.{w|d}

                                      Store                  s{b|h|w|d}

                                      Store-Conditional      sc.{w|d}

                                      lwsync                 fence.tso

                                      sync                   fence rw,rw

                                      isync                  fence.i; fence r,r

Table 80 provides a mapping from Power memory operations onto RISC-V memory instructions. Power

ISYNC maps on RISC-V to a FENCE.I followed by a FENCE R,R; the latter fence is needed because ISYNC is
used to define a “control+control fence” dependency that is not present in RVWMO.

                           Table 81. Mappings from ARM operations to RISC-V operations
                   ARM Operation                 RVWMO Mapping
                   Load                          l{b|h|w|d}

                   Load-Acquire                  fence rw, rw; l{b|h|w|d}; fence r,rw

                   Load-Exclusive                lr.{w|d}

                   Load-Acquire-Exclusive        lr.{w|d}.aqrl

                   Store                         s{b|h|w|d}

                   Store-Release                 fence rw,w; s{b|h|w|d}

                   Store-Exclusive               sc.{w|d}

                   Store-Release-Exclusive       sc.{w|d}.rl

                   dmb                           fence rw,rw

                   dmb.ld                        fence r,rw

                   dmb.st                        fence w,w

                   isb                           fence.i; fence r,r

Table 81 provides a mapping from ARM memory operations onto RISC-V memory instructions. Since
RISC-V does not currently have plain load and store opcodes with aq or rl annotations, ARM load-acquire
and store-release operations should be mapped using fences instead. Furthermore, in order to enforce
store-release-to-load-acquire ordering, there must be a FENCE RW,RW between the store-release and load-
acquire; Table 81 enforces this by always placing the fence in front of each acquire operation. ARM load-
exclusive and store-exclusive instructions can likewise map onto their RISC-V LR and SC equivalents, but
instead of placing a FENCE RW,RW in front of an LR with aq set, we simply also set rl instead. ARM ISB
maps on RISC-V to FENCE.I followed by FENCE R,R similarly to how ISYNC maps for Power.

                      Table 82. Mappings from Linux memory primitives to RISC-V primitives.
           Linux Operation           RVWMO Mapping
           smp_mb()                  fence rw,rw

           smp_rmb()                 fence r,r

           smp_wmb()                 fence w,w

           dma_rmb()                 fence r,r

           dma_wmb()                 fence w,w

           mb()                      fence iorw,iorw

           rmb()                     fence ri,ri

           wmb()                     fence wo,wo

           smp_load_acquire()        l{b|h|w|d}; fence r,rw

           smp_store_release() fence.tso; s{b|h|w|d}

           Linux Construct           RVWMO AMO Mapping
           atomic <op> relaxed amo <op>.{w|d}

           atomic <op> acquire amo <op>.{w|d}.aq

           atomic <op> release amo <op>.{w|d}.rl

             Linux Operation            RVWMO Mapping
             atomic <op>                amo <op>.{w|d}.aqrl

             Linux Construct            RVWMO LR/SC Mapping
             atomic <op> relaxed loop:lr.{w|d}; <op>; sc.{w|d}; bnez loop

             atomic <op> acquire loop:lr.{w|d}.aq; <op>; sc.{w|d}; bnez loop
                                                                            *
             atomic <op> release loop:lr.{w|d}; <op>; sc.{w|d}.aqrl ; bnez loop OR
                                                                                    *
                                        fence.tso; loop:lr.{w|d}; <op >; sc.{w|d} ; bnez loop

             atomic <op>                loop:lr.{w|d}.aq; <op>; sc.{w|d}.aqrl; bnez loop

With regards to Table 82, other constructs (such as spinlocks) should follow accordingly. Platforms or
devices with non-coherent DMA may need additional synchronization (such as cache flush or invalidate
mechanisms); currently any such extra synchronization will be device-specific.

Table 82 provides a mapping of Linux memory ordering macros onto RISC-V memory instructions. The
Linux fences dma_rmb() and dma_wmb() map onto FENCE R,R and FENCE W,W, respectively, since the
RISC-V Unix Platform requires coherent DMA, but would be mapped onto FENCE RI,RI and FENCE
WO,WO, respectively, on a platform with non-coherent DMA. Platforms with non-coherent DMA may also
require a mechanism by which cache lines can be flushed and/or invalidated. Such mechanisms will be
device-specific and/or standardized in a future extension to the ISA.

The Linux mappings for release operations may seem stronger than necessary, but these mappings are
needed to cover some cases in which Linux requires stronger orderings than the more intuitive mappings
would provide. In particular, as of the time this text is being written, Linux is actively debating whether to
require load-load, load-store, and store-store orderings between accesses in one critical section and
accesses in a subsequent critical section in the same hart and protected by the same synchronization
object. Not all combinations of FENCE RW,W/FENCE R,RW mappings with aq/rl mappings combine to
provide such orderings. There are a few ways around this problem, including:

 1. Always use FENCE RW,W/FENCE R,RW, and never use aq/rl. This suffices but is undesirable, as it
    defeats the purpose of the aq/rl modifiers.
 2. Always use aq/rl, and never use FENCE RW,W/FENCE R,RW. This does not currently work due to the
    lack of load and store opcodes with aq and rl modifiers.
 3. Strengthen the mappings of release operations such that they would enforce sufficient orderings in the
    presence of either type of acquire mapping. This is the currently recommended solution, and the one
    shown in Table 82.

RVWMO Mapping: (a) lw a0, 0(s0) (b) fence.tso // vs. fence rw,w (c) sd x0,0(s1) … loop: (d) amoswap.d.aq
a1,t1,0(s1) bnez a1,loop (e) lw a2,0(s2)

For example, the critical section ordering rule currently being debated by the Linux community would
require (a) to be ordered before (e) in Listing 16. If that will indeed be required, then it would be
insufficient for (b) to map as FENCE RW,W. That said, these mappings are subject to change as the Linux
Kernel Memory Model evolves.

   1 Linux Code:
   2 (a) int r0 = *x;
   3             (bc) spin_unlock(y, 0);
   4 ....
   5 ....
   6 (d) spin_lock(y);

   7 (e) int r1 = *z;
   8
   9 RVWMO Mapping:
  10 (a) lw a0, 0(s0)
  11 (b) fence.tso // vs. fence rw,w
  12 (c) sd x0,0(s1)
  13 ....
  14 loop:
  15 (d) lr.d.aq a1,(s1)
  16 bnez a1,loop
  17 sc.d a1,t1,(s1)
  18 bnez a1,loop
  19 (e) lw a2,0(s2)

Listing 16. Orderings between critical sections in Linux

Table 83 provides a mapping of C11/C++11 atomic operations onto RISC-V memory instructions. If load
and store opcodes with aq and rl modifiers are introduced, then the mappings in Table 84 will suffice. Note
however that the two mappings only interoperate correctly if atomic_<op>(memory_order_seq_cst) is
mapped using an LR that has both aq and rl set. Even more importantly, a Table 83 sequentially consistent
store, followed by a Table 84 sequentially consistent load can be reordered unless the Table 83 mapping of
stores is strengthened by either adding a second fence or mapping the store to amoswap.rl instead.

                            Table 83. Mappings from C/C++ primitives to RISC-V primitives.
         C/C++ Construct                                      RVWMO Mapping
         Non-atomic load                                      l{b|h|w|d}

         atomic_load(memory_order_relaxed)                    l{b|h|w|d}

         atomic_load(memory_order_acquire)                    l{b|h|w|d}; fence r,rw

         atomic_load(memory_order_seq_cst)                    fence rw,rw; l{b|h|w|d}; fence r,rw

         Non-atomic store                                     s{b|h|w|d}

         atomic_store(memory_order_relaxed)                   s{b|h|w|d}

         atomic_store(memory_order_release)                   fence rw,w; s{b|h|w|d}

         atomic_store(memory_order_seq_cst)                   fence rw,w; s{b|h|w|d}

         atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_acquire) fence r,rw

         atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_release) fence rw,w

         atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_acq_rel) fence.tso

         atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_seq_cst) fence rw,rw

         C/C++ Construct                                      RVWMO AMO Mapping
         atomic_<op>(memory_order_relaxed)                    amo<op>.{w|d}

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_acquire)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.aq

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_release)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.rl

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_acq_rel)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.aqrl

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_seq_cst)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.aqrl

         C/C++ Construct                                      RVWMO LR/SC Mapping
         atomic_<op>(memory_order_relaxed)                    loop:lr.{w|d}; <op>; sc.{w|d};

         C/C++ Construct                                       RVWMO Mapping
                                                               bnez loop

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_acquire)                     loop:lr.{w|d}.aq; <op>; sc.{w|d};

                                                               bnez loop

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_release)                     loop:lr.{w|d}; <op>; sc.{w|d}.rl;

                                                               bnez loop

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_acq_rel)                     loop:lr.{w|d}.aq; <op>; sc.{w|d}.rl;

                                                               bnez loop

         atomic_<op>(memory_order_seq_cst)                     loop:lr.{w|d}.aqrl; <op>;

                                                               sc.{w|d}.rl; bnez loop

Table 84. Hypothetical mappings from C/C++ primitives to RISC-V primitives, if native load-acquire and store-release
                                            opcodes are introduced.
             C/C++ Construct                                      RVWMO Mapping
             Non-atomic load                                      l{b|h|w|d}

             atomic_load(memory_order_relaxed)                    l{b|h|w|d}

             atomic_load(memory_order_acquire)                    l{b|h|w|d}.aq

             atomic_load(memory_order_seq_cst)                    l{b|h|w|d}.aq

             Non-atomic store                                     s{b|h|w|d}

             atomic_store(memory_order_relaxed)                   s{b|h|w|d}

             atomic_store(memory_order_release)                   s{b|h|w|d}.rl

             atomic_store(memory_order_seq_cst)                   s{b|h|w|d}.rl

             atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_acquire) fence r,rw

             atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_release) fence rw,w

             atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_acq_rel) fence.tso

             atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_seq_cst) fence rw,rw

             C/C++ Construct                                      RVWMO AMO Mapping
             atomic_<op>(memory_order_relaxed)                    amo<op>.{w|d}

             atomic_<op>(memory_order_acquire)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.aq

             atomic_<op>(memory_order_release)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.rl

             atomic_<op>(memory_order_acq_rel)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.aqrl

             atomic_<op>(memory_order_seq_cst)                    amo<op>.{w|d}.aqrl

             C/C++ Construct                                      RVWMO LR/SC Mapping
             atomic_<op>(memory_order_relaxed)                    lr.{w|d}; <op>; sc.{w|d}

             atomic_<op>(memory_order_acquire)                    lr.{w|d}.aq; <op>; sc.{w|d}

             atomic_<op>(memory_order_release)                    lr.{w|d}; <op>; sc.{w|d}.rl

             atomic_<op>(memory_order_acq_rel)                    lr.{w|d}.aq; <op>; sc.{w|d}.rl
                                                                                *
             atomic_<op>(memory_order_seq_cst)                    lr.{w|d}.aq <op>; sc.{w|d}.rl
             *
                 must be lr.{w|d}.aqrl in order to interoperate with code mapped per Table 83

Any AMO can be emulated by an LR/SC pair, but care must be taken to ensure that any PPO orderings that
originate from the LR are also made to originate from the SC, and that any PPO orderings that terminate at
the SC are also made to terminate at the LR. For example, the LR must also be made to respect any data
dependencies that the AMO has, given that load operations do not otherwise have any notion of a data
dependency. Likewise, the effect a FENCE R,R elsewhere in the same hart must also be made to apply to the
SC, which would not otherwise respect that fence. The emulator may achieve this effect by simply mapping
AMOs onto lr.aq; <op>; sc.aqrl, matching the mapping used elsewhere for fully ordered atomics.

These C11/C++11 mappings require the platform to provide the following Physical Memory Attributes (as
defined in the RISC-V Privileged ISA) for all memory:

 ⚫ main memory
 ⚫ coherent
 ⚫ AMOArithmetic
 ⚫ RsrvEventual

Platforms with different attributes may require different mappings, or require platform-specific SW (e.g.,
memory-mapped I/O).

B.1.6. Implementation Guidelines

The RVWMO and RVTSO memory models by no means preclude microarchitectures from employing
sophisticated speculation techniques or other forms of optimization in order to deliver higher
performance. The models also do not impose any requirement to use any one particular cache hierarchy,
nor even to use a cache coherence protocol at all. Instead, these models only specify the behaviors that can
be exposed to software. Microarchitectures are free to use any pipeline design, any coherent or non-
coherent cache hierarchy, any on-chip interconnect, etc., as long as the design only admits executions that
satisfy the memory model rules. That said, to help people understand the actual implementations of the
memory model, in this section we provide some guidelines on how architects and programmers should
interpret the models' rules.

Both RVWMO and RVTSO are multi-copy atomic (or other-multi-copy-atomic): any store value that is
visible to a hart other than the one that originally issued it must also be conceptually visible to all other
harts in the system. In other words, harts may forward from their own previous stores before those stores
have become globally visible to all harts, but no early inter-hart forwarding is permitted. Multi-copy
atomicity may be enforced in a number of ways. It might hold inherently due to the physical design of the
caches and store buffers, it may be enforced via a single-writer/multiple-reader cache coherence protocol,
or it might hold due to some other mechanism.

Although multi-copy atomicity does impose some restrictions on the microarchitecture, it is one of the key
properties keeping the memory model from becoming extremely complicated. For example, a hart may not
legally forward a value from a neighbor hart’s private store buffer (unless of course it is done in such a way
that no new illegal behaviors become architecturally visible). Nor may a cache coherence protocol forward
a value from one hart to another until the coherence protocol has invalidated all older copies from other
caches. Of course, microarchitectures may (and high-performance implementations likely will) violate
these rules under the covers through speculation or other optimizations, as long as any non-compliant
behaviors are not exposed to the programmer.

As a rough guideline for interpreting the PPO rules in RVWMO, we expect the following from the software
perspective:

 ⚫ programmers will use PPO rules 1 and 4-8 regularly and actively.

 ⚫ expert programmers will use PPO rules 9-11 to speed up critical paths of important data structures.
 ⚫ even expert programmers will rarely if ever use PPO rules 2-3 and 12-13 directly. These are included to
   facilitate common microarchitectural optimizations (rule 2) and the operational formal modeling
   approach (rules 3 and 12-13) described in Appendix B.2.3. They also facilitate the process of porting
   code from other architectures that have similar rules.

We also expect the following from the hardware perspective:

 ⚫ PPO rules 1 and 3-6 reflect well-understood rules that should pose few surprises to architects.
 ⚫ PPO rule 2 reflects a natural and common hardware optimization, but one that is very subtle and hence
   is worth double checking carefully.
 ⚫ PPO rule 7 may not be immediately obvious to architects, but it is a standard memory model
   requirement
 ⚫ The load value axiom, the atomicity axiom, and PPO rules 8-13 reflect rules that most hardware
   implementations will enforce naturally, unless they contain extreme optimizations. Of course,
   implementations should make sure to double check these rules nevertheless. Hardware must also
   ensure that syntactic dependencies are not optimized away.

Architectures are free to implement any of the memory model rules as conservatively as they choose. For
example, a hardware implementation may choose to do any or all of the following:

 ⚫ interpret all fences as if they were FENCE RW,RW (or FENCE IORW,IORW, if I/O is involved),
   regardless of the bits actually set
 ⚫ implement all fences with PW and SR as if they were FENCE RW,RW (or FENCE IORW,IORW, if I/O is
   involved), as PW with SR is the most expensive of the four possible main memory ordering
   components anyway
 ⚫ emulate aq and rl as described in Appendix B.1.5
 ⚫ enforcing all same-address load-load ordering, even in the presence of patterns such as fri-rfi and
    RSW

 ⚫ forbid any forwarding of a value from a store in the store buffer to a subsequent AMO or LR to the same
   address
 ⚫ forbid any forwarding of a value from an AMO or SC in the store buffer to a subsequent load to the
   same address
 ⚫ implement TSO on all memory accesses, and ignore any main memory fences that do not include PW
   and SR ordering (e.g., as Ztso implementations will do)
 ⚫ implement all atomics to be RCsc or even fully ordered, regardless of annotation

Architectures that implement RVTSO can safely do the following:

 ⚫ Ignore all fences that do not have both PW and SR (unless the fence also orders I/O)
 ⚫ Ignore all PPO rules except for rules 4 through 7, since the rest are redundant with other PPO rules
   under RVTSO assumptions

Other general notes:

 ⚫ Silent stores (i.e., stores that write the same value that already exists at a memory location) behave like
   any other store from a memory model point of view. Likewise, even when an AMO does not change the
   value in memory (e.g., an AMOMAX when the current memory value ≥ rs2), it is still semantically
   considered a store operation. Microarchitectures that attempt to implement silent stores must take care
   to ensure that the memory model is still obeyed, particularly in cases such as RSW Appendix B.1.3.5

    which tend to be incompatible with silent stores.
 ⚫ Writes may be merged (i.e., two consecutive writes to the same address may be merged) or subsumed
   (i.e., the earlier of two back-to-back writes to the same address may be elided) as long as the resulting
   behavior does not otherwise violate the memory model semantics.

The question of write subsumption can be understood from the following example:

                             Table 85. Write subsumption litmus test, allowed execution

                Hart 0           Hart 1
                 li t1, 3        li t3, 2
                li t2, 1
            (a) sw t1,0(s0) (d) lw a0,0(s1)
            (b) fence w, w (e) sw a0,0(s0)
             (c) sw t2,0(s1) (f) sw t3,0(s0)

As written, if the load (d) reads value 1, then (a) must precede (f) in the global memory order:

 ⚫ (a) precedes (c) in the global memory order because of rule 4
 ⚫ (c) precedes (d) in the global memory order because of the Load Value axiom
 ⚫ (d) precedes (e) in the global memory order because of rule 10
 ⚫ (e) precedes (f) in the global memory order because of rule 1

In other words the final value of the memory location whose address is in s0 must be 2 (the value written
by the store (f)) and cannot be 3 (the value written by the store (a)).

A very aggressive microarchitecture might erroneously decide to discard (e), as (f) supersedes it, and this
may in turn lead the microarchitecture to break the now-eliminated dependency between (d) and (f) (and
hence also between (a) and (f)). This would violate the memory model rules, and hence it is forbidden.
Write subsumption may in other cases be legal, if for example there were no data dependency between (d)
and (e).

B.1.6.1. Possible Future Extensions

We expect that any or all of the following possible future extensions would be compatible with the RVWMO
memory model:

 ⚫ V vector ISA extensions
 ⚫ J JIT extension
 ⚫ Native encodings for load and store opcodes with aq and rl set
 ⚫ Fences limited to certain addresses
 ⚫ Cache write-back/flush/invalidate/etc.instructions

B.1.7. Known Issues

B.1.7.1. Mixed-size RSW

          Table 86. Mixed-size discrepancy (permitted by axiomatic models, forbidden by operational model)
                                         Hart 0                              Hart 1
                                          li t1, 1                               li t1, 1
                                    (a) lw a0,0(s0)              (d) lw a1,0(s1)
                                    (b) fence rw,rw              (e) amoswap.w.rl a2,t1,0(s2)
                                    (c) sw t1,0(s1)              (f) ld a3,0(s2)
                                                                 (g) lw a4,4(s2)
                                                                     xor a5,a4,a4
                                                                     add s0,s0,a5
                                                                 (h) sw t1,0(s0)
                                         Outcome: a0=1, a1=1, a2=0, a3=1, a4=0

           Table 87. Mixed-size discrepancy (permitted by axiomatic models, forbidden by operational model)
                                                     Hart 0                  Hart 1
                                                      li t1, 1                   li t1, 1
                                           (a) lw a0,0(s0)             (d) ld a1,0(s1)
                                           (b) fence rw,rw             (e) lw a2,4(s1)
                                           (c) sw t1,0(s1)                  xor a3,a2,a2
                                                                            add s0,s0,a3
                                                                        (f) sw t1,0(s0)
                                                   Outcome: a0=1, a1=1, a2=0

          Table 88. Mixed-size discrepancy (permitted by axiomatic models, forbidden by operational model)
                                                   Hart 0                         Hart 1
                                                     li t1, 1                      li t1, 1
                                            (a)          lw                (d)          sw
                                                         a0,0(s0)                       t1,4(s1)
                                            (b)          fence             (e)          ld
                                                         rw,rw                          a1,0(s1)
                                             (c)         sw                (f)          lw
                                                         t1,0(s1)                       a2,4(s1)
                                                                                        xor
                                                                                        a3,a2,a2
                                                                                        add
                                                                                        s0,s0,a3
                                                                           (g)          sw
                                                                                        t1,0(s0)
                                        Outcome: a0=1, a1=0x100000001, a2=1

There is a known discrepancy between the operational and axiomatic specifications within the family of
mixed-size RSW variants shown in Table 86-Table 88. To address this, we may choose to add something

like the following new PPO rule: Memory operation a precedes memory operation b in preserved program
order (and hence also in the global memory order) if a precedes b in program order, a and b both access
regular main memory (rather than I/O regions), a is a load, b is a store, there is a load m between a and b,
there is a byte x that both a and m read, there is no store between a and m that writes to x, and m precedes b
in PPO. In other words, in herd syntax, we may choose to add (po-loc & rsw);ppo;[W] to PPO. Many
implementations will already enforce this ordering naturally. As such, even though this rule is not official,
we recommend that implementers enforce it nevertheless in order to ensure forwards compatibility with
the possible future addition of this rule to RVWMO.

B.2. Formal Memory Model Specifications, Version 0.1
To facilitate formal analysis of RVWMO, this chapter presents a set of formalizations using different tools
and modeling approaches. Any discrepancies are unintended; the expectation is that the models describe
exactly the same sets of legal behaviors.

This appendix should be treated as commentary; all normative material is provided in Section 3.1 and in
the rest of the main body of the ISA specification. All currently known discrepancies are listed in Appendix
B.1.7. Any other discrepancies are unintentional.

B.2.1. Formal Axiomatic Specification in Alloy

We present a formal specification of the RVWMO memory model in Alloy (alloy.mit.edu). This model is
available online at github.com/daniellustig/riscv-memory-model.

The online material also contains some litmus tests and some examples of how Alloy can be used to model
check some of the mappings in Appendix B.1.5.

  // =RVWMO PPO=

  // Preserved Program Order
  fun ppo : Event->Event {
    // same-address ordering
    po_loc :> Store
    + rdw
    + (AMO + StoreConditional) <: rfi

    // explicit synchronization
    + ppo_fence
    + Acquire <: ^po :> MemoryEvent
    + MemoryEvent <: ^po :> Release
    + RCsc <: ^po :> RCsc
    + pair

    // syntactic dependencies
    + addrdep
    + datadep
    + ctrldep :> Store

    // pipeline dependencies
    + (addrdep+datadep).rfi

      + addrdep.^po :> Store
  }

  // the global memory order respects preserved program order
  fact { ppo in ^gmo }

Listing 17. The RVWMO memory model formalized in Alloy (1/5: PPO)

  // =RVWMO axioms=

  // Load Value Axiom
  fun candidates[r: MemoryEvent] : set MemoryEvent {
      (r.~^gmo & Store & same_addr[r]) // writes preceding r in gmo
      + (r.^~po & Store & same_addr[r]) // writes preceding r in po
  }

  fun latest_among[s: set Event] : Event { s - s.~^gmo }

  pred LoadValue {
      all w: Store | all r: Load |
        w->r in rf <=> w = latest_among[candidates[r]]
  }

  // Atomicity Axiom
  pred Atomicity {
      all r: Store.~pair |                           // starting from the lr,
        no x: Store & same_addr[r] |                 // there is no store x to the same addr
           x not in same_hart[r]                     // such that x is from a different hart,
           and x in r.~rf.^gmo                       // x follows (the store r reads from) in gmo,
           and r.pair in x.^gmo                      // and r follows x in gmo
  }

  // Progress Axiom implicit: Alloy only considers finite executions

  pred RISCV_mm { LoadValue and Atomicity /* and Progress */ }

The RVWMO memory model formalized in Alloy (2/5: Axioms)

  //Basic model of memory

  sig Hart {        // hardware thread
      start : one Event
  }
  sig Address {}
  abstract sig Event {
      po: lone Event // program order
  }

  abstract sig MemoryEvent extends Event {

      address: one Address,
      acquireRCpc: lone MemoryEvent,
      acquireRCsc: lone MemoryEvent,
      releaseRCpc: lone MemoryEvent,
      releaseRCsc: lone MemoryEvent,
      addrdep: set MemoryEvent,
      ctrldep: set Event,
      datadep: set MemoryEvent,
      gmo: set MemoryEvent,        // global memory order
      rf: set MemoryEvent
  }
  sig LoadNormal extends MemoryEvent {} // l{b|h|w|d}
  sig LoadReserve extends MemoryEvent { // lr
      pair: lone StoreConditional
  }
  sig StoreNormal extends MemoryEvent {}                      // s{b|h|w|d}
  // all StoreConditionals in the model are assumed to be successful
  sig StoreConditional extends MemoryEvent {}                 // sc
  sig AMO extends MemoryEvent {}                              // amo
  sig NOP extends Event {}

  fun Load : Event { LoadNormal + LoadReserve + AMO }
  fun Store : Event { StoreNormal + StoreConditional + AMO }

  sig Fence extends Event {
      pr: lone Fence, // opcode bit
      pw: lone Fence, // opcode bit
      sr: lone Fence, // opcode bit
      sw: lone Fence      // opcode bit
  }
  sig FenceTSO extends Fence {}

  /* Alloy encoding detail: opcode bits are either set (encoded, e.g.,
   * as f.pr in iden) or unset (f.pr not in iden).                    The bits cannot be used for
   * anything else */
  fact { pr + pw + sr + sw in iden }
  // likewise for ordering annotations
  fact { acquireRCpc + acquireRCsc + releaseRCpc + releaseRCsc in iden }
  // don't try to encode FenceTSO via pr/pw/sr/sw; just use it as-is
  fact { no FenceTSO.(pr + pw + sr + sw) }

Listing 18. The RVWMO memory model formalized in Alloy (3/5: model of memory)

  // =Basic model rules=

  // Ordering annotation groups
  fun Acquire : MemoryEvent { MemoryEvent.acquireRCpc + MemoryEvent.acquireRCsc }
  fun Release : MemoryEvent { MemoryEvent.releaseRCpc + MemoryEvent.releaseRCsc }
  fun RCpc : MemoryEvent { MemoryEvent.acquireRCpc + MemoryEvent.releaseRCpc }

  fun RCsc : MemoryEvent { MemoryEvent.acquireRCsc + MemoryEvent.releaseRCsc }

  // There is no such thing as store-acquire or load-release, unless it's both
  fact { Load & Release in Acquire }
  fact { Store & Acquire in Release }

  // FENCE PPO
  fun FencePRSR : Fence { Fence.(pr & sr) }
  fun FencePRSW : Fence { Fence.(pr & sw) }
  fun FencePWSR : Fence { Fence.(pw & sr) }
  fun FencePWSW : Fence { Fence.(pw & sw) }

  fun ppo_fence : MemoryEvent->MemoryEvent {
        (Load      <: ^po :> FencePRSR).(^po :> Load)
      + (Load      <: ^po :> FencePRSW).(^po :> Store)
      + (Store <: ^po :> FencePWSR).(^po :> Load)
      + (Store <: ^po :> FencePWSW).(^po :> Store)
      + (Load      <: ^po :> FenceTSO) .(^po :> MemoryEvent)
      + (Store <: ^po :> FenceTSO) .(^po :> Store)
  }

  // auxiliary definitions
  fun po_loc : Event->Event { ^po & address.~address }
  fun same_hart[e: Event] : set Event { e + e.^~po + e.^po }
  fun same_addr[e: Event] : set Event { e.address.~address }

  // initial stores
  fun NonInit : set Event { Hart.start.*po }
  fun Init : set Event { Event - NonInit }
  fact { Init in StoreNormal }
  fact { Init->(MemoryEvent & NonInit) in ^gmo }
  fact { all e: NonInit | one e.*~po.~start } // each event is in exactly one
  hart
  fact { all a: Address | one Init & a.~address } // one init store per address
  fact { no Init <: po and no po :> Init }

Listing 19. The RVWMO memory model formalized in Alloy (4/5: Basic model rules)

  // po
  fact { acyclic[po] }

  // gmo
  fact { total[^gmo, MemoryEvent] } // gmo is a total order over all MemoryEvents

  //rf
  fact { rf.~rf in iden } // each read returns the value of only one write
  fact { rf in Store <: address.~address :> Load }
  fun rfi : MemoryEvent->MemoryEvent { rf & (*po + *~po) }

  //dep

  fact { no StoreNormal <: (addrdep + ctrldep + datadep) }
  fact { addrdep + ctrldep + datadep + pair in ^po }
  fact { datadep in datadep :> Store }
  fact { ctrldep.*po in ctrldep }
  fact { no pair & (^po :> (LoadReserve + StoreConditional)).^po }
  fact { StoreConditional in LoadReserve.pair } // assume all SCs succeed

  // rdw
  fun rdw : Event->Event {
      (Load <: po_loc :> Load)          // start with all same_address load-load pairs,
      - (~rf.rf)                        // subtract pairs that read from the same store,
      - (po_loc.rfi)                    // and subtract out "fri-rfi" patterns
  }

  // filter out redundant instances and/or visualizations
  fact { no gmo & gmo.gmo } // keep the visualization uncluttered
  fact { all a: Address | some a.~address }

  // =Optional: opcode encoding restrictions=

  // the list of blessed fences
  fact { Fence in
      Fence.pr.sr
      + Fence.pw.sw
      + Fence.pr.pw.sw
      + Fence.pr.sr.sw
      + FenceTSO
      + Fence.pr.pw.sr.sw
  }

  pred restrict_to_current_encodings {
      no (LoadNormal + StoreNormal) & (Acquire + Release)
  }

  // =Alloy shortcuts=
  pred acyclic[rel: Event->Event] { no iden & ^rel }
  pred total[rel: Event->Event, bag: Event] {
      all disj e, f: bag | e->f in rel + ~rel
      acyclic[rel]
  }

Listing 20. The RVWMO memory model formalized in Alloy (5/5: Auxiliaries)

B.2.2. Formal Axiomatic Specification in Herd

The tool herd takes a memory model and a litmus test as input and simulates the execution of the test on
top of the memory model. Memory models are written in the domain specific language Cat. This section
provides two Cat memory model of RVWMO. The first model, Listing 22, follows the global memory order,
Section 3.1, definition of RVWMO, as much as is possible for a Cat model. The second model, Listing 23, is
an equivalent, more efficient, partial order based RVWMO model.

The simulator herd is part of the diy tool suite — see diy.inria.fr for software and documentation. The
models and more are available online at diy.inria.fr/cats7/riscv/.

  (*************)
  (* Utilities *)
  (*************)

  (* All fence relations *)
  let fence.r.r = [R];fencerel(Fence.r.r);[R]
  let fence.r.w = [R];fencerel(Fence.r.w);[W]
  let fence.r.rw = [R];fencerel(Fence.r.rw);[M]
  let fence.w.r = [W];fencerel(Fence.w.r);[R]
  let fence.w.w = [W];fencerel(Fence.w.w);[W]
  let fence.w.rw = [W];fencerel(Fence.w.rw);[M]
  let fence.rw.r = [M];fencerel(Fence.rw.r);[R]
  let fence.rw.w = [M];fencerel(Fence.rw.w);[W]
  let fence.rw.rw = [M];fencerel(Fence.rw.rw);[M]
  let fence.tso =
     let f = fencerel(Fence.tso) in
     ([W];f;[W]) | ([R];f;[M])

  let fence =
     fence.r.r | fence.r.w | fence.r.rw |
     fence.w.r | fence.w.w | fence.w.rw |
     fence.rw.r | fence.rw.w | fence.rw.rw |
     fence.tso

  (* Same address, no W to the same address in-between *)
  let po-loc-no-w = po-loc \ (po-loc?;[W];po-loc)
  (* Read same write *)
  let rsw = rf^-1;rf
  (* Acquire, or stronger               *)
  let AQ = Acq|AcqRel
  (* Release or stronger *)
  and RL = RelAcqRel
  (* All RCsc *)
  let RCsc = Acq|Rel|AcqRel
  (* Amo events are both R and W, relation rmw relates paired lr/sc *)
  let AMO = R & W
  let StCond = range(rmw)

  (*************)
  (* ppo rules *)
  (*************)

  (* Overlapping-Address Orderings *)
  let r1 = [M];po-loc;[W]
  and r2 = ([R];po-loc-no-w;[R]) \ rsw
  and r3 = [AMO|StCond];rfi;[R]

  (* Explicit Synchronization *)
  and r4 = fence
  and r5 = [AQ];po;[M]
  and r6 = [M];po;[RL]
  and r7 = [RCsc];po;[RCsc]
  and r8 = rmw
  (* Syntactic Dependencies *)
  and r9 = [M];addr;[M]
  and r10 = [M];data;[W]
  and r11 = [M];ctrl;[W]
  (* Pipeline Dependencies *)
  and r12 = [R];(addr|data);[W];rfi;[R]
  and r13 = [R];addr;[M];po;[W]

  let ppo = r1 | r2 | r3 | r4 | r5 | r6 | r7 | r8 | r9 | r10 | r11 | r12 | r13

Listing 21. riscv-defs.cat, a herd definition of preserved program order (1/3)

  Total

  (* Notice that herd has defined its own rf relation *)

  (* Define ppo *)
  include "riscv-defs.cat"

  (********************************)
  (* Generate global memory order *)
  (********************************)

  let gmo0 = (* precursor: ie build gmo as an total order that include gmo0 *)
     loc & (W\FW) * FW | # Final write after any write to the same location
     ppo |                         # ppo compatible
     rfe                           # includes herd external rf (optimization)

  (* Walk over all linear extensions of gmo0 *)
  with     gmo from linearizations(M\IW,gmo0)

  (* Add initial writes upfront -- convenient for computing rfGMO *)
  let gmo = gmo | loc & IW * (M\IW)

  (**********)
  (* Axioms *)
  (**********)

  (* Compute rf according to the load value axiom, aka rfGMO *)
  let WR = loc & ([W];(gmo|po);[R])
  let rfGMO = WR \ (loc&([W];gmo);WR)

  (* Check equality of herd rf and of rfGMO *)

  empty (rf\rfGMO)|(rfGMO\rf) as RfCons

  (* Atomicity axiom *)
  let infloc = (gmo & loc)^-1
  let inflocext = infloc & ext
  let winside = (infloc;rmw;inflocext) & (infloc;rf;rmw;inflocext) & [W]
  empty winside as Atomic

Listing 22. riscv.cat, a herd version of the RVWMO memory model (2/3)

  Partial

  (***************)
  (* Definitions *)
  (***************)

  (* Define ppo *)
  include "riscv-defs.cat"

  (* Compute coherence relation *)
  include "cos-opt.cat"

  (**********)
  (* Axioms *)
  (**********)

  (* Sc per location *)
  acyclic co|rf|fr|po-loc as Coherence

  (* Main model axiom *)
  acyclic co|rfe|fr|ppo as Model

  (* Atomicity axiom *)
  empty rmw & (fre;coe) as Atomic

Listing 23. riscv.cat, an alternative herd presentation of the RVWMO memory model (3/3)

B.2.3. An Operational Memory Model

This is an alternative presentation of the RVWMO memory model in operational style. It aims to admit
exactly the same extensional behavior as the axiomatic presentation: for any given program, admitting an
execution if and only if the axiomatic presentation allows it.

The axiomatic presentation is defined as a predicate on complete candidate executions. In contrast, this
operational presentation has an abstract microarchitectural flavor: it is expressed as a state machine, with
states that are an abstract representation of hardware machine states, and with explicit out-of-order and
speculative execution (but abstracting from more implementation-specific microarchitectural details such
as register renaming, store buffers, cache hierarchies, cache protocols, etc.). As such, it can provide useful
intuition. It can also construct executions incrementally, making it possible to interactively and randomly
explore the behavior of larger examples, while the axiomatic model requires complete candidate executions

over which the axioms can be checked.

The operational presentation covers mixed-size execution, with potentially overlapping memory accesses
of different power-of-two byte sizes. Misaligned accesses are broken up into single-byte accesses.

The operational model, together with a fragment of the RISC-V ISA semantics (RV64I and A), are
integrated into the rmem exploration tool (github.com/rems-project/rmem). rmem can explore litmus tests
(see Appendix B.1.2) and small ELF binaries exhaustively, pseudorandomly, and interactively. In rmem, the
ISA semantics is expressed explicitly in Sail (see github.com/rems-project/sail for the Sail language, and
github.com/rems-project/sail-riscv for the RISC-V ISA model), and the concurrency semantics is expressed
in Lem (see github.com/rems-project/lem for the Lem language).

rmem has a command-line interface and a web-interface. The web-interface runs entirely on the client side,
and is provided online together with a library of litmus tests: www.cl.cam.ac.uk/. The command-line
interface is faster than the web-interface, specially in exhaustive mode.

Below is an informal introduction of the model states and transitions. The description of the formal model
starts in the next subsection.

Terminology: In contrast to the axiomatic presentation, here every memory operation is either a load or a
store. Hence, AMOs give rise to two distinct memory operations, a load and a store. When used in
conjunction with instruction, the terms load and store refer to instructions that give rise to such
memory operations. As such, both include AMO instructions. The term acquire refers to an instruction (or
its memory operation) with the acquire-RCpc or acquire-RCsc annotation. The term release refers to an
instruction (or its memory operation) with the release-RCpc or release-RCsc annotation.

Model states

Model states: A model state consists of a shared memory and a tuple of hart states.

The shared memory state records all the memory store operations that have propagated so far, in the order
they propagated (this can be made more efficient, but for simplicity of the presentation we keep it this
way).

Each hart state consists principally of a tree of instruction instances, some of which have been finished, and
some of which have not. Non-finished instruction instances can be subject to restart, e.g. if they depend on
an out-of-order or speculative load that turns out to be unsound.

Conditional branch and indirect jump instructions may have multiple successors in the instruction tree.
When such instruction is finished, any untaken alternative paths are discarded.

Each instruction instance in the instruction tree has a state that includes an execution state of the intra-
instruction semantics (the ISA pseudocode for this instruction). The model uses a formalization of the
intra-instruction semantics in Sail. One can think of the execution state of an instruction as a
representation of the pseudocode control state, pseudocode call stack, and local variable values. An
instruction instance state also includes information about the instance’s memory and register footprints,

its register reads and writes, its memory operations, whether it is finished, etc.

Model transitions

The model defines, for any model state, the set of allowed transitions, each of which is a single atomic step
to a new abstract machine state. Execution of a single instruction will typically involve many transitions,
and they may be interleaved in operational-model execution with transitions arising from other
instructions. Each transition arises from a single instruction instance; it will change the state of that
instance, and it may depend on or change the rest of its hart state and the shared memory state, but it does
not depend on other hart states, and it will not change them. The transitions are introduced below and
defined in Appendix B.2.3.5, with a precondition and a construction of the post-transition model state for
each.

Transitions for all instructions:

 ⚫ Fetch instruction: This transition represents a fetch and decode of a new instruction instance, as a
   program order successor of a previously fetched instruction instance (or the initial fetch address).

The model assumes the instruction memory is fixed; it does not describe the behavior of self-modifying
code. In particular, the Fetch instruction transition does not generate memory load operations, and the
shared memory is not involved in the transition. Instead, the model depends on an external oracle that
provides an opcode when given a memory location.

 ⚫ Register write: This is a write of a register value.
 ⚫ Register read: This is a read of a register value from the most recent program-order-predecessor
   instruction instance that writes to that register.
 ⚫ Pseudocode internal step: This covers pseudocode internal computation: arithmetic, function calls, etc.
 ⚫ Finish instruction: At this point the instruction pseudocode is done, the instruction cannot be
   restarted, memory accesses cannot be discarded, and all memory effects have taken place. For
   conditional branch and indirect jump instructions, any program order successors that were fetched
   from an address that is not the one that was written to the pc register are discarded, together with the
   sub-tree of instruction instances below them.

Transitions specific to load instructions:

 ⚫ Initiate memory load operations: At this point the memory footprint of the load instruction is
   provisionally known (it could change if earlier instructions are restarted) and its individual memory
   load operations can start being satisfied.

 ⚫ Satisfy memory load operation by forwarding from unpropagated stores: This partially or entirely
   satisfies a single memory load operation by forwarding, from program-order-previous memory store
   operations.
 ⚫ Satisfy memory load operation from memory: This entirely satisfies the outstanding slices of a single
   memory load operation, from memory.

 ⚫ Complete load operations: At this point all the memory load operations of the instruction have been
   entirely satisfied and the instruction pseudocode can continue executing. A load instruction can be
   subject to being restarted until the transition. But, under some conditions, the model might treat a load
   instruction as non-restartable even before it is finished (e.g. see ).

Transitions specific to store instructions:

 ⚫ Initiate memory store operation footprints: At this point the memory footprint of the store is
   provisionally known.

 ⚫ Instantiate memory store operation values: At this point the memory store operations have their values
   and program-order-successor memory load operations can be satisfied by forwarding from them.
 ⚫ Commit store instruction: At this point the store operations are guaranteed to happen (the instruction
   can no longer be restarted or discarded), and they can start being propagated to memory.

 ⚫ Propagate store operation: This propagates a single memory store operation to memory.

 ⚫ Complete store operations: At this point all the memory store operations of the instruction have been
   propagated to memory, and the instruction pseudocode can continue executing.

Transitions specific to sc instructions:

 ⚫ Early sc fail: This causes the sc to fail, either a spontaneous fail or because it is not paired with a
   program-order-previous lr.
 ⚫ Paired sc: This transition indicates the sc is paired with an lr and might succeed.
 ⚫ Commit and propagate store operation of an sc: This is an atomic execution of the transitions Commit
   store instruction and Propagate store operation, it is enabled only if the stores from which the lr read
   from have not been overwritten.
 ⚫ Late sc fail: This causes the sc to fail, either a spontaneous fail or because the stores from which the lr
   read from have been overwritten.

Transitions specific to AMO instructions:

 ⚫ Satisfy, commit and propagate operations of an AMO: This is an atomic execution of all the transitions
   needed to satisfy the load operation, do the required arithmetic, and propagate the store operation.

Transitions specific to fence instructions:

 ⚫ Commit fence

The transitions labeled ○ can always be taken eagerly, as soon as their precondition is satisfied, without
excluding other behavior; the ∙ cannot. Although Fetch instruction is marked with a ∙, it can be taken
eagerly as long as it is not taken infinitely many times.

An instance of a non-AMO load instruction, after being fetched, will typically experience the following
transitions in this order:

 1. Register read
 2. Initiate memory load operations
 3. Satisfy memory load operation by forwarding from unpropagated stores and/or Satisfy memory load
    operation from memory (as many as needed to satisfy all the load operations of the instance)
 4. Complete load operations
 5. Register write
 6. Finish instruction

Before, between, and after the transitions above, any number of Pseudocode internal step transitions may
appear. In addition, a Fetch instruction transition for fetching the instruction in the next program location
will be available until it is taken.

This concludes the informal description of the operational model. The following sections describe the
formal operational model.

B.2.3.1. Intra-instruction Pseudocode Execution

The intra-instruction semantics for each instruction instance is expressed as a state machine, essentially
running the instruction pseudocode. Given a pseudocode execution state, it computes the next state. Most
states identify a pending memory or register operation, requested by the pseudocode, which the memory
model has to do. The states are (this is a tagged union; tags in small-caps):

Load_mem(kind, address, size, load_continuation)                  - memory load operation
Early_sc_fail(res_continuation)                                   - allow sc to fail early
Store_ea(kind, address, size, next_state)                         - memory store effective address
Store_memv(mem_value, store_continuation)                         - memory store value
Fence(kind, next_state)                                           - fence
Read_reg(reg_name, read_continuation)                             - register read
Write_reg(reg_name, reg_value, next_state)                        - register write
Internal(next_state)                                              - pseudocode internal step
Done                                                              - end of pseudocode

Here:

 ⚫ mem_value and reg_value are lists of bytes;
 ⚫ address is an integer of XLEN bits;

for load/store, kind identifies whether it is lr/sc, acquire-RCpc/release-RCpc, acquire-RCsc/release-RCsc,
acquire-release-RCsc; * for fence, kind identifies whether it is a normal or TSO, and (for normal fences) the
predecessor and successor ordering bits; * reg_name identifies a register and a slice thereof (start and end
bit indices); and the continuations describe how the instruction instance will continue for each value that
might be provided by the surrounding memory model (the load_continuation and read_continuation take
the value loaded from memory and read from the previous register write, the store_continuation takes false
for an sc that failed and true in all other cases, and res_continuation takes false if the sc fails and true
otherwise).

                  For example, given the load instruction lw x1,0(x2), an execution will typically go as follows.
                  The initial execution state will be computed from the pseudocode for the given opcode. This
                  can be expected to be Read_reg(x2, read_continuation). Feeding the most recently written
                  value of register x2 (the instruction semantics will be blocked if necessary until the register
                 value is available), say 0x4000, to read_continuation returns Load_mem(plain_load,
                  0x4000, 4, load_continuation). Feeding the 4-byte value loaded from memory location 0x4000,
                  say 0x42, to load_continuation returns Write_reg(x1, 0x42, Done). Many Internal(
                  next_state) states may appear before and between the states above.

Notice that writing to memory is split into two steps, Store_ea and Store_memv: the first one makes the
memory footprint of the store provisionally known, and the second one adds the value to be stored. We
ensure these are paired in the pseudocode (Store_ea followed by Store_memv), but there may be other
steps between them.

                  It is observable that the Store_ea can occur before the value to be stored is determined. For
                  example, for the litmus test LB+fence.r.rw+data-po to be allowed by the operational model (as
                 it is by RVWMO), the first store in Hart 1 has to take the Store_ea step before its value is
                  determined, so that the second store can see it is to a non-overlapping memory footprint,
                  allowing the second store to be committed out of order without violating coherence.

The pseudocode of each instruction performs at most one store or one load, except for AMOs that perform

exactly one load and one store. Those memory accesses are then split apart into the architecturally atomic
units by the hart semantics (see Initiate memory load operations and Initiate memory store operation
footprints below).

Informally, each bit of a register read should be satisfied from a register write by the most recent (in
program order) instruction instance that can write that bit (or from the hart’s initial register state if there is
no such write). Hence, it is essential to know the register write footprint of each instruction instance, which
we calculate when the instruction instance is created (see the Fetch instruction action of below). We ensure
in the pseudocode that each instruction does at most one register write to each register bit, and also that it
does not try to read a register value it just wrote.

Data-flow dependencies (address and data) in the model emerge from the fact that each register read has to
wait for the appropriate register write to be executed (as described above).

B.2.3.2. Instruction Instance State

Each instruction instance _i has a state comprising:

 ⚫ program_loc, the memory address from which the instruction was fetched;
 ⚫ instruction_kind, identifying whether this is a load, store, AMO, fence, branch/jump or a simple
   instruction (this also includes a kind similar to the one described for the pseudocode execution states);
 ⚫ src_regs, the set of source _reg_name_s (including system registers), as statically determined from the
   pseudocode of the instruction;
 ⚫ dst_regs, the destination _reg_name_s (including system registers), as statically determined from the
   pseudocode of the instruction;
 ⚫ pseudocode_state (or sometimes just state for short), one of (this is a tagged union; tags in small-caps):

Plain(isa_state)                                          - ready to make a pseudocode transition
Pending_mem_loads(load_continuation)                      - requesting memory load operation(s)
Pending_mem_stores(store_continuation)                    - requesting memory store operation(s)

 ⚫ reg_reads, the register reads the instance has performed, including, for each one, the register write
   slices it read from;
 ⚫ reg_writes, the register writes the instance has performed;
 ⚫ mem_loads, a set of memory load operations, and for each one the as-yet-unsatisfied slices (the byte
   indices that have not been satisfied yet), and, for the satisfied slices, the store slices (each consisting of
   a memory store operation and subset of its byte indices) that satisfied it.
 ⚫ mem_stores, a set of memory store operations, and for each one a flag that indicates whether it has
   been propagated (passed to the shared memory) or not.
 ⚫ information recording whether the instance is committed, finished, etc.

Each memory load operation includes a memory footprint (address and size). Each memory store
operations includes a memory footprint, and, when available, a value.

A load instruction instance with a non-empty mem_loads, for which all the load operations are satisfied
(i.e. there are no unsatisfied load slices) is said to be entirely satisfied.

Informally, an instruction instance is said to have fully determined data if the load (and sc) instructions
feeding its source registers are finished. Similarly, it is said to have a fully determined memory footprint if the
load (and sc) instructions feeding its memory operation address register are finished. Formally, we first

define the notion of fully determined register write: a register write w from reg_writes of instruction instance
i is said to be fully determined if one of the following conditions hold:

 1. i is finished; or
 2. the value written by w is not affected by a memory operation that i has made (i.e. a value loaded from
    memory or the result of sc), and, for every register read that i has made, that affects w, the register write
    from which i read is fully determined (or i read from the initial register state).

Now, an instruction instance i is said to have fully determined data if for every register read r from
reg_reads, the register writes that r reads from are fully determined. An instruction instance i is said to
have a fully determined memory footprint if for every register read r from reg_reads that feeds into i’s
memory operation address, the register writes that r reads from are fully determined.

                  The rmem tool records, for every register write, the set of register writes from other instructions
                  that have been read by this instruction at the point of performing the write. By carefully
                 arranging the pseudocode of the instructions covered by the tool we were able to make it so
                  that this is exactly the set of register writes on which the write depends on.

B.2.3.3. Hart State

The model state of a single hart comprises:

 ⚫ hart_id, a unique identifier of the hart;
 ⚫ initial_register_state, the initial register value for each register;
 ⚫ initial_fetch_address, the initial instruction fetch address;
 ⚫ instruction_tree, a tree of the instruction instances that have been fetched (and not discarded), in
   program order.

B.2.3.4. Shared Memory State

The model state of the shared memory comprises a list of memory store operations, in the order they
propagated to the shared memory.

When a store operation is propagated to the shared memory it is simply added to the end of the list. When
a load operation is satisfied from memory, for each byte of the load operation, the most recent
corresponding store slice is returned.

                  For most purposes, it is simpler to think of the shared memory as an array, i.e., a map from
                  memory locations to memory store operation slices, where each memory location is mapped to
                  a one-byte slice of the most recent memory store operation to that location. However, this
                  abstraction is not detailed enough to properly handle the sc instruction. The RVWMO allows
                 store operations from the same hart as the sc to intervene between the store operation of the
                  sc and the store operations the paired lr read from. To allow such store operations to
                  intervene, and forbid others, the array abstraction must be extended to record more
                  information. Here, we use a list as it is very simple, but a more efficient and scalable
                  implementations should probably use something better.

B.2.3.5. Transitions

Each of the paragraphs below describes a single kind of system transition. The description starts with a
condition over the current system state. The transition can be taken in the current state only if the
condition is satisfied. The condition is followed by an action that is applied to that state when the

transition is taken, in order to generate the new system state.

Fetch instruction

A possible program-order-successor of instruction instance i can be fetched from address loc if:

 1. it has not already been fetched, i.e., none of the immediate successors of i in the hart’s instruction_tree
    are from loc; and
 2. if i’s pseudocode has already written an address to pc, then loc must be that address, otherwise loc is:
      ⚫ for a conditional branch, the successor address or the branch target address;
      ⚫ for a (direct) jump and link instruction (jal), the target address;
      ⚫ for an indirect jump instruction (jalr), any address; and
      ⚫ for any other instruction, i.program_loc+4.

Action: construct a freshly initialized instruction instance i' for the instruction in the program memory at
loc, with state Plain(isa_state), computed from the instruction pseudocode, including the static
information available from the pseudocode such as its instruction_kind, src_regs, and dst_regs, and add i' to
the hart’s instruction_tree as a successor of i.

The possible next fetch addresses (loc) are available immediately after fetching i and the model does not
need to wait for the pseudocode to write to pc; this allows out-of-order execution, and speculation past
conditional branches and jumps. For most instructions these addresses are easily obtained from the
instruction pseudocode. The only exception to that is the indirect jump instruction (jalr), where the
address depends on the value held in a register. In principle the mathematical model should allow
speculation to arbitrary addresses here. The exhaustive search in the rmem tool handles this by running the
exhaustive search multiple times with a growing set of possible next fetch addresses for each indirect jump.
The initial search uses empty sets, hence there is no fetch after indirect jump instruction until the
pseudocode of the instruction writes to pc, and then we use that value for fetching the next instruction.
Before starting the next iteration of exhaustive search, we collect for each indirect jump (grouped by code
location) the set of values it wrote to pc in all the executions in the previous search iteration, and use that as
possible next fetch addresses of the instruction. This process terminates when no new fetch addresses are
detected.

Initiate memory load operations

An instruction instance i in state Plain(Load_mem(kind, address, size, load_continuation)) can always
initiate the corresponding memory load operations. Action:

 1. Construct the appropriate memory load operations mlos:
      ⚫ if address is aligned to size then mlos is a single memory load operation of size bytes from address;
      ⚫ otherwise, mlos is a set of size memory load operations, each of one byte, from the addresses
        address…address+size−1.
 2. set mem_loads of i to mlos; and
 3. update the state of i to Pending_mem_loads(load_continuation).

   In Section 3.1.1.1 it is said that misaligned memory accesses may be decomposed at any granularity.
   Here we decompose them to one-byte accesses as this granularity subsumes all others.

Satisfy memory load operation by forwarding from unpropagated stores

For a non-AMO load instruction instance i in state Pending_mem_loads(load_continuation), and a
memory load operation mlo in i.mem_loads that has unsatisfied slices, the memory load operation can be
partially or entirely satisfied by forwarding from unpropagated memory store operations by store
instruction instances that are program-order-before i if:

 1. all program-order-previous fence instructions with .sr and .pw set are finished;
 2. for every program-order-previous fence instruction, f, with .sr and .pr set, and .pw not set, if f is not
    finished then all load instructions that are program-order-before f are entirely satisfied;
 3. for every program-order-previous fence.tso instruction, f, that is not finished, all load instructions
    that are program-order-before f are entirely satisfied;
 4. if i is a load-acquire-RCsc, all program-order-previous store-releases-RCsc are finished;
 5. if i is a load-acquire-release, all program-order-previous instructions are finished;
 6. all non-finished program-order-previous load-acquire instructions are entirely satisfied; and
 7. all program-order-previous store-acquire-release instructions are finished;

Let msoss be the set of all unpropagated memory store operation slices from non-sc store instruction
instances that are program-order-before i and have already calculated the value to be stored, that overlap
with the unsatisfied slices of mlo, and which are not superseded by intervening store operations or store
operations that are read from by an intervening load. The last condition requires, for each memory store
operation slice msos in msoss from instruction i':

 ⚫ that there is no store instruction program-order-between i and i' with a memory store operation
   overlapping msos; and
 ⚫ that there is no load instruction program-order-between i and i' that was satisfied from an overlapping
   memory store operation slice from a different hart.

Action:

 1. update i.mem_loads to indicate that mlo was satisfied by msoss; and
 2. restart any speculative instructions which have violated coherence as a result of this, i.e., for every non-
    finished instruction i' that is a program-order-successor of i, and every memory load operation mlo' of i'
    that was satisfied from msoss', if there exists a memory store operation slice msos' in msoss', and an
    overlapping memory store operation slice from a different memory store operation in msoss, and msos'
    is not from an instruction that is a program-order-successor of i, restart i' and its restart-dependents.

Where, the restart-dependents of instruction j are:

 ⚫ program-order-successors of j that have data-flow dependency on a register write of j;
 ⚫ program-order-successors of j that have a memory load operation that reads from a memory store
   operation of j (by forwarding);
 ⚫ if j is a load-acquire, all the program-order-successors of j;
 ⚫ if j is a load, for every fence, f, with .sr and .pr set, and .pw not set, that is a program-order-successor
   of j, all the load instructions that are program-order-successors of f;
 ⚫ if j is a load, for every fence.tso, f, that is a program-order-successor of j, all the load instructions that
   are program-order-successors of f; and
 ⚫ (recursively) all the restart-dependents of all the instruction instances above.

   Forwarding memory store operations to a memory load might satisfy only some slices of the load,
   leaving other slices unsatisfied.

   A program-order-previous store operation that was not available when taking the transition above
   might make msoss provisionally unsound (violating coherence) when it becomes available. That store
   will prevent the load from being finished (see Finish instruction), and will cause it to restart when
   that store operation is propagated (see Propagate store operation).

   A consequence of the transition condition above is that store-release-RCsc memory store operations
   cannot be forwarded to load-acquire-RCsc instructions: msoss does not include memory store
   operations from finished stores (as those must be propagated memory store operations), and the
   condition above requires all program-order-previous store-releases-RCsc to be finished when the load
   is acquire-RCsc.

Satisfy memory load operation from memory

For an instruction instance i of a non-AMO load instruction or an AMO instruction in the context of the
Satisfy, commit and propagate operations of an AMO transition, any memory load operation mlo in
i.mem_loads that has unsatisfied slices, can be satisfied from memory if all the conditions of
<sat_by_forwarding, Satisfy memory load operation by forwarding from unpropagated stores>> are
satisfied. Action: let msoss be the memory store operation slices from memory covering the unsatisfied
slices of mlo, and apply the action of Satisfy memory operation by forwarding from unpropagates stores.

                   Note that Satisfy memory operation by forwarding from unpropagates stores might leave some
                   slices of the memory load operation unsatisfied, those will have to be satisfied by taking the
                  transition again, or taking Satisfy memory load operation from memory. Satisfy memory load
                   operation from memory, on the other hand, will always satisfy all the unsatisfied slices of the
                   memory load operation.

Complete load operations

A load instruction instance i in state Pending_mem_loads(load_continuation) can be completed (not to be
confused with finished) if all the memory load operations i.mem_loads are entirely satisfied (i.e. there are
no unsatisfied slices). Action: update the state of i to Plain(load_continuation(mem_value)), where
mem_value is assembled from all the memory store operation slices that satisfied i.mem_loads.

Early sc fail

An sc instruction instance i in state Plain(Early_sc_fail(res_continuation)) can always be made to fail.
Action: update the state of i to Plain(res_continuation(false)).

Paired sc

An sc instruction instance i in state Plain(Early_sc_fail(res_continuation)) can continue its (potentially
successful) execution if i is paired with an lr. Action: update the state of i to Plain(res_continuation(true)).

Initiate memory store operation footprints

An instruction instance i in state Plain(Store_ea(kind, address, size, next_state)) can always announce its
pending memory store operation footprint. Action:

 1. construct the appropriate memory store operations msos (without the store value):
      ⚫ if address is aligned to size then msos is a single memory store operation of size bytes to address;
      ⚫ otherwise, msos is a set of size memory store operations, each of one-byte size, to the addresses
        address…address+size−1.
 2. set i.mem_stores to msos; and
 3. update the state of i to Plain(next_state).

   Note that after taking the transition above the memory store operations do not yet have their values.
   The importance of splitting this transition from the transition below is that it allows other program-
   order-successor store instructions to observe the memory footprint of this instruction, and if they
   don’t overlap, propagate out of order as early as possible (i.e. before the data register value becomes
   available).

Instantiate memory store operation values

An instruction instance i in state Plain(Store_memv(mem_value, store_continuation)) can always
instantiate the values of the memory store operations i.mem_stores. Action:

 1. split mem_value between the memory store operations i.mem_stores; and
 2. update the state of i to Pending_mem_stores(store_continuation).

Commit store instruction

An uncommitted instruction instance i of a non-sc store instruction or an sc instruction in the context of
the   Commit     and     propagate     store   operation      of   an     sc     transition,   in    state
Pending_mem_stores(store_continuation), can be committed (not to be confused with propagated) if:

 1. i has fully determined data;
 2. all program-order-previous conditional branch and indirect jump instructions are finished;
 3. all program-order-previous fence instructions with .sw set are finished;
 4. all program-order-previous fence.tso instructions are finished;
 5. all program-order-previous load-acquire instructions are finished;
 6. all program-order-previous store-acquire-release instructions are finished;
 7. if i is a store-release, all program-order-previous instructions are finished;
 8. all program-order-previous memory access instructions have a fully determined memory footprint;
 9. all program-order-previous store instructions, except for sc that failed, have initiated and so have non-
    empty mem_stores; and
10. all program-order-previous load instructions have initiated and so have non-empty mem_loads.

Action: record that i is committed.

                  Notice that if condition 8 is satisfied the conditions 9 and 10 are also satisfied, or will be
                  satisfied after taking some eager transitions. Hence, requiring them does not strengthen the
                 model. By requiring them, we guarantee that previous memory access instructions have taken
                  enough transitions to make their memory operations visible for the condition check of , which
                  is the next transition the instruction will take, making that condition simpler.

Propagate store operation

For a committed instruction instance i in state Pending_mem_stores(store_continuation), and an
unpropagated memory store operation mso in i.mem_stores, mso can be propagated if:

 1. all memory store operations of program-order-previous store instructions that overlap with mso have
    already propagated;
 2. all memory load operations of program-order-previous load instructions that overlap with mso have
    already been satisfied, and (the load instructions) are non-restartable (see definition below); and
 3. all memory load operations that were satisfied by forwarding mso are entirely satisfied.

Where a non-finished instruction instance j is non-restartable if:

 1. there does not exist a store instruction s and an unpropagated memory store operation mso of s such
    that applying the action of the Propagate store operation transition to mso will result in the restart of j;
    and
 2. there does not exist a non-finished load instruction l and a memory load operation mlo of l such that
    applying the action of the Satisfy memory load operation by forwarding from unpropagated stores
    /Satisfy memory load operation from memory transition (even if mlo is already satisfied) to mlo will
    result in the restart of j.

Action:

 1. update the shared memory state with mso;
 2. update i.mem_stores to indicate that mso was propagated; and
 3. restart any speculative instructions which have violated coherence as a result of this, i.e., for every non-
    finished instruction i' program-order-after i and every memory load operation mlo' of i' that was
    satisfied from msoss', if there exists a memory store operation slice msos' in msoss' that overlaps with
    mso and is not from mso, and msos' is not from a program-order-successor of i, restart i' and its restart-
    dependents (see Satisfy memory load operation by forwarding from unpropagated stores).

Commit and propagate store operation of an sc

An uncommitted sc instruction instance i, from hart h, in state Pending_mem_stores(store_continuation),
with a paired lr i' that has been satisfied by some store slices msoss, can be committed and propagated at
the same time if:

 1. i' is finished;
 2. every memory store operation that has been forwarded to i' is propagated;
 3. the conditions of Commit store instruction is satisfied;
 4. the conditions of Propagate store instruction is satisfied (notice that an sc instruction can only have
    one memory store operation); and
 5. for every store slice msos from msoss, msos has not been overwritten, in the shared memory, by a store
    that is from a hart that is not h, at any point since msos was propagated to memory.

Action:

 1. apply the actions of Commit store instruction; and
 2. apply the action of Propagate store instruction.

Late sc fail

An sc instruction instance i in state Pending_mem_stores(store_continuation), that has not propagated its
memory store operation, can always be made to fail. Action:

  1. clear i.mem_stores; and
 2. update the state of i to Plain(store_continuation(false)).

   For efficiency, the rmem tool allows this transition only when it is not possible to take the Commit and
   propagate store operation of an sc transition. This does not affect the set of allowed final states, but
   when explored interactively, if the sc should fail one should use the Early sc fail transition instead of
   waiting for this transition.

Complete store operations

A store instruction instance i in state Pending_mem_stores(store_continuation), for which all the memory
store operations in i.mem_stores have been propagated, can always be completed (not to be confused with
finished). Action: update the state of i to Plain(store_continuation(true)).

Satisfy, commit and propagate operations of an AMO

An AMO instruction instance i in state Pending_mem_loads(load_continuation) can perform its memory
access if it is possible to perform the following sequence of transitions with no intervening transitions:

  1. Satisfy memory load operation from memory
 2. Complete load operations
 3. Pseudocode internal step (zero or more times)
 4. Instantiate memory store operation values
 5. Commit store instruction
 6. Propagate store operation
 7. Complete store operations

and in addition, the condition of Finish instruction, with the exception of not requiring i to be in state
Plain(Done), holds after those transitions. Action: perform the above sequence of transitions (this does not
include Finish instruction), one after the other, with no intervening transitions.

                  Notice that program-order-previous stores cannot be forwarded to the load of an AMO. This is
                  simply because the sequence of transitions above does not include the forwarding transition.
                  But even if it did include it, the sequence will fail when trying to do the Propagate store
                  operation transition, as this transition requires all program-order-previous store operations to
                  overlapping memory footprints to be propagated, and forwarding requires the store operation
                 to be unpropagated.

                  In addition, the store of an AMO cannot be forwarded to a program-order-successor load.
                  Before taking the transition above, the store operation of the AMO does not have its value and
                  therefore cannot be forwarded; after taking the transition above the store operation is
                  propagated and therefore cannot be forwarded.

Commit fence

A fence instruction instance i in state Plain(Fence(kind, next_state)) can be committed if:

 1. if i is a normal fence and it has .pr set, all program-order-previous load instructions are finished;
 2. if i is a normal fence and it has .pw set, all program-order-previous store instructions are finished; and
 3. if i is a fence.tso, all program-order-previous load and store instructions are finished.

Action:

 1. record that i is committed; and
 2. update the state of i to Plain(next_state).

Register read

An instruction instance i in state Plain(Read_reg(reg_name, read_cont)) can do a register read of reg_name
if every instruction instance that it needs to read from has already performed the expected reg_name
register write.

Let read_sources include, for each bit of reg_name, the write to that bit by the most recent (in program
order) instruction instance that can write to that bit, if any. If there is no such instruction, the source is the
initial register value from initial_register_state. Let reg_value be the value assembled from read_sources.
Action:

 1. add reg_name to i.reg_reads with read_sources and reg_value; and
 2. update the state of i to Plain(read_cont(reg_value)).

Register write

An instruction instance i in state Plain(Write_reg(reg_name, reg_value, next_state)) can always do a
reg_name register write. Action:

 1. add reg_name to i.reg_writes with deps and reg_value; and
 2. update the state of i to Plain(next_state).

where deps is a pair of the set of all read_sources from i.reg_reads, and a flag that is true iff i is a load
instruction instance that has already been entirely satisfied.

Pseudocode internal step

An instruction instance i in state Plain(Internal(next_state)) can always do that pseudocode-internal step.
Action: update the state of i to Plain(next_state).

Finish instruction

A non-finished instruction instance i in state Plain(Done) can be finished if:

 1. if i is a load instruction:
      a. all program-order-previous load-acquire instructions are finished;
      b. all program-order-previous fence instructions with .sr set are finished;
      c. for every program-order-previous fence.tso instruction, f, that is not finished, all load instructions

          that are program-order-before f are finished; and
     d. it is guaranteed that the values read by the memory load operations of i will not cause coherence
        violations, i.e., for any program-order-previous instruction instance i', let cfp be the combined
        footprint of propagated memory store operations from store instructions program-order-between i
        and i', and fixed memory store operations that were forwarded to i from store instructions program-
        order-between i and i' including i', and let /cfp be the complement of cfp in the memory footprint of
        i. If /cfp is not empty:
           i. i' has a fully determined memory footprint;
           ii. i' has no unpropagated memory store operations that overlap with /cfp; and
          iii. if i' is a load with a memory footprint that overlaps with /cfp, then all the memory load
               operations of i' that overlap with /cfp are satisfied and i' is non-restartable (see the Propagate
               store operation transition for how to determined if an instruction is non-restartable).

             Here, a memory store operation is called fixed if the store instruction has fully determined data.

 2. i has a fully determined data; and
 3. if i is not a fence, all program-order-previous conditional branch and indirect jump instructions are
    finished.

Action:

 1. if i is a conditional branch or indirect jump instruction, discard any untaken paths of execution, i.e.,
    remove all instruction instances that are not reachable by the branch/jump taken in instruction_tree;
    and
 2. record the instruction as finished, i.e., set finished to true.

B.2.3.6. Limitations

 ⚫ The model covers user-level RV64IA. In particular, it does not support the misaligned atomicity
   granule PMA or the total store ordering extension Ztso. It should be trivial to adapt the model to
   RV32IA and to the G, Q and C extensions, but we have never tried it. This will involve, mostly, writing
   Sail code for the instructions, with minimal, if any, changes to the concurrency model.
 ⚫ The model covers only normal memory accesses (it does not handle I/O accesses).
 ⚫ The model does not cover TLB-related effects.
 ⚫ The model assumes the instruction memory is fixed. In particular, the Fetch instruction transition does
   not generate memory load operations, and the shared memory is not involved in the transition.
   Instead, the model depends on an external oracle that provides an opcode when given a memory
   location.
 ⚫ The model does not cover exceptions, traps and interrupts.

