
Appendix C: ISA Extension Naming Conventions
This chapter describes the RISC-V ISA extension naming scheme that is used to concisely describe the set
of instructions present in a hardware implementation, or the set of instructions used by an application
binary interface (ABI).

               The RISC-V ISA is designed to support a wide variety of implementations with various
              experimental instruction-set extensions. We have found that an organized naming scheme
               simplifies software tools and documentation.

Case Sensitivity
The ISA names are case insensitive.

Base Integer ISA
RISC-V ISA names begin with either RV32I, RV32E, RV64I, or RV64E, indicating the base integer ISA.

Instruction-Set Extension Names
Standard ISA extensions are given a name consisting of a single letter. For example, the first four standard
extensions to the integer bases are: M for integer multiplication and division, A for atomic memory
instructions, F for single-precision floating-point instructions, and D for double-precision floating-point
instructions. Any RISC-V instruction-set variant can be succinctly described by concatenating the base
integer prefix with the names of the included extensions, e.g., RV64IMAFD.

We have also defined an abbreviation G to represent the IMAFDZicsr_Zifencei base and extensions, as this
is intended to represent our standard general-purpose ISA.

Standard extensions to the RISC-V ISA are given other reserved letters: Q for quad-precision floating-point,
C for the 16-bit compressed instruction format, and such.

Some ISA extensions depend on the presence of other extensions. For instance, D depends on F and F
depends on Zicsr. These dependencies may be implicit in the ISA name. For example, RV32IF is
equivalent to RV32IFZicsr, and RV32ID is equivalent to RV32IFD and RV32IFDZicsr.

Underscores
Underscores _ may be used to separate ISA extensions to improve readability and to provide
disambiguation.

Additional Standard Unprivileged Extension Names
Standard unprivileged extensions can also be named by using a single Z followed by an alphanumeric
name. The name must end with an alphabetical character. The second letter from the end cannot be
numeric if the last letter is p. For example, Zifencei names the instruction-fetch fence extension.

The first letter following the Z conventionally indicates the most closely related alphabetical extension
category, IMAFDQLCBKJTVPH. For the Zfa extension for additional floating-point instructions, for
example, the letter f indicates the extension is related to the F extension.

                 The Zhinx extension is an exception to this rule, as the extension is not related to the H
                extension but the Zfh extension.

If multiple Z extensions are named, they should be ordered first by category, then alphabetically within a
category — for example, Zicsr_Zifencei_Ztso.

All multi-letter extensions, including those with the Z prefix, must be separated from other multi-letter
extensions by an underscore: for example, RV32IMACZicsr_Zifencei.

User-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names
Standard extensions that extend the user-level architecture are prefixed with the letters Su.

Standard user-level extensions should be listed after standard unprivileged extensions, and like other
multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple
user-level extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.

Supervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names
Standard extensions that extend the supervisor-level virtual-memory architecture are prefixed with the
letters Sv, followed by an alphanumeric name. Other standard extensions that extend the supervisor-level
architecture are prefixed with the letters Ss, followed by an alphanumeric name. The name must end with
an alphabetical character. The second letter from the end cannot be numeric if the last letter is p. These
extensions are further defined in Volume II.

The extensions Sv32, Sv39, Sv48, and Sv59 were defined before the rule against extension names ending in
numbers was established.

Standard supervisor-level extensions should be listed after standard unprivileged and user-level
extensions, and like other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by
an underscore. If multiple supervisor-level extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.

Hypervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names
Standard extensions that extend the hypervisor-level architecture are prefixed with the letters Sh.

Standard hypervisor-level extensions should be listed after standard unprivileged, user-level and
supervisor-level extensions, and like other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-
letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple hypervisor-level extensions are listed, they should be
ordered alphabetically.

                 Many augmentations to the hypervisor-level architecture are more naturally defined as
                supervisor-level extensions, following the scheme described in the previous section. The Sh
                 prefix is used by the few hypervisor-level extensions that have no supervisor-visible effects.

Machine-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names
Standard extensions that extend the machine-level architecture are prefixed with the letters Sm.

Standard machine-level extensions should be listed after standard lesser-privileged extensions, and like
other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If
multiple machine-level extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.

Non-Standard Extension Names
Non-standard extensions are named by using a single X followed by the alphanumeric name. The name
must end with an alphabetic character. The second letter from the end cannot be numeric if the last letter
is p. For example, Xhwacha names the Hwacha vector-fetch ISA extension (Lee et al., 2014).

Non-standard extensions must be listed after all standard extensions, and, like other multi-letter
extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple non-
standard extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.

For example, an ISA with             non-standard      extensions    Argle    and     Bargle    may     be    named
RV64IZifencei_Xargle_Xbargle.

Version Numbers
Recognizing that instruction sets may expand or alter over time, we encode extension version numbers
following the extension name. Version numbers are divided into major and minor version numbers,
separated by a p. If the minor version is 0, then p0 can be omitted from the version string. To avoid
ambiguity, no extension name may end with a number or a p preceded by a number.

Because the P extension for Packed SIMD can be confused for the decimal point in a version number, it
must be preceded by an underscore if it follows another extension with a version number. For example,
rv32i2p2 means version 2.2 of RV32I, whereas rv32i2_p2 means version 2.0 of RV32I with version 2.0 of
the P extension.

Changes in major version numbers imply a loss of backwards compatibility, whereas changes in only the
minor version number must be backwards-compatible. For example, the original 64-bit standard ISA
defined in release 1.0 of this manual can be written in full as RV64I1p0M1p0A1p0F1p0D1p0, more
concisely as RV64I1M1A1F1D1.

We define the default version of ratified standard extensions as follows:

 ⚫ Version 2 if the extension is one of the following extensions: I, E, M, A, F, D, Q, C, Zicntr, Zicsr, Zifencei,
   Zihintpause, Zihpm.

 ⚫ Version 1 otherwise.

For instance, RV32IV is equivalent to RV32I2V1.

Canonical Order
In canonical ISA name strings, components appear in the following order:

 1. Base ISA
 2. One-letter extensions, MAFDQCBVPH, in this order
 3. Z-prefixed extensions
 4. Su-prefixed extensions
 5. Ss-prefixed extensions
 6. Sv-prefixed extensions
 7. Sh-prefixed extensions
 8. Sm-prefixed extensions

9. X-prefixed extensions

For instance, RV32IMACV is canonical, whereas RV32IMAVC is not.

Summary
Table 89 summarizes the standardized extension names.

                                        Table 89. Standard ISA extension names.
                Subset                                                Name            Implies
                                                          Base ISA
                Integer                                                   I

                Reduced Integer                                           E

                                             Standard Unprivileged Extensions
                Integer Multiplication and Division                       M           Zmmul

                Atomics                                                   A

                Single-Precision Floating-Point                           F           Zicsr

                Double-Precision Floating-Point                           D             F

                General                                                   G     IMAFDZicsr_Zifencei
                Quad-Precision Floating-Point                             Q             D

                16-bit Compressed Instructions                            C

                Bit Manipulation                                          B

                Vector                                                    V             D

                Packed SIMD                                               P

                                     Additional Standard Unprivileged Extensions
                Unprivileged extension “abc”                           Zabc

                                              Standard User-Level Extensions
                User-level extension “def”                            Sudef

                                         Standard Supervisor-Level Extensions
                Hypervisor                                                H

                Supervisor-level extension “ghi”                      Ssghi

                Supervisor-level virtual-memory extension “jkl”       Svjkl

                                         Standard Hypervisor-Level Extensions
                Hypervisor-level extension “mno”                      Shmno

                                          Standard Machine-Level Extensions
                Machine-level extension “pqr”                         Smpqr

                                                Non-Standard Extensions
                Non-standard extension “stu”                           Xstu

