
Chapter 6. Sm Machine Extensions
                 This chapter is currently being restructured. Its contents are normative, but the presentation
                might appear disjoint.

6.1. Smstateen and Ssstateen Extensions
The implementation of optional RISC-V extensions has the potential to open covert channels between
separate user threads, or between separate guest OSes running under a hypervisor. The problem occurs
when an extension adds processor state — usually explicit registers, but possibly other forms of state — that
the main OS or hypervisor is unaware of (and hence won’t context-switch) but that can be
modified/written by one user thread or guest OS and perceived/examined/read by another.

For example, the Advanced Interrupt Architecture (AIA) for RISC-V adds to a hart as many as ten
supervisor-level CSRs (siselect, sireg, stopi, sseteipnum, sclreipnum, sseteienum, sclreienum,
sclaimei, sieh, and siph) and provides also the option for hardware to be backward-compatible with older,
pre-AIA software. Because an older hypervisor that is oblivious to the AIA will not know to swap any of the
AIA’s new CSRs on context switches, the registers may then be used as a covert channel between multiple
guest OSes that run atop this hypervisor. Although traditional practices might consider such a
communication channel harmless, the intense focus on security today argues that a means be offered to
plug such channels.

The f registers of the RISC-V floating-point extensions and the v registers of the vector extension would
similarly be potential covert channels between user threads, except for the existence of the FS and VS fields
in the sstatus register. Even if an OS is unaware of, say, the vector extension and its v registers, access to
those registers is blocked when the VS field is initialized to zero, either at machine level or by the OS itself
initializing sstatus.

Obviously, one way to prevent the use of new user-level CSRs as covert channels would be to add to
mstatus or sstatus an XS field for each relevant extension, paralleling the V extension’s VS field. However,
this is not considered a general solution to the problem due to the number of potential future extensions
that may add small amounts of state. Even with a 64-bit sstatus (necessitating adding sstatush for RV32),
it is not certain there are enough remaining bits in sstatus to accommodate all future user-level
extensions. In any event, there is no need to strain sstatus (and add sstatush) for this purpose. The
“enable” flags that are needed to plug covert channels are not generally expected to require swapping on
context switches of user threads, making them a less-than-compelling candidate for inclusion in sstatus.
Hence, a new place is provided for them instead.

6.1.1. State Enable Extensions

The Smstateen and Ssstateen extensions collectively specify machine-mode and supervisor-mode features.
The Smstateen extension specification comprises the mstateen*, sstateen*, and hstateen* CSRs and their
functionality. The Ssstateen extension specification comprises only the sstateen* and hstateen* CSRs and
their functionality.

For RV64 harts, this extension adds four new 64-bit CSRs at machine level: mstateen0 (Machine State
Enable 0), mstateen1, mstateen2, and mstateen3.

If supervisor mode is implemented, another four CSRs are defined at supervisor level: sstateen0,
sstateen1, sstateen2, and sstateen3.

And if the hypervisor extension is implemented, another set of CSRs is added: hstateen0, hstateen1,
hstateen2, and hstateen3.

For RV32, there are CSR addresses for accessing the upper 32 bits of corresponding machine-level and
hypervisor CSRs: mstateen0h, mstateen1h, mstateen2h, mstateen3h, hstateen0h, hstateen1h, hstateen2h,
and hstateen3h.

For the supervisor-level sstateen registers, high-half CSRs are not added at this time because it is expected
the upper 32 bits of these registers will always be zeros, as explained later below.

Each bit of a stateen CSR controls less-privileged access to an extension’s state, for an extension that was
not deemed “worthy” of a full XS field in sstatus like the FS and VS fields for the F and V extensions. The
number of registers provided at each level is four because it is believed that 4 * 64 = 256 bits for machine
and hypervisor levels, and 4 * 32 = 128 bits for supervisor level, will be adequate for many years to come,
perhaps for as long as the RISC-V ISA is in use. The exact number four is an attempted compromise
between providing too few bits on the one hand and going overboard with CSRs that will never be used on
the other. A possible future doubling of the number of stateen CSRs is covered later.

The stateen registers at each level control access to state at all less-privileged levels, but not at its own
level. This is analogous to how the existing counteren CSRs control access to performance counter
registers. Just as with the counteren CSRs, when a stateen CSR prevents access to state by less-privileged
levels, an attempt in one of those privilege modes to execute an instruction that would read or write the
protected state raises an illegal-instruction exception, or, if executing in VS or VU mode and the
circumstances for a virtual-instruction exception apply, raises a virtual-instruction exception instead of an
illegal-instruction exception.

When this extension is not implemented, all state added by an extension is accessible as defined by that
extension.

When a stateen CSR prevents access to state for a privilege mode, attempting to execute in that privilege
mode an instruction that implicitly updates the state without reading it may or may not raise an illegal-
instruction or virtual-instruction exception. Such cases must be disambiguated by being explicitly
specified one way or the other.

In some cases, the bits of the stateen CSRs will have a dual purpose as enables for the ISA extensions that
introduce the controlled state.

Each bit of a supervisor-level sstateen CSR controls user-level access (from U-mode or VU-mode) to an
extension’s state. The intention is to allocate the bits of sstateen CSRs starting at the least-significant end,
bit 0, through to bit 31, and then on to the next-higher-numbered sstateen CSR.

For every bit with a defined purpose in an sstateen CSR, the same bit is defined in the matching mstateen
CSR to control access below machine level to the same state. The upper 32 bits of an mstateen CSR (or for
RV32, the corresponding high-half CSR) control access to state that is inherently inaccessible to user level,
so no corresponding enable bits in the supervisor-level sstateen CSR are applicable. The intention is to
allocate bits for this purpose starting at the most-significant end, bit 63, through to bit 32, and then on to
the next-higher mstateen CSR. If the rate that bits are being allocated from the least-significant end for
sstateen CSRs is sufficiently low, allocation from the most-significant end of mstateen CSRs may be
allowed to encroach on the lower 32 bits before jumping to the next-higher mstateen CSR. In that case, the
bit positions of “encroaching” bits will remain forever read-only zeros in the matching sstateen CSRs.

With the hypervisor extension, the hstateen CSRs have identical encodings to the mstateen CSRs, except
controlling accesses for a virtual machine (from VS and VU modes).

Each standard-defined bit of a stateen CSR is WARL and may be read-only zero or one, subject to the
following conditions.

Bits in any stateen CSR that are defined to control state that a hart doesn’t implement are read-only zeros

for that hart. Likewise, all reserved bits not yet given a defined meaning are also read-only zeros. For every
bit in an mstateen CSR that is zero (whether read-only zero or set to zero), the same bit appears as read-
only zero in the matching hstateen and sstateen CSRs. For every bit in an hstateen CSR that is zero
(whether read-only zero or set to zero), the same bit appears as read-only zero in sstateen when accessed
in VS-mode.

A bit in a supervisor-level sstateen CSR cannot be read-only one unless the same bit is read-only one in
the matching mstateen CSR and, if it exists, in the matching hstateen CSR. A bit in an hstateen CSR
cannot be read-only one unless the same bit is read-only one in the matching mstateen CSR.

On reset, all writable mstateen bits are initialized by the hardware to zeros. If machine-level software
changes these values, it is responsible for initializing the corresponding writable bits of the hstateen and
sstateen CSRs to zeros too. Software at each privilege level should set its respective stateen CSRs to
indicate the state it is prepared to allow less-privileged software to access. For OSes and hypervisors, this
usually means the state that the OS or hypervisor is prepared to swap on a context switch, or to manage in
some other way.

For each mstateen CSR, bit 63 is defined to control access to the matching sstateen and hstateen CSRs.
That is, bit 63 of mstateen0 controls access to sstateen0 and hstateen0; bit 63 of mstateen1 controls
access to sstateen1 and hstateen1; etc. Likewise, bit 63 of each hstateen correspondingly controls access
to the matching sstateen CSR.

A hypervisor may need this control over accesses to the sstateen CSRs if it ever must emulate for a virtual
machine an extension that is supposed to be affected by a bit in an sstateen CSR. Even if such emulation
is uncommon, it should not be excluded.

Machine-level software needs identical control to be able to emulate the hypervisor extension. That is,
machine level needs control over accesses to the supervisor-level sstateen CSRs in order to emulate the
hstateen CSRs, which have such control.

Bit 63 of each mstateen CSR may be read-only zero only if the hypervisor extension is not implemented
and the matching supervisor-level sstateen CSR is all read-only zeros. In that case, machine-level software
should emulate attempts to access the affected sstateen CSR from S-mode, ignoring writes and returning
zero for reads. Bit 63 of each hstateen CSR is always writable (not read-only).

6.1.2. State Enable 0 Registers

   63     62      61      60      59     58      57      56          55   54    53                                 48
  SE0   ENVCFG   WPRI   CSRIND    AIA   IMSIC CONTEXT P1P13     SRMCFG    CTR                  WPRI

   47                                                                                                              32
                                                              WPRI

   31                                                                                                              16
                                                              WPRI

   15                                                                                      3           2     1     0
                                                WPRI                                                  JVT   FCSR   C

                                 Figure 118. Machine State Enable 0 Register (mstateen0)

   63     62      61     60         59     58     57     56          55     54      53                                      48
  SE0   ENVCFG   WPRI   CSRIND     AIA   IMSIC CONTEXT        WPRI         CTR                          WPRI

   47                                                                                                                       32
                                                              WPRI

   31                                                                                                                       16
                                                              WPRI

   15                                                                                               3           2     1     0
                                                 WPRI                                                          JVT   FCSR   C

                                 Figure 119. Hypervisor State Enable 0 Register (hstateen0)

   31                                                                                                                       16
                                                              WPRI

   15                                                                                               3           2     1     0
                                                 WPRI                                                          JVT   FCSR   C

                                 Figure 120. Supervisor State Enable 0 Register (sstateen0)

The C bit controls access to any and all custom state. The C bit of these registers is not custom state itself; it
is a standard field of a standard CSR, either mstateen0, hstateen0, or sstateen0.

                 The requirements that non-standard extensions must meet to be conforming are not relaxed
                 due solely to changes in the value of this bit. In particular, if software sets this bit but does not
                execute any custom instructions or access any custom state, the software must continue to
                 execute as specified by all relevant RISC-V standards, or the hardware is not standard-
                 conforming.

The FCSR bit controls access to fcsr for the case when floating-point instructions operate on x registers
instead of f registers as specified by the Zfinx and related extensions (Zdinx, etc.). Whenever misa.F = 1,
FCSR bit of mstateen0 is read-only zero (and hence read-only zero in hstateen0 and sstateen0 too). For
convenience, when the stateen CSRs are implemented and misa.F = 0, then if the FCSR bit of a
controlling stateen0 CSR is zero, all floating-point instructions cause an illegal-instruction exception (or
virtual-instruction exception, if relevant), as though they all access fcsr, regardless of whether they really
do.

The JVT bit controls access to the jvt CSR provided by the Zcmt extension.

See Section 6.8 for the definition of the CTR bits in mstateen0 and hstateen0.

The SE0 bit in mstateen0 controls access to the hstateen0, hstateen0h, and the sstateen0 CSRs. The SE0
bit in hstateen0 controls access to the sstateen0 CSR.

The ENVCFG bit in mstateen0 controls access to the henvcfg, henvcfgh, and the senvcfg CSRs. The
ENVCFG bit in hstateen0 controls access to the senvcfg CSRs.

The CSRIND bit in mstateen0 controls access to the siselect, sireg*, vsiselect, and the vsireg* CSRs
provided by the Sscsrind extensions. The CSRIND bit in hstateen0 controls access to the siselect and the
sireg*, (really vsiselect and vsireg*) CSRs provided by the Sscsrind extensions.

The IMSIC bit in mstateen0 controls access to the IMSIC state, including CSRs stopei and vstopei,
provided by the Ssaia extension. The IMSIC bit in hstateen0 controls access to the guest IMSIC state,
including CSRs stopei (really vstopei), provided by the Ssaia extension.

                 Setting the IMSIC bit in hstateen0 to zero prevents a virtual machine from accessing the
                hart’s IMSIC the same as setting hstatus.VGEIN = 0.

The AIA bit in mstateen0 controls access to all state introduced by the Ssaia extension and not controlled

by either the CSRIND or the IMSIC bits. The AIA bit in hstateen0 controls access to all state introduced by
the Ssaia extension and not controlled by either the CSRIND or the IMSIC bits of hstateen0.

The CONTEXT bit in mstateen0 controls access to the scontext and hcontext CSRs provided by the Sdtrig
extension. The CONTEXT bit in hstateen0 controls access to the scontext CSR provided by the Sdtrig
extension.

The P1P13 bit in mstateen0 controls access to the hedelegh introduced by Privileged Specification Version
1.13.

The SRMCFG bit in mstateen0 controls access to the srmcfg CSR introduced by the Ssqosid Section 8.1
extension.

6.1.3. Usage

After the writable bits of the machine-level mstateen CSRs are initialized to zeros on reset, machine-level
software can set bits in these registers to enable less-privileged access to the controlled state. This may be
either because machine-level software knows how to swap the state or, more likely, because machine-level
software isn’t swapping supervisor-level environments. (Recall that the main reason the mstateen CSRs
must exist is so machine level can emulate the hypervisor extension. When machine level isn’t emulating
the hypervisor extension, it is likely there will be no need to keep any implemented mstateen bits zero.)

If machine level sets any writable mstateen bits to nonzero, it must initialize the matching hstateen CSRs,
if they exist, by writing zeros to them. And if any mstateen bits that are set to one have matching bits in the
sstateen CSRs, machine-level software must also initialize those sstateen CSRs by writing zeros to them.
Ordinarily, machine-level software will want to set bit 63 of all mstateen CSRs, necessitating that it write
zero to all hstateen CSRs.

Software should ensure that all writable bits of sstateen CSRs are initialized to zeros when an OS at
supervisor level is first entered. The OS can then set bits in these registers to enable user-level access to the
controlled state, presumably because it knows how to context-swap the state.

For the sstateen CSRs whose access by a guest OS is permitted by bit 63 of the corresponding hstateen
CSRs, a hypervisor must include the sstateen CSRs in the context it swaps for a guest OS. When it starts a
new guest OS, it must ensure the writable bits of those sstateen CSRs are initialized to zeros, and it must
emulate accesses to any other sstateen CSRs.

If software at any privilege level does not support multiple contexts for less-privilege levels, then it may
choose to maximize less-privileged access to all state by writing a value of all ones to the stateen CSRs at
its level (the mstateen CSRs for machine level, the sstateen CSRs for an OS, and the hstateen CSRs for a
hypervisor), without knowing all the state to which it is granting access. This is justified because there is no
risk of a covert channel between execution contexts at the less-privileged level when only one context exists
at that level. This situation is expected to be common for machine level, and it might also arise, for
example, for a type-1 hypervisor that hosts only a single guest virtual machine.

                 If a need is anticipated, the set of stateen CSRs could in the future be doubled by adding
                 these:

                   ⚫ 0x38C mstateen4, 0x39C mstateen4h

                  ⚫ 0x38D mstateen5, 0x39D mstateen5h
                   ⚫ 0x38E mstateen6, 0x39E mstateen6h
                   ⚫ 0x38F mstateen7, 0x39F mstateen7h
                   ⚫ 0x18C sstateen4

                 ⚫ 0x18D sstateen5
                 ⚫ 0x18E sstateen6
                 ⚫ 0x18F sstateen7
                 ⚫ 0x68C hstateen4, 0x69C hstateen4h
                 ⚫ 0x68D hstateen5, 0x69D hstateen5h
                 ⚫ 0x68E hstateen6, 0x69E hstateen6h
                 ⚫ 0x68F hstateen7, 0x69F hstateen7h

               These additional CSRs are not a definite part of the original proposal because it is unclear
               whether they will ever be needed, and it is believed the rate of consumption of bits in the first
               group, registers numbered 0-3, will be slow enough that any looming shortage will be
               perceptible many years in advance. At the moment, it is not known even how many years it may
               take to exhaust just mstateen0, sstateen0, and hstateen0.

6.2. Smcsrind and Sscsrind Extensions for Indirect CSR Access

6.2.1. Introduction

Smcsrind/Sscsrind is an ISA extension that extends the indirect CSR access mechanism originally defined
as part of the Smaia/Ssaia extensions, in order to make it available for use by other extensions without
creating an unnecessary dependence on Smaia/Ssaia.

This extension confers two benefits:

 1. It provides a means to access an array of registers via CSRs without requiring allocation of large chunks
    of the limited CSR address space.
 2. It enables software to access each of an array of registers by index, without requiring a switch statement
    with a case for each register.

               CSRs are accessed indirectly via this extension using select values, in contrast to being
               accessed directly using standard CSR numbers. A CSR accessible via one method may or may
               not be accessible via the other method. Select values are a separate address space from CSR
               numbers, and from tselect values in the Sdtrig extension. If a CSR is both directly and
               indirectly accessible, the CSR’s select value is unrelated to its CSR number.
   
               Further, Machine-level and Supervisor-level select values are separate address spaces from
               each other; however, Machine-level and Supervisor-level CSRs with the same select value may
               be defined by an extension as partial or full aliases with respect to each other. This typically
               would be done for CSRs that can be delegated from Machine-level to Supervisor-level.

The machine-level extension Smcsrind encompasses all added CSRs and all behavior modifications for a
hart, over all privilege levels. For a supervisor-level environment, extension Sscsrind is essentially the
same as Smcsrind except excluding the machine-level CSRs and behavior not directly visible to supervisor
level.

6.2.2. Machine-level CSRs

Number          Privilege     Width         Name              Description
0x350           MRW           XLEN          miselect          Machine indirect register select

Number             Privilege      Width          Name            Description
0x351              MRW            XLEN           mireg           Machine indirect register alias
0x352              MRW            XLEN           mireg2          Machine indirect register alias 2
0x353              MRW            XLEN           mireg3          Machine indirect register alias 3
0x355              MRW            XLEN           mireg4          Machine indirect register alias 4
0x356              MRW            XLEN           mireg5          Machine indirect register alias 5
0x357              MRW            XLEN           mireg6          Machine indirect register alias 6

                The mireg* CSR numbers are not consecutive because miph is CSR number 0x354.

The CSRs listed in the table above provide a window for accessing register state indirectly. The value of
miselect determines which register is accessed upon read or write of each of the machine indirect alias
CSRs (mireg*). miselect value ranges are allocated to dependent extensions, which specify the register
state accessible via each miregi register, for each miselect value. miselect is a WARL register.

The miselect register implements at least enough bits to support all implemented miselect values
(corresponding to the implemented extensions that utilize miselect/mireg* to indirectly access register
state). The miselect register may be read-only zero if there are no extensions implemented that utilize it.

Values of miselect with the most-significant bit set (bit XLEN - 1 = 1) are designated only for custom use,
presumably for accessing custom registers through the alias CSRs. Values of miselect with the most-
significant bit clear are designated only for standard use and are reserved until allocated to a standard
architecture extension. If XLEN is changed, the most-significant bit of miselect moves to the new position,
retaining its value from before.

                An implementation is not required to support any custom values for miselect.

The behavior upon accessing mireg* from M-mode, while miselect holds a value that is not implemented,
is UNSPECIFIED.

                 It is expected that implementations will typically raise an illegal-instruction exception for such
                 accesses, so that, for example, they can be identified as software bugs. Platform specs, profile
                specs, and/or the Privileged ISA spec may place more restrictions on behavior for such
                 accesses.

Attempts to access mireg* while miselect holds a number in an allocated and implemented range results
in a specific behavior that, for each combination of miselect and miregi, is defined by the extension to
which the miselect value is allocated.

                 Ordinarily, each miregi will access register state, access read-only 0 state, or raise an illegal-
                 instruction exception.

                For RV32, if an extension defines an indirectly accessed register as 64 bits wide, it is
                 recommended that the lower 32 bits of the register are accessed through one of mireg, mireg2,
                 or mireg3, while the upper 32 bits are accessed through mireg4, mireg5, or mireg6,
                 respectively.

                 Six *ireg* registers are defined in order to ensure that the needs of extensions in development
                 are covered, with some room for growth. For example, for an siselect value associated with
                 counter X, sireg/sireg2 could be used to access mhpmcounterX/mhpmeventX, while sireg4
                /sireg5 could access mhpmcounterXh/mhpmeventXh. Six *ireg* registers allows for accessing
                 up to 3 CSR arrays per index (*iselect) with RV32-only CSRs, or up to 6 CSR arrays per
                 index value without RV32-only CSRs.

6.2.3. Supervisor-level CSRs

Number          Privilege     Width         Name              Description
0x150           SRW           XLEN          siselect          Supervisor indirect register select
0x151           SRW           XLEN          sireg             Supervisor indirect register alias
0x152           SRW           XLEN          sireg2            Supervisor indirect register alias 2
0x153           SRW           XLEN          sireg3            Supervisor indirect register alias 3
0x155           SRW           XLEN          sireg4            Supervisor indirect register alias 4
0x156           SRW           XLEN          sireg5            Supervisor indirect register alias 5
0x157           SRW           XLEN          sireg6            Supervisor indirect register alias 6

The CSRs in the table above are required if S-mode is implemented.

The siselect register will support the value range 0..0xFFF at a minimum. A future extension may define
a value range outside of this minimum range. Only if such an extension is implemented will siselect be
required to support larger values.

               Requiring a range of 0–0xFFF for siselect, even though most or all of the space may be
              reserved or inaccessible, permits M-mode to emulate indirectly accessed registers in this
               implemented range, including registers that may be standardized in the future.

Values of siselect with the most-significant bit set (bit XLEN - 1 = 1) are designated only for custom use,
presumably for accessing custom registers through the alias CSRs. Values of siselect with the most-
significant bit clear are designated only for standard use and are reserved until allocated to a standard
architecture extension. If XLEN is changed, the most-significant bit of siselect moves to the new position,
retaining its value from before.

The behavior upon accessing sireg* from M-mode or S-mode, while siselect holds a value that is not
implemented at supervisor level, is UNSPECIFIED.

               It is recommended that implementations raise an illegal-instruction exception for such
              accesses, to facilitate possible emulation (by M-mode) of these accesses.

               An extension is considered not to be implemented at supervisor level if machine level has
              disabled the extension for S-mode, such as by the settings of certain fields in CSR menvcfg, for
               example.

Otherwise, attempts to access sireg* from M-mode or S-mode while siselect holds a number in a
standard-defined and implemented range result in specific behavior that, for each combination of
siselect and siregi, is defined by the extension to which the siselect value is allocated.

               Ordinarily, each siregi will access register state, access read-only 0 state, or, unless executing
              in a virtual machine (covered in the next section), raise an illegal-instruction exception.

Note that the widths of siselect and sireg* are always the current XLEN rather than SXLEN. Hence, for
example, if MXLEN = 64 and SXLEN = 32, then these registers are 64 bits when the current privilege mode
is M (running RV64 code) but 32 bits when the privilege mode is S (RV32 code).

6.2.4. Virtual Supervisor-level CSRs

Number             Privilege      Width          Name            Description
0x250              HRW            XLEN           vsiselect       Virtual supervisor indirect register select
0x251              HRW            XLEN           vsireg          Virtual supervisor indirect register alias
0x252              HRW            XLEN           vsireg2         Virtual supervisor indirect register alias 2
0x253              HRW            XLEN           vsireg3         Virtual supervisor indirect register alias 3
0x255              HRW            XLEN           vsireg4         Virtual supervisor indirect register alias 4
0x256              HRW            XLEN           vsireg5         Virtual supervisor indirect register alias 5
0x257              HRW            XLEN           vsireg6         Virtual supervisor indirect register alias 6

The CSRs in the table above are required if the hypervisor extension is implemented. These VS CSRs all
match supervisor CSRs, and substitute for those supervisor CSRs when executing in a virtual machine (in
VS-mode or VU-mode).

The vsiselect register will support the value range 0..0xFFF at a minimum. A future extension may
define a value range outside of this minimum range. Only if such an extension is implemented will
vsiselect be required to support larger values.

                 Requiring a range of 0–0xFFF for vsiselect, even though most or all of the space may be
                 reserved or inaccessible, permits a hypervisor to emulate indirectly accessed registers in this
                 implemented range, including registers that may be standardized in the future.
                More generally it is recommended that vsiselect and siselect be implemented with the
                 same number of bits. This also avoids creation of a virtualization hole due to observable
                 differences between vsiselect and siselect widths.

Values of vsiselect with the most-significant bit set (bit XLEN - 1 = 1) are designated only for custom use,
presumably for accessing custom registers through the alias CSRs. Values of vsiselect with the most-
significant bit clear are designated only for standard use and are reserved until allocated to a standard
architecture extension. If XLEN is changed, the most-significant bit of vsiselect moves to the new
position, retaining its value from before.

For alias CSRs sireg* and vsireg*, the hypervisor extension’s usual rules for when to raise a virtual-
instruction exception (based on whether an instruction is HS-qualified) are not applicable. The rules given
in this section for sireg and vsireg apply instead, unless overridden by the requirements specified in the
section below, which take precedence over this section when extension Smstateen is also implemented.

A virtual-instruction exception is raised for attempts from VS-mode or VU-mode to directly access
vsiselect or vsireg*, or attempts from VU-mode to access siselect or sireg*.

The behavior upon accessing vsireg* from M-mode or HS-mode, or accessing sireg* (really vsireg*)
from VS-mode, while vsiselect holds a value that is not implemented at HS level, is UNSPECIFIED.

                 It is recommended that implementations raise an illegal-instruction exception for such
                accesses, to facilitate possible emulation (by M-mode) of these accesses.

Otherwise, while vsiselect holds a number in a standard-defined and implemented range, attempts to
access vsireg* from a sufficiently privileged mode, or to access sireg* (really vsireg*) from VS-mode,
result in specific behavior that, for each combination of vsiselect and vsiregi, is defined by the
extension to which the vsiselect value is allocated.

      6.3. Smepmp Extension for PMP Enhancements for memory access and execution prevention in Machine mode | Page 803

               Ordinarily, each vsiregi will access register state, access read-only 0 state, or raise an
               exception (either an illegal-instruction exception or, for select accesses from VS-mode, a
               virtual-instruction exception). When vsiselect holds a value that is implemented at HS level
              but not at VS level, attempts to access sireg* (really vsireg*) from VS-mode will typically
               raise a virtual-instruction exception. But there may be cases specific to an extension where
               different behavior is more appropriate.

Like siselect and sireg*, the widths of vsiselect and vsireg* are always the current XLEN rather than
VSXLEN. Hence, for example, if HSXLEN = 64 and VSXLEN = 32, then these registers are 64 bits when
accessed by a hypervisor in HS-mode (running RV64 code) but 32 bits for a guest OS in VS-mode (RV32
code).

6.2.5. Access control by the state-enable CSRs

If extension Smstateen is implemented together with Smcsrind, bit 60 of state-enable register mstateen0
controls access to siselect, sireg*, vsiselect, and vsireg*. When mstateen0[60]=0, an attempt to access
one of these CSRs from a privilege mode less privileged than M-mode results in an illegal-instruction
exception. As always, the state-enable CSRs do not affect the accessibility of any state when in M-mode,
only in less privileged modes. For more explanation, see the documentation for extension Smstateen in
Section 6.1.

Other extensions may specify that certain mstateen bits control access to registers accessed indirectly
through siselect + sireg*, and/or vsiselect + vsireg*. However, regardless of any other mstateen bits, if
mstateen0[60] = 1, a virtual-instruction exception is raised as described in the previous section for all
attempts from VS-mode or VU-mode to directly access vsiselect or vsireg*, and for all attempts from
VU-mode to access siselect or sireg*.

If the hypervisor extension is implemented, the same bit is defined also in hypervisor CSR hstateen0, but
controls access to only siselect and sireg* (really vsiselect and vsireg*), which is the state potentially
accessible to a virtual machine executing in VS or VU-mode. When hstateen0[60]=0 and mstateen0[60]=1,
all attempts from VS or VU-mode to access siselect or sireg* raise a virtual-instruction exception, not an
illegal-instruction exception, regardless of the value of vsiselect or any other mstateen bit.

Extension Ssstateen is defined as the supervisor-level view of Smstateen. Therefore, the combination of
Sscsrind and Ssstateen incorporates the bit defined above for hstateen0 but not that for mstateen0, since
machine-level CSRs are not visible to supervisor level.

               CSR address space is reserved for a possible future Sucsrind extension that extends indirect
              CSR access to user mode.

6.3. Smepmp Extension for PMP Enhancements for memory access and
execution prevention in Machine mode
Being able to access the memory of a process running at a high privileged execution mode, such as the
Supervisor or Machine mode, from a lower privileged mode such as the User mode, introduces an obvious
attack vector since it allows for an attacker to perform privilege escalation, and tamper with the code
and/or data of that process. A less obvious attack vector exists when the reverse happens, in which case an
attacker instead of tampering with code and/or data that belong to a high-privileged process, can tamper
with the memory of an unprivileged / less-privileged process and trick the high-privileged process to use or
execute it.

Two mechanisms combine to prevent this attack vector. The first one prevents the OS from accessing the
memory of an unprivileged process unless a specific code path is followed, and the second one prevents the

6.3. Smepmp Extension for PMP Enhancements for memory access and execution prevention in Machine mode | Page 804

OS from executing the memory of an unprivileged process at all times. RISC-V already includes support for
the former through the sstatus.SUM bit, and for the latter by always denying supervisor execution of
virtual memory pages marked with the U bit.

                 Terms:

                   ⚫ PMP Entry: A pair of pmpcfg[i] / pmpaddr[i] registers.
                   ⚫ PMP Rule: The contents of a pmpcfg register and its associated pmpaddr register(s), that
                     encode a valid protected physical memory region, where pmpcfg[i].A != OFF, and if
                     pmpcfg[i].A == TOR, pmpaddr[i-1] < pmpaddr[i].

                   ⚫ Ignored: Any permissions set by a matching PMP rule are ignored, and all accesses to the
                     requested address range are allowed.
                  ⚫ Enforced: Only access types configured in the PMP rule matching the requested address
                     range are allowed; failures will cause an access-fault exception.
                   ⚫ Denied: Any permissions set by a matching PMP rule are ignored, and no accesses to the
                     requested address range are allowed.; failures will cause an access-fault exception.
                   ⚫ Locked: A PMP rule/entry where the pmpcfg.L bit is set.
                   ⚫ PMP reset: A reset process where all PMP settings of the hart, including locked
                     rules/settings, are re-initialized to a set of safe defaults, before releasing the hart (back) to
                     the firmware / OS / application.

6.3.1. Threat model

The rationale that guided development of this extension is included in Section Appendix A.1.

Without the Smepmp extension, it is not possible for a PMP rule to be enforced only on non-Machine
modes and denied on Machine mode, in order to allow access to a memory region solely by less-privileged
modes. It is only possible to have a locked rule that will be enforced on all modes, or a rule that will be
enforced on non-Machine modes and be ignored by Machine mode. So for any physical memory region
which is not protected with a Locked rule, Machine mode has unlimited access, including the ability to
execute it.

Without being able to protect less-privileged modes from Machine mode, it is not possible to prevent the
mentioned attack vector. This becomes even more important for RISC-V than on other architectures, since
implementations are allowed where a hart only has Machine and User modes available, so the whole OS
will run on Machine mode instead of the non-existent Supervisor mode. In such implementations the
attack surface is greatly increased, and the same kind of attacks performed on Supervisor mode and
mitigated through the virtual-memory system, can be performed on Machine mode without any available
mitigations. Even on implementations with Supervisor mode present attacks are still possible against the
Firmware and/or the Secure Monitor running on Machine mode.

6.3.2. Smepmp Physical Memory Protection Rules

To address the threat model outlined in Section Section 6.3.1, this extension introduces the RLB, MMWP, and
MML fields in the mseccfg CSR and their associated rules. See Figure 35 for the detailed specification of
these fields and the corresponding rules.

The physical memory protection rules when mseccfg.MML is set to 1 are summarized in the truth table
below.

         6.3. Smepmp Extension for PMP Enhancements for memory access and execution prevention in Machine mode | Page 805

             Bits on pmpcfg register                                              Result
     L            R           W           X                    M Mode                              S/U Mode
     0            0           0           0                       Inaccessible region (Access Exception)
     0            0           0           1               Access Exception                    Execute-only region
     0            0           1           0        Shared data region: Read/write on M mode, read-only on S/U mode
     0            0           1           1             Shared data region: Read/write for both M and S/U mode
     0            1           0           0               Access Exception                     Read-only region
     0            1           0           1               Access Exception                    Read/Execute region
     0            1           1           0               Access Exception                     Read/Write region
     0            1           1           1               Access Exception                 Read/Write/Execute region
     1            0           0           0                  Locked inaccessible region* (Access Exception)
     1            0           0           1         Locked Execute-only region*                Access Exception
     1            0           1           0       Locked Shared code region: Execute only on both M and S/U mode.*
     1            0           1           1       Locked Shared code region: Execute only on S/U mode, read/execute
                                                                             on M mode.*
     1            1           0           0           Locked Read-only region*                 Access Exception
     1            1           0           1         Locked Read/Execute region*                Access Exception
     1            1           1           0          Locked Read/Write region*                 Access Exception
     1            1           1           1         Locked Shared data region: Read only on both M and S/U mode.*

: *Locked rules cannot be removed or modified until a PMP reset, unless mseccfg.RLB is set.

A visual representation of these rules is as follows:

6.4. Smcntrpmf Cycle and Instret Privilege Mode Filtering | Page 806

6.3.3. Smepmp software discovery

Since all fields defined in mseccfg as part of this extension are locked when set (MMWP/MML) or locked when
cleared (RLB), software can’t poll them for determining the presence of Smepmp. It is expected that
BootROM will set mseccfg.MMWP and/or mseccfg.MML during early boot, before jumping to the firmware, so
that the firmware will be able to determine the presence of Smepmp by reading mseccfg and checking the
state of mseccfg.MMWP and mseccfg.MML.

6.4. Smcntrpmf Cycle and Instret Privilege Mode Filtering

6.4.1. Introduction

The cycle and instret counters serve to support user mode self-profiling usages, wherein a user can read the
counter(s) twice and compute the delta(s) to evaluate user software performance and behavior. By default,
these counters are not filtered by privilege mode, and thus they continue to increment while traps (e.g.,
page faults or interrupts) to more privileged code are handled. This causes two problems:

 ⚫ It introduces unpredictable noise to the counter values observed by the user.
 ⚫ It leaks information about privileged software execution to user mode.

Smcntrpmf remedies these issues by introducing privilege mode filtering for the cycle and instret counters.

                                                        6.4. Smcntrpmf Cycle and Instret Privilege Mode Filtering | Page 807

6.4.2. CSRs

6.4.2.1. Machine Counter Configuration (mcyclecfg, minstretcfg) Registers

mcyclecfg and minstretcfg are 64-bit registers that configure privilege mode filtering for the cycle and
instret counters, respectively.

   63         62          61         60         59         58                                57:0
    0       MINH        SINH       UINH       VSINH      VUINH                              WPRI

Field              Description
MINH               If set, then counting of events in M-mode is inhibited
SINH               If set, then counting of events in S/HS-mode is inhibited
UINH               If set, then counting of events in U-mode is inhibited
VSINH              If set, then counting of events in VS-mode is inhibited
VUINH              If set, then counting of events in VU-mode is inhibited

When all xINH bits are zero, event counting is enabled in all modes.

For each bit in 61:58, if the associated privilege mode is not implemented, the bit is read-only zero.

For RV32, bits 63:32 of mcyclecfg can be accessed via the mcyclecfgh CSR, and bits 63:32 of minstretcfg
can be accessed via the minstretcfgh CSR.

The content of these registers may be accessible from Supervisor level if the Smcdeleg/Ssccfg extensions
are implemented.

                The more natural CSR number for mcyclecfg would be 0x320, but that was allocated to
                mcountinhibit.

               This register format matches that specified for programmable counters by Sscofpmf. The bit
                position for the OF bit (bit 63) is read-only 0, since these counters do not generate local-
                counter-overflow interrupts on overflow.

6.4.3. Counter Behavior

The fundamental behavior of cycle and instret is modified in that counting does not occur while executing
in an inhibited privilege mode. Further, the following defines how transitions between a non-inhibited
privilege mode and an inhibited privilege mode are counted.

The cycle counter will simply count CPU cycles while the CPU is in a non-inhibited privilege mode. Mode
transition operations (traps and trap returns) may take multiple clock cycles, and the change of privilege
mode may be reported as occurring in any one of those cycles (possibly different for each occurrence of a
trap or trap return).

                The RISC-V ISA has no requirement that the number of cycles for a trap or trap return be the
                same for all occurrences. Implementations are free to determine the extent to which this
               number may be consistent and predictable (or not), and the same is true for the specific cycle
                in which privilege mode changes.

For the instret counter, most instructions do not affect mode transitions, so for those the behavior is clear:
instructions that retire in a non-inhibited mode increment instret, and instructions that retire in an

6.5. Smrnmi Extension for Resumable Non-Maskable Interrupts | Page 808

inhibited mode do not. There are two types of instructions that can affect a privilege mode change:
instructions that cause synchronous exceptions to a more privileged mode, and xRET instructions that
return to a less privileged mode. The former are not considered to retire, and hence do not increment
instret. The latter do retire, and should increment instret only if the originating privilege mode is not
inhibited.

                 The instret definition above is intended to ensure that the counter increments in a predictable
                 fashion. For example, consider a scenario where minstretcfg is configured such that all modes
                 other than U-mode are inhibited. A user mode load should increment only once, even if it takes
                 a page fault or other exception. With this definition, the faulting execution of the load will not
                 increment (it does not retire), the handler instructions will not increment (they execute in an
                inhibited mode), including the xRET (it arguably retires in a non-inhibited mode, but it
                 originates in an inhibited mode). Only once the load is re-executed and retires will it increment
                 instret.

                 In cases where an instruction is emulated by software running in a privilege mode that is
                 inhibited in minstretcfg, the emulation routine must emulate the instret increment.

6.5. Smrnmi Extension for Resumable Non-Maskable Interrupts
The base machine-level architecture supports only unresumable non-maskable interrupts (UNMIs), where
the NMI jumps to a handler in machine mode, overwriting the current mepc and mcause register values. If
the hart had been executing machine-mode code in a trap handler, the previous values in mepc and mcause
would not be recoverable and so execution is not generally resumable.

The Smrnmi extension adds support for resumable non-maskable interrupts (RNMIs) to RISC-V. The
extension adds four new CSRs (mnepc, mncause, mnstatus, and mnscratch) to hold the interrupted state, and
one new instruction, MNRET, to resume from the RNMI handler.

6.5.1. RNMI Interrupt Signals

The rnmi interrupt signals are inputs to the hart. These interrupts have higher priority than any other
interrupt or exception on the hart and cannot be disabled by software. Specifically, they are not disabled by
clearing the mstatus.MIE register.

6.5.2. RNMI Handler Addresses

The RNMI interrupt trap handler address is implementation-defined.

RNMI also has an associated exception trap handler address, which is implementation defined.

                 For example, some implementations might use the address specified in mtvec as the RNMI
                exception trap handler.

6.5.3. RNMI CSRs

This extension adds additional M-mode CSRs to enable a resumable non-maskable interrupt (RNMI).

   MXLEN-1                                                                                                      0
                                                        mnscratch
                                                             MXLEN

                                 Figure 121. Resumable NMI scratch register mnscratch

                                               6.5. Smrnmi Extension for Resumable Non-Maskable Interrupts | Page 809

The mnscratch CSR holds an MXLEN-bit read-write register which enables the RNMI trap handler to save
and restore the context that was interrupted.

   MXLEN-1                                                                                                       0
                                                  mnepc (WARL)
                                                     MXLEN

                               Figure 122. Resumable NMI program counter mnepc.

The mnepc CSR is an MXLEN-bit read-write register which on entry to the RNMI trap handler holds the PC
of the instruction that took the interrupt.

The low bit of mnepc (mnepc[0]) is always zero. On implementations that support only IALIGN=32, the two
low bits (mnepc[1:0]) are always zero.

If an implementation allows IALIGN to be either 16 or 32 (by changing CSR misa, for example), then,
whenever IALIGN=32, bit mnepc[1] is masked on reads so that it appears to be 0. This masking occurs also
for the implicit read by the MNRET instruction. Though masked, mnepc[1] remains writable when
IALIGN=32.

mnepc is a WARL register that must be able to hold all valid virtual addresses. It need not be capable of
holding all possible invalid addresses. Prior to writing mnepc, implementations may convert an invalid
address into some other invalid address that mnepc is capable of holding.

   MXLEN-1       MXLEN-2                                                                                         0
    Interrupt                                  Exception Code (WARL)
        1                                                  MXLEN-1

                                    Figure 123. Resumable NMI cause mncause.

The mncause CSR holds the reason for the RNMI. If the reason is an interrupt, bit MXLEN-1 is set to 1, and
the RNMI cause is encoded in the least-significant bits. If the reason is an interrupt and RNMI causes are
not supported, bit MXLEN-1 is set to 1, and zero is written to the least-significant bits. If the reason is an
exception within M-mode that results in a double trap as specified in the Smdbltrp extension, bit MXLEN-1
is set to 0 and the least-significant bits are set to the cause code corresponding to the exception that
precipitated the double trap.

   MXLEN-1              13 12      11     10        9          8         7        6        4 3    2          0
          Reserved         MNPP (WARL) Reserved   MNPELP   Reserved   MNPV (WARL) Reserved   NMIE   Reserved
            MXLEN-13            2          1        1          1          1             3         1          3

                               Figure 124. Resumable NMI status register mnstatus.

The mnstatus CSR holds a two-bit field, MNPP, which on entry to the RNMI trap handler holds the
privilege mode of the interrupted context, encoded in the same manner as mstatus.MPP. If the H extension
is also implemented, mnstatus also holds a one-bit field, MNPV, which on entry to the RNMI trap handler
holds the virtualization mode of the interrupted context, encoded in the same manner as mstatus.MPV.

If the Zicfilp extension is implemented, mnstatus also holds the MNPELP field, which on entry to the
RNMI trap handler holds the previous ELP state. When an RNMI trap is taken, MNPELP is set to ELP and
ELP is set to 0.

mnstatus also holds the NMIE bit. When NMIE=1, non-maskable interrupts are enabled. When NMIE=0,
all interrupts are disabled.

When NMIE=0, the hart behaves as though mstatus.MPRV were clear, regardless of the current setting of
mstatus.MPRV.

Upon reset, NMIE contains the value 0.

6.5. Smrnmi Extension for Resumable Non-Maskable Interrupts | Page 810

                 RNMIs are masked out of reset to give software the opportunity to initialize data structures
                and devices for subsequent RNMI handling.

Software can set NMIE to 1, but attempts to clear NMIE have no effect.

                 Normally, only reset sequences will explicitly set the NMIE bit.

                 That the NMIE bit is settable does not suffice to support the nesting of RNMIs. To support this
                feature in a direct manner would have required allowing software to clear the NMIE bit—a
                 design choice that would have contravened the concept of non-maskability.

                 Software that wishes to minimize the latency until the next RNMI is taken can follow the top-
                 half/bottom-half model, where the RNMI handler itself only enqueues a task to a task queue
                 then returns. The bulk of the interrupt servicing is performed later, with RNMIs enabled.

For the purposes of the WFI instruction, NMIE is a global interrupt enable, meaning that the setting of
NMIE does not affect the operation of the WFI instruction.

The other bits in mnstatus are reserved; software should write zeros and hardware implementations should
return zeros.

6.5.4. MNRET Instruction

MNRET is an M-mode-only instruction that uses the values in mnepc and mnstatus to return to the
program counter, privilege mode, and virtualization mode of the interrupted context. This instruction also
sets mnstatus.NMIE. If MNRET changes the privilege mode to a mode less privileged than M, it also sets
mstatus.MPRV to 0. If the Zicfilp extension is implemented, then if the new privileged mode is y, MNRET
sets ELP to the logical AND of yLPE (see Section 6.9.1.1) and mnstatus.MNPELP.

6.5.5. RNMI Operation

When an RNMI interrupt is detected, the interrupted PC is written to the mnepc CSR, the type of RNMI to
the mncause CSR, and the privilege mode of the interrupted context to the mnstatus CSR. The
mnstatus.NMIE bit is cleared, masking all interrupts.

The hart then enters machine-mode and jumps to the RNMI trap handler address.

The RNMI handler can resume original execution using the new MNRET instruction, which restores the
PC from mnepc, the privilege mode from mnstatus, and also sets mnstatus.NMIE, which re-enables
interrupts.

When the Smdbltrp extension is not implemented, if the hart encounters an exception while executing in
M-mode with the mnstatus.NMIE bit clear, the actions taken are the same as if the exception had occurred
while mnstatus.NMIE were set, except that the program counter is set to the RNMI exception trap handler
address. The behavior when the Smdbltrp extension is implemented is described in Section 3.1.6.2.

                 The Smrnmi extension does not change the behavior of the MRET and SRET instructions. In
                particular, MRET and SRET are unaffected by the mnstatus.NMIE bit, and their execution
                 does not alter the mnstatus.NMIE bit.

                                                    6.6. Smcdeleg and Ssccfg Counter Delegation Extensions | Page 811

6.6. Smcdeleg and Ssccfg Counter Delegation Extensions
In modern “Rich OS” environments, hardware performance monitoring resources are managed by the
kernel, kernel driver, and/or hypervisor. Counters may be configured with differing scopes, in some cases
counting events system-wide, while in others counting events on behalf of a single virtual machine or
application. In such environments, the latency of counter writes has a direct impact on overall profiling
overhead as a result of frequent counter writes during:

    1. Sample collection, to clear overflow indication, and reload overflowed counter(s)
    2. Context switch, between processes, threads, containers, or virtual machines

These extensions provide a means for M-mode to allow writing select counters and event selectors from
S/HS-mode. The purpose is to avert transitions to and from M-mode that add latency to these performance
critical supervisor/hypervisor code sections. These extensions also defines one new CSR, scountinhibit.

For a Machine-level environment, extension Smcdeleg (‘Sm’ for Privileged architecture and Machine-level
extension, ‘cdeleg’ for Counter Delegation) encompasses all added CSRs and all behavior modifications for
a hart, over all privilege levels. For a Supervisor-level environment, extension Ssccfg (‘Ss’ for Privileged
architecture and Supervisor-level extension, ‘ccfg’ for Counter Configuration) provides access to delegated
counters, and to new supervisor-level state.For a RISC-V hardware platform, Smcdeleg and Ssccfg must
always be implemented in tandem.

The Smcdeleg and Ssccfg extensions both depend on the Sscsrind extension.

6.6.1. Counter Delegation

The mcounteren register allows M-mode to provide the next-lower privilege mode with read access to select
counters.When the Smcdeleg/Ssccfg extensions are enabled (menvcfg.CDE=1), it further allows M-mode to
delegate select counters to S-mode.

The siselect (and vsiselect) index range 0x40-0x5F is reserved for delegated counter access. When a
counter i is delegated (mcounteren[i]=1 and menvcfg.CDE=1), the register state associated with counter i can
be read or written via sireg*, while siselect holds 0x40+i. The counter state accessible via alias CSRs is
shown in the table below.

                                      Table 134. Indirect HPM State Mappings
    siselect value        sireg                sireg4                   sireg2                sireg5

    0x40                  cycle 1
                                               cycleh   1
                                                                        cyclecfg   14
                                                                                              cyclecfgh14

    0x41                                                         See below
    0x42                  instret1             instreth1                instretcfg14          instretcfgh14

    0x43                  hpmcounter32         hpmcounter3h2            hpmevent32            hpmevent3h23

    …                     …                    …                        …                     …
    0x5F                  hpmcounter312        hpmcounter31h2           hpmevent312           hpmevent31h23

1
    Depends on Zicntr support
2
    Depends on Zihpm support
3
    Depends on Sscofpmf support
4
    Depends on Smcntrpmf support

hpmeventi may represent a subset of the state accessed by the mhpmeventi register. Specifically, if Sscofpmf
is implemented, event selector bit 62 (MINH) is read-only 0 when accessed through sireg*.

6.6. Smcdeleg and Ssccfg Counter Delegation Extensions | Page 812

Likewise, cyclecfg and instretcfg may represent a subset of the state accessed by the mcyclecfg and
minstretcfg registers, respectively. If Smcntrpmf is implemented, counter configuration register bit 62
(MINH) is read-only 0 when accessed through sireg*.

If extension Smstateen is implemented, refer to extensions Smcsrind/Sscsrind (Section 6.2) for how setting
bit 60 of CSR mstateen0 to zero prevents access to registers siselect, sireg*, vsiselect, and vsireg*
from privileged modes less privileged than M-mode, and likewise how setting bit 60 of hstateen0 to zero
prevents access to siselect and sireg* (really vsiselect and vsireg*) from VS-mode.

The remaining rules of this section apply only when access to a CSR is not blocked by mstateen0[60] = 0 or
hstateen0[60] = 0.

While the privilege mode is M or S and siselect holds a value in the range 0x40-0x5F, illegal-instruction
exceptions are raised for the following cases:

 ⚫ attempts to access any sireg* when menvcfg.CDE = 0;
 ⚫ attempts to access sireg3 or sireg6;
 ⚫ attempts to access sireg4 or sireg5 when XLEN = 64;
 ⚫ attempts to access sireg* when siselect = 0x41, or when the counter selected by siselect is not
   delegated to S-mode (the corresponding bit in mcounteren = 0).

                 The memory-mapped mtime register is not a performance monitoring counter to be managed
                by supervisor software, hence the special treatment of siselect value 0x41 described above.

For each siselect and sireg* combination defined in Table 134, the table further indicates the extensions
upon which the underlying counter state depends.If any extension upon which the underlying state
depends is not implemented, an attempt from M or S mode to access the given state through sireg* raises
an illegal-instruction exception.

If the hypervisor (H) extension is also implemented, then as specified by extensions Smcsrind/Sscsrind, a
virtual-instruction exception is raised for attempts from VS-mode or VU-mode to directly access vsiselect
or vsireg*, or attempts from VU-mode to access siselect or sireg*. Furthermore, while vsiselect holds
a value in the range 0x40-0x5F:

 ⚫ An attempt to access any vsireg* from M or S mode raises an illegal-instruction exception.
 ⚫ An attempt from VS-mode to access any sireg* (really vsireg*) raises an illegal-instruction exception
   if menvcfg.CDE = 0, or a virtual-instruction exception if menvcfg.CDE = 1.

6.6.2. Supervisor Counter Inhibit (scountinhibit) Register

Smcdeleg/Ssccfg defines a new scountinhibit register, a masked alias of mcountinhibit. For counters
delegated to S-mode, the associated mcountinhibit bits can be accessed via scountinhibit.For counters
not delegated to S-mode, the associated bits in scountinhibit are read-only zero.

When menvcfg.CDE=0, attempts to access scountinhibit raise an illegal-instruction exception. When
Supervisor Counter Delegation is enabled, attempts to access scountinhibit from VS-mode or VU-mode
raise a virtual-instruction exception.

6.6.3. Virtualizing scountovf

For implementations that support Smcdeleg/Ssccfg, Sscofpmf, and the H extension, when menvcfg.CDE=1,
attempts to read scountovf from VS-mode or VU-mode raise a virtual-instruction exception.

                                                                       6.7. Smdbltrp Double Trap Extension | Page 813

6.6.4. Virtualizing Local-Counter-Overflow Interrupts

For implementations that support Smcdeleg, Sscofpmf, and Smaia, the local-counter-overflow interrupt
(LCOFI) bit (bit 13) in each of CSRs mvip and mvien is implemented and writable.

For implementations that support Smcdeleg/Ssccfg, Sscofpmf, Smaia/Ssaia, and the H extension, the
LCOFI bit (bit 13) in each of hvip and hvien is implemented and writable.

                The hvip register is defined by the hypervisor (H) extension, while the mvip, mvien and hvien
                registers are defined by the Smaia/Ssaia extensions.

                By virtue of implementing hvip.LCOFI, it is implicit that the LCOFI bit (bit 13) in each of vsie
                and vsip is also implemented.
    
                Requiring support for the LCOFI bits listed above ensures that virtual LCOFIs can be delivered
                to an OS running in S-mode, and to a guest OS running in VS-mode. It is optional whether the
                LCOFI bit (bit 13) in each of mideleg and hideleg, which allows all LCOFIs to be delegated to
                S-mode and VS-mode, respectively, is implemented and writable.

6.7. Smdbltrp Double Trap Extension
The Smdbltrp extension addresses a double trap (See Section 3.1.6.2) in M-mode. When the Smrnmi
extension (Section 6.5) is implemented, it enables invocation of the RNMI handler on a double trap in M-
mode to handle the critical error. If the Smrnmi extension is not implemented or if a double trap occurs
during the RNMI handler’s execution, this extension helps transition the hart to a critical error state and
enables signaling the critical error to the platform.

To improve error diagnosis and resolution, this extension supports debugging harts in a critical error state.
The extension introduces a mechanism to enter Debug Mode instead of asserting a critical-error signal to
the platform when the hart is in a critical error state. See (The RISC-V Debug Specification, n.d.) for details.

See Section 3.1.6.2 for the operational details.

6.8. Smctr Control Transfer Records Extension, Version 1.0
A method for recording control flow transfer history is valuable not only for performance profiling but also
for debugging. Control flow transfers refer to jump instructions (including function calls and returns),
taken branch instructions, traps, and trap returns. Profiling tools, such as Linux perf, collect control
transfer history when sampling software execution, thereby enabling tools, like AutoFDO, to identify hot
paths for optimization.

Control flow trace capabilities offer very deep transfer history, but the volume of data produced can result
in significant performance overheads due to memory bandwidth consumption, buffer management, and
decoder overhead. The Control Transfer Records (CTR) extension provides a method to record a limited
history in register-accessible internal chip storage, with the intent of dramatically reducing the
performance overhead and complexity of collecting transfer history.

CTR defines a circular (FIFO) buffer. Each buffer entry holds a record for a single recorded control flow
transfer. The number of records that can be held in the buffer depends upon both the implementation (the
maximum supported depth) and the CTR configuration (the software selected depth).

Only qualified transfers are recorded. Qualified transfers are those that meet the filtering criteria, which
include the privilege mode and the transfer type.

Recorded transfers are inserted at the write pointer, which is then incremented, while older recorded
transfers may be overwritten once the buffer is full. Or the user can enable RAS (Return Address Stack)
emulation mode, where only function calls are recorded, and function returns pop the last call record. The
source PC, target PC, and some optional metadata (transfer type, elapsed cycles) are stored for each
recorded transfer.

The CTR buffer is accessible through an indirect CSR interface, such that software can specify which
logical entry in the buffer it wishes to read or write. Logical entry 0 always corresponds to the youngest
recorded transfer, followed by entry 1 as the next youngest, and so on.

The machine-level extension, Smctr, encompasses all newly added Control Status Registers (CSRs),
instructions, and behavior modifications for a hart across all privilege levels. The corresponding
supervisor-level extension, Ssctr, is essentially identical to Smctr, except that it excludes machine-level
CSRs and behaviors not intended to be directly accessible at the supervisor level.

Smctr and Ssctr depend on both the implementation of S-mode and the Sscsrind extension.

6.8.1. CSRs

6.8.1.1. Machine Control Transfer Records Control Register (mctrctl)

The mctrctl register is a 64-bit read/write register that enables and configures the CTR capability.

       63                                                      60                59                                          56
                                 Custom                                                               WPRI

       55                                                                                                                    48
                                                                       WPRI

       47                 46                45                 44                43          42                 41           40
   DIRLJMPINH          INDLJMPINH         RETINH           CORSWAPINH         DIRJMPINH   INDJMPINH          DIRCALLINH   INDCALLINH

       39                 38                37                 36                35          34                 33           32
                WPRI                      TKBRINH            NTBREN           TRETINH      INTRINH            EXCINH        WPRI

       31                                                                                                                    24
                                                                       WPRI

       23                                                                                                                    16
                                                                       WPRI

       15                                   13                 12                11          10                  9            8
                         WPRI                               LCOFIFRZ           BPFRZ        WPRI                MTE          STE

       7                   6                                                     3           2                   1            0
    RASEMU                                          WPRI                                     M                   S            U

                               Figure 125. Machine Control Transfer Records Control Register Format

                  Table 135. Machine Control Transfer Records Control Register Field Definitions
Field                 Description
M, S, U               Enable transfer recording in the selected privileged mode(s).
RASEMU                Enables RAS (Return Address Stack) Emulation Mode. See Section 6.8.5.4.
MTE                   Enables recording of traps to M-mode when M=0. See Section 6.8.5.1.2.
STE                   Enables recording of traps to S-mode when S=0. See Section 6.8.5.1.2.
BPFRZ                 Set sctrstatus.FROZEN on a breakpoint exception that traps to M-mode or S-mode. See
                      Section 6.8.5.5.
LCOFIFRZ              Set sctrstatus.FROZEN on local-counter-overflow interrupt (LCOFI) that traps to M-mode
                      or S-mode. See Section 6.8.5.5.
EXCINH                Inhibit recording of exceptions. See Section 6.8.5.2.
INTRINH               Inhibit recording of interrupts. See Section 6.8.5.2.
TRETINH               Inhibit recording of trap returns. See Section 6.8.5.2.
NTBREN                Enable recording of not-taken branches. See Section 6.8.5.2.
TKBRINH               Inhibit recording of taken branches. See Section 6.8.5.2.
INDCALLINH            Inhibit recording of indirect calls. See Section 6.8.5.2.
DIRCALLINH            Inhibit recording of direct calls. See Section 6.8.5.2.
INDJMPINH             Inhibit recording of indirect jumps (without linkage). See Section 6.8.5.2.
DIRJMPINH             Inhibit recording of direct jumps (without linkage). See Section 6.8.5.2.
CORSWAPINH            Inhibit recording of co-routine swaps. See Section 6.8.5.2.
RETINH                Inhibit recording of function returns. See Section 6.8.5.2.
INDLJMPINH            Inhibit recording of other indirect jumps (with linkage). See Section 6.8.5.2.
DIRLJMPINH            Inhibit recording of other direct jumps (with linkage). See Section 6.8.5.2.
Custom[3:0]           WARL bits designated for custom use. The value 0 must correspond to standard behavior. See
                      Section 6.8.6.

All fields are optional except for M, S, U, and BPFRZ. All unimplemented fields are read-only 0, while all
implemented fields are writable. If the Sscofpmf extension is implemented, LCOFIFRZ must be writable.

               Because the ROI of CTR is perceived to be low for RV32 implementations, CTR does not fully
               support RV32. While control flow transfers in RV32 can be recorded, RV32 cannot access
              xctrctl bits 63:32. A future extension could add support for RV32 by adding 3 new CSRs
               (mctrctlh, sctrctlh, and vsctrctlh) to provide this access.

6.8.1.2. Supervisor Control Transfer Records Control Register (sctrctl)

The sctrctl register provides supervisor mode access to a subset of mctrctl.

Bits 2 and 9 in sctrctl are read-only 0. As a result, the M and MTE fields in mctrctl are not accessible
through sctrctl. All other mctrctl fields are accessible through sctrctl.

6.8.1.3. Virtual Supervisor Control Transfer Records Control Register (vsctrctl)

If the H extension is implemented, the vsctrctl register is a 64-bit read/write register that is VS-mode’s
version of supervisor register sctrctl. When V=1, vsctrctl substitutes for the usual sctrctl, so
instructions that normally read or modify sctrctl actually access vsctrctl instead.

        63                                                60                59                                                 56
                                  Custom                                                         WPRI

        55                                                                                                                     48
                                                                  WPRI

        47                 46                45           44                43          42                 41                  40
    DIRLJMPINH          INDLJMPINH         RETINH     CORSWAPINH         DIRJMPINH   INDJMPINH          DIRCALLINH       INDCALLINH

        39                 38                37           36                35          34                 33                  32
                 WPRI                      TKBRINH      NTBREN           TRETINH      INTRINH            EXCINH            WPRI

        31                                                                                                                     24
                                                                  WPRI

        23                                                                                                                     16
                                                                  WPRI

        15                                   13           12                11          10                  9                  8
                          WPRI                         LCOFIFRZ           BPFRZ                  WPRI                       STE

        7                   6                                                           2                   1                  0
      RASEMU                                             WPRI                                               S                  U

                         Figure 126. Virtual Supervisor Control Transfer Records Control Register Format

                   Table 136. Virtual Supervisor Control Transfer Records Control Register Field Definitions
Field                           Description
S                               Enable transfer recording in VS-mode.
U                               Enable transfer recording in VU-mode.
STE                             Enables recording of traps to VS-mode when S=0. See Section 6.8.5.1.2.
BPFRZ                           Set sctrstatus.FROZEN on a breakpoint exception that traps to VS-mode. See Section
                                6.8.5.5.
LCOFIFRZ                        Set sctrstatus.FROZEN on local-counter-overflow interrupt (LCOFI) that traps to VS-mode.
                                See Section 6.8.5.5.
Other field definitions match those of sctrctl. The optional fields implemented in vsctrctl should match those
implemented in sctrctl.

                    Unlike the CTR status register or the CTR entry registers, the CTR control register has a VS-
                    mode version. This allows a guest to manage the CTR configuration directly, without requiring
                   traps to HS-mode, while ensuring that the guest configuration (most notably the privilege
                    mode enable bits) do not impact CTR behavior when V=0.

6.8.1.4. Supervisor Control Transfer Records Depth Register (sctrdepth)

The 32-bit sctrdepth register specifies the depth of the CTR buffer.

 31                                                                                                                  3     2           0
                                                           WPRI                                                                DEPTH

                                Figure 127. Supervisor Control Transfer Records Depth Register Format

                  Table 137. Supervisor Control Transfer Records Depth Register Field Definitions
Field            Description
DEPTH            WARL field that selects the depth of the CTR buffer. Encodings:

                 ‘000 - 16

                 ‘001 - 32

                 ‘010 - 64

                 ‘011 - 128

                 ‘100 - 256

                 '11x - reserved

                 The depth of the CTR buffer dictates the number of entries to which the hardware records transfers.
                 For a depth of N, the hardware records transfers to entries 0..N-1. All Entry Registers read as '0' and
                 are read-only when the selected entry is in the range N to 255. When the depth is increased, the
                 newly accessible entries contain unspecified but legal values.

                 It is implementation-specific which DEPTH value(s) are supported.

Attempts to access sctrdepth from VS-mode or VU-mode raise a virtual-instruction exception, unless CTR
state enable access restrictions apply. See Section 6.8.4.

               It is expected that operating systems (OSs) will access sctrdepth only at boot, to select the
               maximum supported depth value. More frequent accesses may result in reduced performance
               in virtualization scenarios, as a result of traps from VS-mode incurred.

               There may be scenarios where software chooses to operate on only a subset of the entries, to
               reduce overhead. In such cases tools may choose to read only the lower entries, and OSs may
               choose to save/restore only on the lower entries while using SCTRCLR to clear the others.
   
               The value in configurable depth lies in supporting VM migration. It is expected that a platform
               spec may specify that one or more CTR depth values must be supported. A hypervisor may wish
               to restrict guests to using one of these required depths, in order to ensure that such guests can
               be migrated to any system that complies with the platform spec. The trapping behavior
               specified for VS-mode accesses to sctrdepth ensures that the hypervisor can impose such
               restrictions.

6.8.1.5. Supervisor Control Transfer Records Status Register (sctrstatus)

The 32-bit sctrstatus register grants access to CTR status information and is updated by the hardware
whenever CTR is active. CTR is active when the current privilege mode is enabled for recording and CTR is
not frozen.

  31     30                                                                                                          16
FROZEN                                                       WPRI

  15                                                   8      7                                                       0
                              WPRI                                                     WRPTR

                      Figure 128. Supervisor Control Transfer Records Status Register Format

                     Table 138. Supervisor Control Transfer Records Status Register Field Definitions
Field              Description
WRPTR              WARL field that indicates the physical CTR buffer entry to be written next. It is incremented after
                   new transfers are recorded (see Section 6.8.5), though there are exceptions when x
                   ctrctl.RASEMU=1, see Section 6.8.5.4. For a given CTR depth (where depth = 2(DEPTH+4)), WRPTR
                   wraps to 0 on an increment when the value matches depth-1, and to depth-1 on a decrement when
                   the value is 0. Bits above those needed to represent depth-1 (e.g., bits 7:4 for a depth of 16) are read-
                   only 0. On depth changes, WRPTR holds an unspecified but legal value.
FROZEN             Inhibit transfer recording. See Section 6.8.5.5.

Undefined bits in sctrstatus are WPRI. Status fields may be added by future extensions, and software
should ignore but preserve any fields that it does not recognize. Undefined bits must be implemented as
read-only 0, unless a custom extension is implemented and enabled (see Section 6.8.6).

                  Logical entry 0, accessed via sireg* when siselect=0x200, is always the physical buffer
                  entry preceding the WRPTR entry. More generally, the physical buffer entry Y associated with
                 logical entry X (X < depth) can be determined using the formula Y = (WRPTR - X - 1) % depth,
                  where depth = 2(DEPTH+4). Logical entries >= depth are read-only 0.

                  Because the sctrstatus register is updated by hardware, writes should be performed with
                  caution. If a multi-instruction read-modify-write to sctrstatus is performed while CTR is
                  active, and between the read and write a qualified transfer or trap that causes CTR freeze
                  completes, a hardware update could be lost. Software may wish to ensure that CTR is inactive
                 before performing a read-modify-write, by ensuring that either sctrstatus.FROZEN=1, or
                  that the current privilege mode is not enabled for recording.

                  When restoring CTR state, sctrstatus should be written before CTR entry state is restored.
                  This ensures that the software writes to logical CTR entries modify the proper physical entries.

                  Exposing the WRPTR provides a more efficient means for synthesizing CTR entries. If a
                  qualified control transfer is emulated, the emulator can simply increment the WRPTR, then
                  write the synthesized record to logical entry 0. If a qualified function return is emulated while
                 RASEMU=1, the emulator can clear ctrsource.V for logical entry 0, then decrement the
                  WRPTR.

                  Exposing the WRPTR may also allow support for Linux perf’s stack stitching capability.

                  Smctr/Ssctr depends upon implementation of S-mode because much of CTR state is accessible
                  only through S-mode CSRs. If, in the future, it becomes desirable to remove this dependency,
                 an extension could add mctrdepth and mctrstatus CSRs that reflect the same state as
                  sctrdepth and sctrstatus, respectively. Further, such an extension should make CTR entries
                  accessible via miselect/mireg*. See Section 6.8.2.

6.8.2. Entry Registers

Control transfer records are stored in a CTR buffer, such that each buffer entry stores information about a
single transfer. The CTR buffer entries are logically accessed via the indirect register access mechanism
defined by the Sscsrind extension. The siselect index range 0x200 through 0x2FF is reserved for CTR
logical entries 0 through 255. When siselect holds a value in this range, sireg provides access to
ctrsource, sireg2 provides access to ctrtarget, and sireg3 provides access to ctrdata. sireg4, sireg5,
and sireg6 are read-only 0.

When vsiselect holds a value in 0x200..0x2FF, the vsireg* registers provide access to the same CTR
entry register state as the analogous sireg* registers. There is not a separate set of entry registers for V=1.

See Section 6.8.4 for cases where CTR accesses from S-mode and VS-mode may be restricted.

6.8.2.1. Control Transfer Record Source Register (ctrsource)

The ctrsource register contains the source program counter, which is the pc of the recorded control
transfer instruction, or the epc of the recorded trap. The valid (V) bit is set by the hardware when a transfer
is recorded in the selected CTR buffer entry, and implies that data in ctrsource, ctrtarget, and ctrdata is
valid for this entry.

ctrsource is an MXLEN-bit WARL register that must be able to hold all valid virtual or physical addresses
that can serve as a pc. It need not be able to hold any invalid addresses; implementations may convert an
invalid address into a valid address that the register is capable of holding. When XLEN < MXLEN, both
explicit writes (by software) and implicit writes (for recorded transfers) will be zero-extended.

63                                                                                                                     1 0
                                                   PC[63:1]                                                              V

                    Figure 129. Control Transfer Record Source Register Format for MXLEN=64

                CTR entry registers are defined as MXLEN, despite the xireg* CSRs used to access them
               being XLEN, to ensure that entries recorded in RV64 are not truncated, as a result of CSR
                Width Modulation, on a transition to RV32.

6.8.2.2. Control Transfer Record Target Register (ctrtarget)

The ctrtarget register contains the target (destination) program counter of the recorded transfer. For a
not-taken branch, ctrtarget holds the PC of the next sequential instruction following the branch. The
optional MISP bit is set by the hardware when the recorded transfer is an instruction whose target or
taken/not-taken direction was mispredicted by the branch predictor. MISP is read-only 0 when not
implemented.

ctrtarget is an MXLEN-bit WARL register that must be able to hold all valid virtual or physical addresses
that can serve as a pc. It need not be able to hold any invalid addresses; implementations may convert an
invalid address into a valid address that the register is capable of holding. When XLEN < MXLEN, both
explicit writes (by software) and implicit writes (by recorded transfers) will be zero-extended.

 63                                                                                                                    32
                                                    PC[63:32]

 31                                                                                                                1    0
                                                  PC[31:1]                                                             MISP

                    Figure 130. Control Transfer Record Target Register Format for MXLEN=64

6.8.2.3. Control Transfer Record Metadata Register (ctrdata)

The ctrdata register contains metadata for the recorded transfer. This register must be implemented,
though all fields within it are optional. Unimplemented fields are read-only 0. ctrdata is a 64-bit register.

 63                                                                                                                    32
                                                      WPRI

 31                                                  16   15 14                                        4   3            0
                          CC                              CCV                     WPRI                         TYPE

                          Figure 131. Control Transfer Record Metadata Register Format

                         Table 139. Control Transfer Record Metadata Register Field Definitions
Field              Description                                                                            Access
TYPE[3:0]          Identifies the type of the control flow transfer recorded in the entry, using the WARL
                   encodings listed in Table 142. Implementations that do not support this field will report
                   0.
CCV                Cycle Count Valid. See Section 6.8.5.3.                                                WARL
CC[15:0]           Cycle Count, composed of the Cycle Count Exponent (CCE, in CC[15:12]) and Cycle        WARL
                   Count Mantissa (CCM, in CC[11:0]). See Section 6.8.5.3.

Undefined bits in ctrdata are WPRI. Undefined bits must be implemented as read-only 0, unless a custom
extension is implemented and enabled.

                  Like the Transfer Type Filtering bits in mctrctl, the ctrdata.TYPE bits leverage the E-trace
                 itype encodings.

6.8.3. Instructions

6.8.3.1. Supervisor CTR Clear Instruction

 31                                         20 19               15 14         12 11        7   6                   0
                    func12                             rs1              funct3        rd             opcode
                    12                                  5                 3           5                 7
              SCTRCLR (0x104)                           0                 0           0              SYSTEM

The SCTRCLR instruction performs the following operations:

 ⚫ Zeroes all CTR Entry Registers, for all DEPTH values
 ⚫ Zeroes the CTR cycle counter and CCV (see Section 6.8.5.3)

Any read of ctrsource, ctrtarget, or ctrdata that follows SCTRCLR, such that it precedes the next
qualified control transfer, will return the value 0. Further, the first recorded transfer following SCTRCLR
will have ctrdata.CCV=0.

SCTRCLR raises an illegal-instruction exception in U-mode, and a virtual-instruction exception in VU-
mode, unless CTR state enable access restrictions apply. See Section 6.8.4.

6.8.4. State Enable Access Control

When Smstateen is implemented, the mstateen0.CTR bit controls access to CTR register state from
privilege modes less privileged than M-mode. When mstateen0.CTR=1, accesses to CTR register state
behave as described in Section 6.4.2 and Section 6.8.2 above, while SCTRCLR behaves as described in
Section 6.8.3.1. When mstateen0.CTR=0 and the privilege mode is less privileged than M-mode, the
following operations raise an illegal-instruction exception:

 ⚫ Attempts to access sctrctl, vsctrctl, sctrdepth, or sctrstatus
 ⚫ Attempts to access sireg* when siselect is in 0x200..0x2FF, or vsireg* when vsiselect is in
   0x200..0x2FF
 ⚫ Execution of the SCTRCLR instruction

When mstateen0.CTR=0, qualified control transfers executed in privilege modes less privileged than M-
mode will continue to implicitly update entry registers and sctrstatus.

If the H extension is implemented and mstateen0.CTR=1, the hstateen0.CTR bit controls access to
supervisor CTR state when V=1. This state includes sctrctl (really vsctrctl), sctrstatus, and sireg*
(really vsireg*) when siselect (really vsiselect) is in 0x200..0x2FF. hstateen0.CTR is read-only 0
when mstateen0.CTR=0.

When mstateen0.CTR=1 and hstateen0.CTR=1, VS-mode accesses to supervisor CTR state behave as
described in Section 6.4.2 and Section 6.8.2 above, while SCTRCLR behaves as described in Section 6.8.3.1.
When mstateen0.CTR=1 and hstateen0.CTR=0, both VS-mode accesses to supervisor CTR state and VS-
mode execution of SCTRCLR raise a virtual-instruction exception.

                sctrdepth    is not included in the above list of supervisor CTR state controlled by
               hstateen0.CTR since accesses to sctrdepth from VS-mode raise a virtual-instruction
                exception regardless of the value of hstateen0.CTR.

When hstateen0.CTR=0, qualified control transfers executed while V=1 will continue to implicitly update
entry registers and sctrstatus.

                See Section 6.2 for how bit 60 in mstateen0 and hstateen0 can also restrict access to
               sireg*/siselect and vsireg*/vsiselect from privilege modes less privileged than M-
                mode.

                Implementations that support Smctr/Ssctr but not Smstateen/Ssstateen may observe reduced
                performance. Because Smctr/Ssctr introduces a significant number of new CSRs, it is
                desirable to avoid save/restore of CTR state when possible. A hypervisor is likely to leverage
               State Enable to trap on the initial guest access to CTR state, delegating CTR and enabling
                save/restore of guest CTR state only once the guest has begun to use it. Without
                Smstateen/Ssstateen, a hypervisor is required to save/restore guest CTR state on every context
                switch.

6.8.5. Behavior

CTR records qualified control transfers. Control transfers are qualified if they meet the following criteria:

 ⚫ The current privilege mode is enabled
 ⚫ The transfer type is not inhibited
 ⚫ sctrstatus.FROZEN is not set
 ⚫ The transfer completes/retires

Such qualified transfers update the Entry Registers at logical entry 0. As a result, older entries are pushed
down the stack; the record previously in logical entry 0 moves to logical entry 1, the record in logical entry 1
moves to logical entry 2, and so on. If the CTR buffer is full, the oldest recorded entry (previously at entry
depth-1) is lost.

Recorded transfers will set the ctrsource.V bit to 1, and will update all implemented record fields.

                In order to collect accurate and representative performance profiles while using CTR, it is
                recommended that hardware recording of control transfers incurs no added performance
               overhead, e.g., in the form of retirement or instruction execution restrictions that are not
                present when CTR is not active.

6.8.5.1. Privilege Mode Transitions

Transfers that change the privilege mode are a special case. What is recorded, if anything, depends on

whether the source privilege mode and/or target privilege mode are enabled for recording, and on the
transfer type (trap or trap return).

Traps between enabled privilege modes are recorded as normal. Traps from a disabled privilege mode to an
enabled privilege mode are partially recorded, such that the ctrsource.PC is 0. Traps from an enabled
mode to a disabled mode, known as external traps, are not recorded by default. See Section 6.8.5.1.2 for how
they can be recorded.

Trap returns have similar treatment. Trap returns between enabled privilege modes are recorded as
normal. Trap returns from an enabled mode back to a disabled mode are partially recorded, such that
ctrtarget.PC is 0. Trap returns from a disabled mode to an enabled mode are not recorded.

                   If privileged software is configuring CTR on behalf of less privileged software, it should ensure
                   that its privilege mode enable bit (e.g., sctrctl.S for Supervisor software) is cleared before a
                  trap return to the less privileged mode. Otherwise the trap return will be recorded, leaking the
                   privileged source pc.

Recording in Debug Mode is always inhibited. Transfers into and out of Debug Mode are never recorded.

The table below provides details on recording of privilege mode transitions. Standard dependencies on
FROZEN and transfer type inhibits also apply, but are not covered by the table.

                                        Table 140. Trap and Trap Return Recording
Transfer Type           Source Mode          Target Mode
                                             Enabled                          Disabled
Trap                    Enabled              Recorded.                        External trap. Not recorded by default,
                                                                              but see Section 6.8.5.1.2.
                        Disabled             Recorded, ctrsource.PC is 0.     Not recorded.
Trap Return             Enabled              Recorded.                        Recorded, ctrtarget.PC is 0.
                        Disabled             Not recorded.                    Not recorded.

Virtualization Mode Transitions

Transitions between VS/VU-mode and M/HS-mode are unique in that they effect a change in the active
CTR control register, and hence the CTR configuration. What is recorded, if anything, on these
virtualization mode transitions depends upon fields from both [ms]ctrctl and vsctrctl.

 ⚫ mctrctl.M, sctrctl.S, and vsctrctl.{S,U} are used to determine whether the source and target modes
   are enabled;
 ⚫ mctrctl.MTE, sctrctl.STE, and vsctrctl.STE are used to determine whether an external trap is
   recorded (see Section 6.8.5.1.2);
 ⚫ sctrctl.LCOFIFRZ and sctrctl.BPFRZ determine whether CTR becomes frozen (see Section 6.8.5.5)
 ⚫ For all other xctrctl fields, the value in vsctrctl is used.

                   Consider an exception that traps from VU-mode to HS-mode, with vsctrctl.U=1 and
                   sctrctl.S=1. Because both the source mode and target mode are enabled for recording,
                  whether the trap is recorded then depends on the CTR configuration (e.g., the transfer type
                   filter bits) in vsctrctl, not in sctrctl.

External Traps

External traps are traps from a privilege mode enabled for CTR recording to a privilege mode that is not
enabled for CTR recording. By default external traps are not recorded, but privileged software running in
the target mode of the trap can opt-in to allowing CTR to record external traps into that mode. The x
ctrctl.xTE bits allow M-mode, S-mode, and VS-mode to opt-in separately.

External trap recording depends not only on the target mode, but on any intervening modes, which are
modes that are more privileged than the source mode but less privileged than the target mode. Not only
must the external trap enable bit for the target mode be set, but the external trap enable bit(s) for any
intervening modes must also be set. See the table below for details.

                 Requiring intervening modes to be enabled for external traps simplifies software management
                 of CTR. Consider a scenario where S-mode software is configuring CTR for U-mode contexts A
                 and B, such that external traps (to any mode) are enabled for A but not for B. When switching
                 between the two contexts, S-mode can simply toggle sctrctl.STE, rather than requiring a trap
                to M-mode to additionally toggle mctrctl.MTE.

                 This method does not provide the flexibility to record external traps to a more privileged mode
                 but not to all intervening mode(s). Because it is expected that profiling tools generally wish to
                 observe all external traps or none, this is not considered a meaningful limitation.

                                    Table 141. External Trap Enable Requirements
Source Mode            Target Mode            External Trap Enable(s) Required
U-mode                 S-mode                 sctrctl.STE

                       M-mode                 mctrctl.MTE, sctrctl.STE

S-mode                 M-mode                 mctrctl.MTE

VU-mode                VS-mode                vsctrctl.STE

                       HS-mode                sctrctl.STE, vsctrctl.STE

                       M-mode                 mctrctl.MTE, sctrctl.STE, vsctrctl.STE

VS-mode                HS-mode                sctrctl.STE

                       M-mode                 mctrctl.MTE, sctrctl.STE

In records for external traps, the ctrtarget.PC is 0.

                 No mechanism exists for recording external trap returns, because the external trap record
                includes all relevant information, and gives the trap handler (e.g., an emulator) the
                 opportunity to modify the record.

                 Note that external trap recording does not depend on EXCINH/INTRINH. Thus, when external
                 traps are enabled, both external interrupts and external exceptions are recorded.

                STE allows recording of traps from U-mode to S-mode as well as from VS/VU-mode to HS-
                 mode. The hypervisor can flip sctrctl.STE before entering a guest if it wants different
                 behavior for U-to-S vs VS/VU-to-HS.

If external trap recording is implemented, mctrctl.MTE and sctrctl.STE must be implemented, while
vsctrctl.STE must be implemented if the H extension is implemented.

6.8.5.2. Transfer Type Filtering

Default CTR behavior, when all transfer type filter bits (xctrctl[47:32]) are unimplemented or 0, is to

record all control transfers within enabled privileged modes. By setting transfer type filter bits, software
can opt out of recording select transfer types, or opt into recording non-default operations. All transfer type
filter bits are optional.

                  Because not-taken branches are not recorded by default, the polarity of the associated enable
                 bit (NTBREN) is the opposite of other bits associated with transfer type filtering (TKBRINH,
                  RETINH, etc). Non-default operations require opt-in rather than opt-out.

The transfer type filter bits leverage the type definitions specified in the RISC-V Efficient Trace Spec v2.0
(Table 4.4 and Section 4.1.1). For completeness, the definitions are reproduced below.

                  Here “indirect” is used interchangeably with “uninferrable”, which is used in the trace spec.
                 Both imply that the target of the jump is not encoded in the opcode.

                                        Table 142. Control Transfer Type Definitions
Encoding         Transfer Type Name
0                Not used by CTR
1                Exception
2                Interrupt
3                Trap return
4                Not-taken branch
5                Taken branch
6                reserved
7                reserved
8                Indirect call
9                Direct call
10               Indirect jump (without linkage)
11               Direct jump (without linkage)
12               Co-routine swap
13               Function return
14               Other indirect jump (with linkage)
15               Other direct jump (with linkage)

Encodings 8 through 15 refer to various encodings of jump instructions. The types are distinguished as
described below.

                                     Table 143. Control Transfer Type Definitions
Transfer Type Name                          Associated Opcodes
Indirect call                               JALR x1, rs where rs != x5
                                            JALR x5, rs where rs != x1
                                            C.JALR rs1 where rs1 != x5
Direct call                                 JAL x1
                                            JAL x5
                                            C.JAL
                                            CM.JALT index
Indirect jump (without linkage)             JALR x0, rs where rs != (x1 or x5)
                                            C.JR rs1 where rs1 != (x1 or x5)
Direct jump (without linkage)               JAL x0
                                            C.J
                                            CM.JT index
Co-routine swap                             JALR x1, x5
                                            JALR x5, x1
                                            C.JALR x5
Function return                             JALR rd, rs where rs == (x1 or x5) and rd != (x1 or x5)
                                            C.JR rs1 where rs1 == (x1 or x5)
                                            CM.POPRET(Z)
Other indirect jump (with linkage)          JALR rd, rs where rs != (x1 or x5) and rd != (x0, x1, or x5)
Other direct jump (with linkage)            JAL rd where rd != (x0, x1, or x5)

                  If implementation of any transfer type filter bit results in reduced software performance,
                  perhaps due to additional retirement restrictions, it is strongly recommended that this reduced
                 performance apply only when the bit is set. Alternatively, support for the bit may be omitted.
                  Maintaining software performance for the default CTR configuration, when all transfer type
                  bits are cleared, is recommended.

6.8.5.3. Cycle Counting

The ctrdata register may optionally include a count of CPU cycles elapsed since the prior CTR record. The
elapsed cycle count value is represented by the CC field, which has a 12-bit mantissa component (Cycle
Count Mantissa, or CCM) and a 4-bit exponent component (Cycle Count Exponent, or CCE).

The elapsed cycle counter (CtrCycleCounter) increments at the same rate as the mcycle counter. Only
cycles while CTR is active are counted, where active implies that the current privilege mode is enabled for
recording and CTR is not frozen. The CC field is encoded such that CCE holds 0 if the CtrCycleCounter
value is less than 4096, otherwise it holds the index of the most significant one bit in the CtrCycleCounter
value, minus 11. CCM holds CtrCycleCounter bits CCE+10:CCE-1.

The elapsed cycle count can then be calculated by software using the following formula:

    if (CCE==0):
        return CCM
    else:
                       12
        return (2           + CCM) << CCE-1
    endif

The CtrCycleCounter is reset on writes to xctrctl, and on execution of SCTRCLR, to ensure that any
accumulated cycle counts do not persist across a context switch.

An implementation that supports cycle counting must implement CCV and all CCM bits, but may
implement 0..4 exponent bits in CCE. Unimplemented CCE bits are read-only 0. For implementations that
support transfer type filtering, it is recommended to implement at least 3 exponent bits. This allows
capturing the full latency of most functions, when recording only calls and returns.

The size of the CtrCycleCounter required to support each CCE width is given in the table below.

                                           Table 144. Cycle Counter Size Options
CCE bits          CtrCycleCounter bits              Max elapsed cycle value
0                 12                                4095
1                 13                                8191
2                 15                                32764
3                 19                                524224
4                 27                                134201344

                  When CCE>1, the granularity of the reported cycle count is reduced. For example, when
                  CCE=3, the bottom 2 bits of the cycle counter are not reported, and thus the reported value
                  increments only every 4 cycles. As a result, the reported value represents an undercount of
                  elapsed cycles for most cases (when the unreported bits are non-zero). On average, the
                  undercount will be (2CCE-1-1)/2. Software can reduce the average undercount to 0 by adding
                 (2CCE-1-1)/2 to each computed cycle count value when CCE>1.

                  Though this compressed method of representation results in some imprecision for larger cycle
                  count values, it produces meaningful area savings, reducing storage per entry from 27 bits to
                  16.

The CC value saturates when all implemented bits in CCM and CCE are 1.

The CC value is valid only when the Cycle Count Valid (CCV) bit is set. If CCV=0, the CC value might not
hold the correct count of elapsed active cycles since the last recorded transfer. The next record will have
CCV=0 after a write to xctrctl, or execution of SCTRCLR, since CtrCycleCounter is reset. CCV should
additionally be cleared after any other implementation-specific scenarios where active cycles might not be
counted in CtrCycleCounter.

6.8.5.4. RAS (Return Address Stack) Emulation Mode

When the optional xctrctl.RASEMU bit is implemented and set to 1, transfer recording behavior is altered
to emulate the behavior of a return-address stack (RAS).

 ⚫ Indirect and direct calls are recorded as normal
 ⚫ Function returns pop the most recent call, by decrementing the WRPTR then invalidating the WRPTR

    entry (by setting ctrsource.V=0). As a result, logical entry 0 is invalidated and moves to logical entry
    depth-1, while logical entries 1..depth-1 move to 0..depth-2.
 ⚫ Co-routine swaps affect both a return and a call. Logical entry 0 is overwritten, and WRPTR is not
   modified.
 ⚫ Other transfer types are inhibited
 ⚫ Transfer type filtering bits (xctrctl[47:32]) and external trap enable bits (xctrctl.xTE) are ignored

                  Profiling tools often collect call stacks along with each sample. Stack walking, however, is a
                  complex and often slow process that may require recompilation (e.g., -fno-omit-frame-pointer)
                  to work reliably. With RAS emulation, tools can ask CTR hardware to save call stacks even for
                  unmodified code.

                  CTR RAS emulation has limitations. The CTR buffer will contain only partial stacks in cases
                 where the call stack depth was greater than the CTR depth, CTR recording was enabled at a
                  lower point in the call stack than main(), or where the CTR buffer was cleared since main().

                  The CTR stack may be corrupted in cases where calls and returns are not symmetric, such as
                  with stack unwinding (e.g., setjmp/longjmp, C++ exceptions), where stale call entries may be
                  left on the CTR stack, or user stack switching, where calls from multiple stacks may be
                  intermixed.

                  As described in Section 6.8.5.3, when CCV=1, the CC field provides the elapsed cycles since the
                  prior CTR entry was recorded. This introduces implementation challenges when RASEMU=1
                  because, for each recorded call, there may have been several recorded calls (and returns which
                  “popped” them) since the prior remaining call entry was recorded (see Section 6.8.5.4). The
                 implication is that returns that pop a call entry not only do not reset the cycle counter, but
                  instead add the CC field from the popped entry to the counter. For simplicity, an
                  implementation may opt to record CCV=0 for all calls, or those whose parent call was popped,
                  when RASEMU=1.

6.8.5.5. Freeze

When sctrstatus.FROZEN=1, transfer recording is inhibited. This bit can be set by hardware, as described
below, or by software.

When sctrctl.LCOFIFRZ=1 and a local-counter-overflow interrupt (LCOFI) traps (as a result of an HPM
counter overflow) to M-mode or to S-mode, sctrstatus.FROZEN is set by hardware. This inhibits CTR
recording until software clears FROZEN. The LCOFI trap itself is not recorded.

                  Freeze on LCOFI ensures that the execution path leading to the sampled instruction (xepc) is
                  preserved, and that the local-counter-overflow interrupt (LCOFI) and associated Interrupt
                  Service Routine (ISR) do not displace any recorded transfer history state. It is the responsibility
                  of the ISR to clear FROZEN before xRET, if continued control transfer recording is desired.

                  LCOFI refers only to architectural traps directly caused by a local counter overflow. If a local-
                 counter-overflow interrupt is recognized without a trap, FROZEN is not automatically set. For
                  instance, no freeze occurs if the LCOFI is pended while interrupts are masked, and software
                  recognizes the LCOFI (perhaps by reading stopi or sip) and clears sip.LCOFIP before the
                  trap is raised. As a result, some or all CTR history may be overwritten while handling the
                  LCOFI. Such cases are expected to be very rare; for most usages (e.g., application profiling)
                  privilege mode filtering is sufficient to ensure that CTR updates are inhibited while interrupts
                  are handled in a more privileged mode.

Similarly, on a breakpoint exception that traps to M-mode or S-mode with sctrctl.BPFRZ=1, FROZEN is
set by hardware. The breakpoint exception itself is not recorded.

                   Breakpoint exception refers to synchronous exceptions with a cause value of Breakpoint (3),
                  regardless of source (ebreak, c.ebreak, Sdtrig); it does not include entry into Debug Mode, even
                   in cores where this is implemented as an exception.

If the H extension is implemented, freeze behavior for LCOFIs and breakpoint exceptions that trap to VS-
mode is determined by the LCOFIFRZ and BPFRZ values, respectively, in vsctrctl. This includes virtual
LCOFIs pended by a hypervisor.

                   When a guest uses the SBI Supervisor Software Events (SSE) extension, the LCOFI will trap to
                   HS-mode, which will then invoke a registered VS-mode LCOFI handler routine. If
                  vsctrctl.LCOFIFRZ=1, the HS-mode handler will need to emulate the freeze by setting
                   sctrstatus.FROZEN=1 before invoking the registered handler routine.

6.8.6. Custom Extensions

Any custom CTR extension must be associated with a non-zero value within the designated custom bits in
xctrctl. When the custom bits hold a non-zero value that enables a custom extension, the extension may
alter standard CTR behavior, and may define new custom status fields within sctrstatus or the CTR Entry
Registers. All custom status fields, and standard status fields whose behavior is altered by the custom
extension, must revert to standard behavior when the custom bits hold zero. This includes read-only 0
behavior for any bits undefined by any implemented standard extensions.

6.9. Control-Flow Integrity (CFI)
Control-flow integrity (CFI) capabilities help defend against Return-Oriented Programming (ROP) and
Call/Jump-Oriented Programming (COP/JOP) style control-flow subversion attacks. The Zicfiss and
Zicfilp extensions provide backward-edge and forward-edge CFI respectively. Please see Volume I, Section
4.17 for further details on these CFI capabilities and the associated Unprivileged ISA.

6.9.1. Landing Pad (Zicfilp)

This section specifies the Privileged ISA for the Zicfilp extension.

6.9.1.1. Landing-Pad-Enabled (LPE) State

The term xLPE is used to determine if forward-edge CFI using landing pads provided by the Zicfilp
extension is enabled at a privilege mode.

When S-mode is implemented, it is determined as follows:

                                Table 145. xLPE determination when S-mode is implemented
       Privilege Mode                                                  xLPE
               M                                                   mseccfg.⁠MLPE

            S or HS                                                menvcfg.⁠LPE

              VS                                                   henvcfg.⁠LPE

            U or VU                                                senvcfg.⁠LPE

When S-mode is not implemented, it is determined as follows:

                         Table 146. xLPE determination when S-mode is not implemented
      Privilege Mode                                                xLPE
            M                                                  mseccfg.⁠MLPE

            U                                                   menvcfg.⁠LPE

                The Zicfilp must be explicitly enabled for use at each privilege mode.

               Programs compiled with the LPAD instruction continue to function correctly, but without
                forward-edge CFI protection, when the Zicfilp extension is not implemented or is not
                enabled.

6.9.1.2. Preserving Expected Landing Pad State on Traps

A trap may need to be delivered to the same or to a higher privilege mode upon completion of
JALR/C.JALR/C.JR, but before the instruction at the target of indirect call/jump was decoded, due to:

 ⚫ Asynchronous interrupts.
 ⚫ Synchronous exceptions with priority higher than that of a software-check exception with xtval set to
   “landing pad fault (code=2)” (See Table 106 of Privileged Specification).

The software-check exception caused by Zicfilp has higher priority than an illegal-instruction exception
but lower priority than instruction access-fault.

The software-check exception due to the instruction not being an LPAD instruction when ELP is
LP_EXPECTED or a software-check exception caused by the LPAD instruction itself leads to a trap being
delivered to the same or to a higher privilege mode.

In such cases, the ELP prior to the trap, the previous ELP, must be preserved by the trap delivery such that it
can be restored on a return from the trap. To store the previous ELP state on trap delivery to M-mode, an
MPELP bit is provided in the mstatus CSR. To store the previous ELP state on trap delivery to S/HS-mode, an
SPELP bit is provided in the mstatus CSR. The SPELP bit in mstatus can be accessed through the sstatus
CSR. To store the previous ELP state on traps to VS-mode, a SPELP bit is defined in the vsstatus (VS-modes
version of sstatus). To store the previous ELP state on transition to Debug Mode, a PELP bit is defined in
the dcsr register.

When a trap is taken into privilege mode x, the XPELP is set to ELP and ELP is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

An MRET or SRET instruction is used to return from a trap in M-mode or S-mode, respectively. When
executing an XRET instruction, if the new privilege mode is y, then ELP is set to the value of XPELP if yLPE
(see Section 6.9.1.1) is 1; otherwise, it is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED; XPELP is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

Upon entry into Debug Mode, the PELP bit in dcsr is updated with the ELP at the privilege level the hart was
previously in, and the ELP is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED. When a hart resumes from Debug Mode, if the new
privilege mode is y, then ELP is set to the value of PELP if yLPE (see Section 6.9.1.1) is 1; otherwise, it is set to
NO_LP_EXPECTED.

See also Section 6.5 for semantics added to the RNMI trap and the MNRET instruction when this
extension is implemented.

                  The trap handler in privilege mode x must save the XPELP bit and the x7 register before
                  performing an indirect call/jump if xLPE=1. If the privilege mode x can respond to interrupts
                  and xLPE=1, then the trap handler should also save these values before enabling interrupts.
    
                  The trap handler in privilege mode x must restore the saved XPELP bit and the x7 register
                  before executing the XRET instruction to return from a trap.

6.9.2. Shadow Stack (Zicfiss)

This section specifies the Privileged ISA for the Zicfiss extension.

6.9.2.1. Shadow Stack Pointer (ssp) CSR access control

Attempts to access the ssp CSR may result in either an illegal-instruction exception or a virtual-instruction
exception, contingent upon the state of the envcfg.⁠SSE fields. The conditions are specified as follows:

 ⚫ If the privilege mode is less than M and menvcfg.⁠SSE is 0, an illegal-instruction exception is raised.
 ⚫ Otherwise, if in U-mode and senvcfg.⁠SSE is 0, an illegal-instruction exception is raised.
 ⚫ Otherwise, if in VS-mode and henvcfg.⁠SSE is 0, a virtual-instruction exception is raised.
 ⚫ Otherwise, if in VU-mode and senvcfg.⁠SSE is 0, a virtual-instruction exception is raised.
 ⚫ Otherwise, the access is allowed.

Access to the ssp CSR is not contingent on S-mode being implemented.

6.9.2.2. Shadow-Stack-Enabled (SSE) State

The term xSSE is used to determine if backward-edge CFI using shadow stacks provided by the Zicfiss
extension is enabled at a privilege mode.

When S-mode is implemented, it is determined as follows:

                            Table 147. xSSE determination when S-mode is implemented
      Privilege Mode                                                xSSE

            M                                                          0

          S or HS                                               menvcfg.⁠SSE

            VS                                                 henvcfg..⁠SSE

          U or VU                                               senvcfg.⁠SSE

When S-mode is not implemented, then xSSE is 0.

                 Activating Zicfiss in U-mode must be done explicitly per process. Not activating Zicfiss at
                 U-mode for a process when that application is not compiled with Zicfiss allows it to invoke
                 shared libraries that may contain Zicfiss instructions. The Zicfiss instructions in the
                 shared library revert to their Zimop- or Zcmop-defined behavior in this case.

                 When Zicfiss is enabled in S-mode it is benign to use an operating system that is not
                 compiled with Zicfiss instructions. Such an operating system that does not use backward-
                 edge CFI for S-mode execution may still activate Zicfiss for U-mode applications.

                When programs that use Zicfiss instructions are installed on a processor that supports the
                 Zicfiss extension but the extension is not enabled at the privilege mode where the program
                 executes, the program continues to function correctly but without backward-edge CFI
                 protection as the Zicfiss instructions will revert to their Zimop- or Zcmop-defined behavior.

                 When programs that use Zicfiss instructions are installed on a processor that does not
                 support the Zicfiss extension but supports the Zimop and Zcmop extensions, the programs
                 continues to function correctly but without backward-edge CFI protection as the Zicfiss

                  instructions will revert to their Zimop- or Zcmop-defined behavior.

                  On processors that do not support Zimop/Zcmop extensions, all Zimop or Zcmop code points
                  including those used for Zicfiss instructions may cause an illegal-instruction exception.
                  Execution of programs that use these instructions on such machines is not supported.

                  Activating Zicfiss in M-mode is currently not supported. Additionally, when S-mode is not
                  implemented, activation is not supported in any privilege mode. These functionalities may be
                  introduced in a future standard extension.

                  Changes to xSSE take effect immediately; address-translation caches need not be
                 synchronized with SFENCE.VMA, HFENCE.GVMA, or HFENCE.VVMA instructions.

6.9.2.3. Shadow Stack Memory Protection

To protect shadow stack memory, the memory is associated with a new page type – the Shadow Stack (SS)
page – in the single-stage and VS-stage page tables. The encoding R=0, W=1, and X=0, is defined to represent
an SS page. When menvcfg.⁠SSE=0, this encoding remains reserved. Similarly, when V=1 and henvcfg.⁠
SSE=0, this encoding remains reserved at VS and VU levels.

If satp.⁠MODE (or vsatp.⁠MODE when V=1) is set to Bare and the effective privilege mode is less than M,
shadow stack instructions raise a store/AMO access-fault exception. When the effective privilege mode is
M, memory access by an SSAMOSWAP.W or SSAMOSWAP.D instruction results in a store/AMO access-
fault exception.

Memory mapped as an SS page cannot be written to by instructions other than SSAMOSWAP.W,
SSAMOSWAP.D, SSPUSH, and C.SSPUSH. Attempts will raise a store/AMO access-fault exception. Access
to a SS page using cache-block operation (CBO.*) instructions is not permitted. Such accesses will raise a
store/AMO access-fault exception. Implicit accesses, including instruction fetches to an SS page, are not
permitted. Such accesses will raise an access-fault exception appropriate to the access type. However, the
shadow stack is readable by all instructions that only load from memory.

                  Stores to shadow stack pages by instructions other than SSAMOSWAP, SSPUSH, and
                  C.SSPUSH will trigger a store/AMO access-fault exception, not a store/AMO page-fault
                  exception, signaling a fatal error. A store/AMO page-fault suggests that the operating system
                  could address and rectify the fault, which is not feasible in this scenario. Hence, the page-fault
                  handler must decode the opcode of the faulting instruction to discern whether the fault was
                  caused by a non-shadow-stack instruction writing to an SS page (a fatal condition) or by a
                  shadow stack instruction to a non-resident page (a recoverable condition). The performance-
                  critical nature of operating system page fault handlers necessitates triggering an access fault
                  instead of a page fault, allowing for a straightforward distinction between fatal conditions and

                 recoverable faults.

                  Operating systems must ensure that no writable, non-shadow-stack alias virtual address
                  mappings exist for the physical memory backing the shadow stack. Furthermore, in systems
                  where an address-misaligned exception supersedes the access-fault exception, handlers
                  emulating misaligned stores must be designed to cause an access-fault exception when the
                  store is directed to a shadow stack page.

                  All instructions that perform load operations are allowed to read from the shadow stack. This
                  feature facilitates debugging and performance profiling by allowing examination of the link
                  register values backed up in the shadow stack.

                  As of the writing of this specification, instruction fetches are the sole type of implicit access
                 subjected to single- or VS-stage address translation.

If a shadow stack (SS) instruction raises an access-fault, page-fault, or guest-page-fault exception that is
supposed to indicate the original instruction type (load or store/AMO), then the reported exception cause is
respectively a store/AMO access fault (code 7), a store/AMO page fault (code 15), or a store/AMO guest-
page fault (code 23). For shadow stack instructions, the reported instruction type is always as though it
were a store or AMO, even for instructions SSPOPCHK and C.SSPOPCHK that only read from memory and
do not write to it.

               When Zicfiss is implemented, the existing “store/AMO” exceptions can be thought of as
              “store/AMO/SS” exceptions, indicating that the trapping instruction is either a store, an AMO,
               or a shadow stack instruction.

Shadow stack instructions are restricted to accessing shadow stack (pte.xwr=0b010) pages. Should a
shadow stack instruction access a page that is not designated as a shadow stack page and is not marked as
read-only (pte.xwr=0b001), a store/AMO access-fault exception will be invoked. Conversely, if the page
being accessed by a shadow stack instruction is a read-only page, a store/AMO page-fault exception will be
triggered.

               Shadow stack loads and stores will trigger a store/AMO page-fault if the accessed page is
               read-only, to support copy-on-write (COW) of a shadow stack page. If the page has been
               marked read-only for COW tracking, the page-fault handler responds by creating a copy of the
               page and updates the pte.xwr to 0b010, thereby designating each copy as a shadow stack
               page. Conversely, if the access targets a genuinely read-only page, the fault being reported as a
               store/AMO page-fault signals to the operating system that the fault is fatal and non-
               recoverable. Reporting the fault as a store/AMO page-fault, even for SSPOPCHK initiated
               memory access, aids in the determination of fatality; if these were reported as load page-faults,
               access to a truly read-only page might be mistakenly treated as a recoverable fault, leading to
              the faulting instruction being retried indefinitely. The PTE does not provide a read-only
               shadow stack encoding.

               Attempts by shadow stack instructions to access pages marked as read-write, read-write-
               execute, read-execute, or execute-only result in a store/AMO access-fault exception, similarly
               indicating a fatal condition.

               Shadow stacks should be bounded at each end by guard pages to prevent accidental
               underflows or overflows from one shadow stack into another. Conventionally, a guard page for
               a stack is a page that is not accessible by the process that owns the stack.

If the virtual address in ssp is not XLEN aligned, then the SSPUSH, C.SSPUSH, SSPOPCHK and
C.SSPOPCHK instructions cause a store/AMO access-fault exception.

                  Misaligned accesses to shadow stack are not required and enforcing alignment is more secure
                  to detect errors in the program. An access-fault exception is raised instead of address-
                 misaligned exception in such cases to indicate fatality and that the instruction must not be
                  emulated by a trap handler.

Correct execution of shadow stack instructions that access memory requires the accessed memory to be
idempotent. If the memory referenced by SSPUSH, C.SSPUSH, SSPOPCHK, C.SSPOPCHK,
SSAMOSWAP.W and SSAMOSWAP.D instructions is not idempotent, then the instructions cause a
store/AMO access-fault exception.

                  The SSPOPCHK instruction performs a load followed by a check of the loaded data value with
                  the link register as source. If the check against the link register faults, and the instruction is
                  restarted by the trap handler, then the instruction will perform a load again. If the memory
                  from which the load is performed is non-idempotent, then the second load may cause
                 unexpected side effects. Shadow stack instructions that access the shadow stack require the
                  memory referenced by ssp to be idempotent to avoid such concerns. Locating shadow stacks in
                  non-idempotent memory, such as non-idempotent device memory, is not an expected usage,
                  and requiring memory referenced to be idempotent does not pose a significant restriction.

The U and SUM bit enforcement is performed normally for shadow stack instruction initiated memory
accesses. The state of the MXR bit does not affect read access to a shadow stack page as the shadow stack
page is always readable by all instructions that load from memory.

The G-stage address translation and protections remain unaffected by the Zicfiss extension. The xwr ==
0010 encoding in the G-stage PTE remains reserved. When G-stage page tables are active, the shadow stack
instructions that access memory require the G-stage page table to have read-write permission for the
accessed memory; else a store/AMO guest-page-fault exception is raised.

                  A future extension may define a shadow stack encoding in the G-stage page table to support
                 use cases such as a hypervisor enforcing shadow stack protections for its guests.

The Svpbmt and Svnapot extensions are supported for shadow stack pages.

The PMA checks are extended to require memory referenced by shadow stack instructions to be
idempotent. The PMP checks are extended to require read-write permission for memory accessed by
shadow stack instructions. If the PMP does not provide read-write permissions or if the accessed memory
is not idempotent then a store/AMO access-fault exception is raised.

The SSAMOSWAP.W and SSAMOSWAP.D instructions require the PMA of the accessed memory range to
provide AMOSwap-level support.

6.10. Pointer Masking Extensions

6.10.1. Introduction

RISC-V Pointer Masking (PM) is a feature that, when enabled, causes the CPU to ignore the upper bits of
the effective address (these terms will be defined more precisely in the Background section). This allows
these bits to be used in whichever way the application chooses. The version of the extension being
described here specifically targets tag checks: When an address is accessed, the tag stored in the masked
bits can be compared against a range-based tag. This is used for dynamic safety checkers such as HWASAN
(Serebryany et al., 2018). Such tools can be applied in all privilege modes (U, S, and M).

HWASAN leverages tags in the upper bits of the address to identify memory errors such as use-after-free or
buffer overflow errors. By storing a pointer tag in the upper bits of the address and checking it against a
memory tag stored in a side table, it can identify whether a pointer is pointing to a valid location. Doing
this without hardware support introduces significant overheads since the pointer tag needs to be manually
removed for every conventional memory operation. Pointer masking support reduces these overheads.

Pointer masking only adds the ability to ignore pointer tags during regular memory accesses. The tag
checks themselves can be implemented in software or hardware. If implemented in software, pointer
masking still provides performance benefits since non-checked accesses do not need to transform the
address before every memory access. Hardware implementations are expected to provide even larger
benefits due to performing tag checks out-of-band and hardening security guarantees derived from these
checks. We anticipate that future extensions may build on pointer masking to support this functionality in
hardware.

It is worth mentioning that while HWASAN is the primary use-case for the current pointer masking
extension, a number of other hardware/software features may be implemented leveraging Pointer Masking.
Some of these use cases include sandboxing, object type checks and garbage collection bits in runtime
systems. Note that the current version of the spec does not explicitly address these use cases, but future
extensions may build on it to do so.

While we describe the high-level concepts of pointer masking as if it was a single extension, it is, in reality,
a family of extensions that implementations or profiles may choose to individually include or exclude (see
Section 6.10.2.7).

6.10.2. Background

6.10.2.1. Definitions

We now define basic terms. Note that these rely on the definition of an “ignore” transformation, which is
defined in Section 6.10.2.2.

 ⚫ Effective address (as defined in the RISC-V Base ISA): A load/store effective address sent to the
   memory subsystem (e.g., as generated during the execution of load/store instructions). This does not
   include addresses corresponding to implicit accesses, such as page-table walks.
 ⚫ Masked bits: The upper PMLEN bits of an address, where PMLEN is a configurable parameter. We will
   use PMLEN consistently throughout this chapter to refer to this parameter.
 ⚫ Transformed address: An effective address after the ignore transformation has been applied.
 ⚫ Address translation mode: The MODE of the currently active address translation scheme as defined in
   the RISC-V privileged specification. This could, for example, refer to Bare, Sv39, Sv48, and Sv57. In
   accordance with the privileged specification, non-Bare translation modes are referred to as virtual-
   memory schemes. For the purpose of this specification, M-mode translation is treated as equivalent to
   Bare.
 ⚫ Address validity: The RISC-V privileged spec defines validity of addresses based on the address
   translation mode that is currently in use (e.g., Sv57, Sv48, Sv39, etc.). For a virtual address to be valid,
   all bits in the unused portion of the address must be the same as the Most Significant Bit (MSB) of the
   used portion. For example, when page-based 48-bit virtual memory (Sv48) is used, load/store effective
   addresses, which are 64 bits, must have bits 63–48 all set to bit 47, or else a page-fault exception will
   occur. For physical addresses, validity means that bits XLEN-1 to PABITS are zero, where PABITS is the
   number of physical address bits supported by the processor.
 ⚫ NVBITS: The upper bits within a virtual address that have no effect on addressing memory and are
   only used for validity checks. These bits depend on the currently active address translation mode. For

    example, in Sv48, these are bits 63-48.
 ⚫ VBITS: The bits within a virtual address that affect which memory is addressed. These are the bits of an
   address which are used to index into page tables.

6.10.2.2. The “Ignore” Transformation

The ignore transformation differs depending on whether it applies to a virtual or physical address. For
virtual addresses, it replaces the upper PMLEN bits with the sign extension of the PMLEN+1st bit.

  transformed_effective_address =
    {{PMLEN{effective_address[XLEN-PMLEN-1]}}, effective_address[XLEN-PMLEN-1:0]}

Listing 28. “Ignore” Transformation for virtual addresses, expressed in Verilog code.

                  If PMLEN is less than or equal to NVBITS for the largest supported address translation mode
                  on a given architecture, this is equivalent to ignoring a subset of NVBITS. This enables cheap
                 implementations that modify validity checks in the CPU instead of performing the sign
                  extension.

When applied to a physical address, including guest-physical addresses (i.e., all cases except when the
active satp register’s MODE field != Bare), the ignore transformation replaces the upper PMLEN bits with
0. This includes both the case of running in M-mode and running in other privilege modes with Bare
address translation mode.

  transformed_effective_address =
    {{PMLEN{0}}, effective_address[XLEN-PMLEN-1:0]}

Listing 29. “Ignore” Transformation for physical addresses, expressed in Verilog code.

                  This definition is consistent with the way that RISC-V already handles physical and virtual
                  addresses differently. While the unused upper bits of virtual addresses are the sign-extension
                 of the used bits (see the definition of “address validity” in Section 6.10.2.1), the equivalent bits
                  in physical addresses are zero-extended. This is necessary due to their interactions with other
                  mechanisms such as Physical Memory Protection (PMP).

When pointer masking is enabled, the ignore transformation will be applied to every explicit memory
access (e.g., loads/stores, atomics operations, and floating point loads/stores). The transformation does not
apply to implicit accesses such as page-table walks or instruction fetches. The set of accesses that pointer
masking applies to is described in Section 6.10.2.6.

                  Pointer masking does not change the underlying address generation logic or permission
                  checks. Under a fixed address translation mode, it is semantically equivalent to replacing a
                  subset of instructions (e.g., loads and stores) with an instruction sequence that applies the
                 ignore operation to the target address of this instruction and then applies the instruction to
                  the transformed address. References to address translation and other implementation details
                  in the text are primarily to explain design decisions and common implementation patterns.

Note that pointer masking is purely an arithmetic operation on the address that makes no assumption
about the meaning of the addresses it is applied to. Pointer masking with the same value of PMLEN always
has the same effect for the same type of address (virtual or physical). This ensures that code that relies on
pointer masking does not need to be aware of the environment it runs in once pointer masking has been
enabled, as long as the value of PMLEN is known, and whether or not addresses are virtual or physical. For

example, the same application or library code can run in user mode, supervisor mode or M-mode (with
different address translation modes) without modification.

                A common scenario for such code is that addresses are generated by mmap system calls. This
                abstracts away the details of the underlying address translation mode from the application
               code. Software therefore needs to be aware of the value of PMLEN to ensure that its minimally
                required number of tag bits is supported. Section 6.10.2.4 covers how this value is derived.

6.10.2.3. Example

Table 148 shows an example of the pointer masking transformation on a virtual address when PM is
enabled for RV64 under Sv57 (PMLEN=7).

                        Table 148. Example of PM address translation for RV64 under Sv57
Page-based profile          Sv57 on RV64
Effective Address           0xABFFFFFF12345678
                            NVBITS[1010101] VBITS[11111111111111111111111110001…000]
PMLEN                       7
Mask                        0x01FFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                            NVBITS[0000000] VBITS[11111111111111111111111111111…111]
PMLEN+1st bit from the top 1
(i.e., bit XLEN-PMLEN-1)
Transformed effective       0xFFFFFFFF12345678
address                     NVBITS[1111111] VBITS[11111111111111111111111110001…000]

If the address was a physical address rather than a virtual address with Sv57, the transformed address with
PMLEN=7 would be 0x1FFFFFF12345678.

6.10.2.4. Determining the Value of PMLEN

From an implementation perspective, ignoring bits is deeply connected to the maximum virtual and
physical address space supported by the processor (e.g., Bare, Sv48, Sv57). In particular, applying the above
transformation is cheap if it covers only bits that are not used by any supported address translation mode
(as it is equivalent to switching off validity checks). Masking NVBITS beyond those bits is more expensive
as it requires ignoring them in the TLB tag, and even more expensive if the masked bits extend into the
VBITS portion of the address (as it requires performing the actual sign extension). Similarly, when running
in Bare or M mode, it is common for implementations to not use a particular number of bits at the top of
the physical address range and fix them to zero. Applying the ignore transformation to those bits is cheap
as well, since it will result in a valid physical address with all the upper bits fixed to 0.

The current standard only supports PMLEN=XLEN-48 (i.e., PMLEN=16 in RV64) and PMLEN=XLEN-57
(i.e., PMLEN=7 in RV64). A setting has been reserved to potentially support other values of PMLEN in
future standards. In such future standards, different supported values of PMLEN may be defined for each
privilege mode (U/VU, S/HS, and M).

                Future versions of the pointer masking extension may introduce the ability to freely configure
                the value of PMLEN. The current extension does not define the behavior if PMLEN was
               different from the values defined above. In particular, there is no guarantee that a future
                pointer masking extension would define the ignore operation in the same way for those values
                of PMLEN.

6.10.2.5. Pointer Masking and Privilege Modes

Pointer masking is controlled separately for different privilege modes. The subset of supported privilege
modes is determined by the set of supported pointer masking extensions. Different privilege modes may
have different pointer masking settings active simultaneously and the hardware will automatically apply
the pointer masking settings of the currently active privilege mode. A privilege mode’s pointer masking
setting is configured by bits in configuration registers of the next-higher privilege mode.

Note that the pointer masking setting that is applied only depends on the active privilege mode, not on the
address that is being masked. Some operating systems (e.g., Linux) may use certain bits in the address to
disambiguate between different types of addresses (e.g., kernel and user-mode addresses). Pointer masking
does not take these semantics into account and is purely an arithmetic operation on the address it is given.

                  Linux places kernel addresses in the upper half of the address space and user addresses in the
                  lower half of the address space. As such, the MSB is often used to identify the type of a
                  particular address. With pointer masking enabled, this role is now played by bit XLEN-
                  PMLEN-1 and code that checks whether a pointer is a kernel or a user address needs to
                  inspect this bit instead. For backward compatibility, it may be desirable that the MSB still
                  indicates whether an address is a user or a kernel address. An operating system’s ABI may
                 mandate this, but it does not affect the pointer masking mechanism itself. For example, the
                  Linux ABI may choose to mandate that the MSB is not used for tagging and replicates bit
                  XLEN-PMLEN-1 bit (note that for such a mechanism to be secure, the kernel needs to check
                  the MSB of any user mode-supplied address and ensure that this invariant holds before using
                  it; alternatively, it can apply the transformation from Listing 1 or 2 to ensure that the MSB is
                  set to the correct value).

6.10.2.6. Memory Accesses Subject to Pointer Masking

Unless otherwise specified, pointer masking applies to all explicit memory accesses.

                  Pointer masking is not applied to SFENCE.*, HFENCE.*, SINVAL.*, or HINVAL.*. When such an
                 operation is invoked, it is the responsibility of the software to provide the correct address.

MPRV and SPVP affect pointer masking as well, causing the pointer masking settings of the effective
privilege mode to be applied. When MXR is in effect at the effective privilege mode where explicit memory
access is performed, pointer masking does not apply.

                  Note that this includes cases where page-based virtual memory is not in effect; i.e., although
                  MXR has no effect on permissions checks when page-based virtual memory is not in effect, it is
                 still used in determining whether or not pointer masking should be applied for loads with
                  effective privilege mode less than M.

                  Cache Management Operations (CMOs) must respect and take into account pointer masking.
                  Otherwise, a few serious security problems can appear, including:

                   ⚫ CBO.ZERO may work as a STORE operation. If pointer masking is not respected, it would
                    be possible to write to memory bypassing the mask enforcement.
                   ⚫ If CMOs did not respect pointer masking, it would be possible to weaponize this in a side-
                     channel attack. For example, U-mode would be able to flush a physical address (without
                     masking) that it should not be permitted to.

Pointer masking only applies to accesses generated by instructions on the CPU (including CPU extensions
such as an FPU). E.g., it does not apply to accesses generated by page-table walks, the IOMMU, or devices.

                 Pointer Masking does not apply to DMA controllers and other devices. It is therefore the

                responsibility of the software to manually untag these addresses.

Misaligned accesses are supported, subject to the same limitations as in the absence of pointer masking.
The behavior is identical to applying the pointer masking transformation to every constituent aligned
memory access. In other words, the accessed bytes should be identical to the bytes that would be accessed if
the pointer masking transformation was individually applied to every byte of the access without pointer
masking. This ensures that both hardware implementations and emulation of misaligned accesses in M-
mode behave the same way, and that the M-mode implementation is identical whether or not pointer
masking is enabled (e.g., such an implementation may leverage MPRV to apply the correct privilege mode’s
pointer masking setting).

No pointer masking operations are applied when software reads/writes to CSRs, including those meant to
hold addresses. If software stores tagged addresses into such CSRs, data load or data store operations based
on those addresses are subject to pointer masking only if they are explicit (Section 6.10.2.6) and pointer
masking is enabled for the privilege mode that performs the access. The implemented WARL width of
CSRs is unaffected by pointer masking (e.g., if a CSR supports 52 bits of valid addresses and pointer
masking is supported with PMLEN=16, the necessary number of WARL bits remains 52 independently of
whether pointer masking is enabled or disabled).

In contrast to software writes, pointer masking, when applicable, is applied for hardware writes to a CSR
(e.g., when the hardware writes the transformed address to stval when taking an exception). Pointer
masking is also applied, when applicable, to the memory access address when matching address triggers in
debug.

For example, software is free to write a tagged or untagged address to stvec, but on trap delivery (e.g., due
to an exception or interrupt), pointer masking will not be applied to the address of the trap handler.
However, when delivering an exception, the hardware applies pointer masking to any address written into
stval if pointer masking is applicable to that address.

                The rationale for this choice is that delivering the additional bits may add overheads in some
                hardware implementations. Further, pointer masking is configured per privilege mode, so all
               trap handlers in supervisor mode would need to be careful to configure pointer masking the
                same way as user mode or manually unmask (which is expensive).

6.10.2.7. Pointer Masking Extensions

Pointer masking refers to a number of separate extensions, all of which are privileged. This approach is
used to capture optionality of pointer masking features. Profiles and implementations may choose to
support an arbitrary subset of these extensions and must define valid ranges for their corresponding values
of PMLEN.

Extensions:

 ⚫ Ssnpm: A supervisor-level extension that provides pointer masking for the next lower privilege mode
   (U-mode), and for VS- and VU-modes if the H extension is present. See Section 4.1.10, Section 5.2.5,
   Section 5.2.1, and Section 5.5.4.
 ⚫ Smnpm: A machine-level extension that provides pointer masking for the next lower privilege mode
   (S/HS if S-mode is implemented, or U-mode otherwise). See Section 3.1.18.
 ⚫ Smmpm: A machine-level extension that provides pointer masking for M-mode. See Section 3.1.19.

In addition, the pointer masking standard defines two extensions that describe an execution environment
but have no bearing on hardware implementations. These extensions are intended to be used in profile
specifications where a User profile or a Supervisor profile can only reference User level or Supervisor level
pointer masking functionality, and not the associated CSR controls that exist at a higher privilege level (i.e.,

in the execution environment).

 ⚫ Sspm: An extension that indicates that there is pointer-masking support available in supervisor mode,
   with some facility provided in the supervisor execution environment to control pointer masking.
 ⚫ Supm: An extension that indicates that there is pointer-masking support available in user mode, with
   some facility provided in the application execution environment to control pointer masking.

The precise nature of these facilities is left to the respective execution environment.

Pointer masking only applies to RV64. In RV32, trying to enable pointer masking will result in an illegal
WARL write and not update the pointer masking configuration bits (see Section 3.1.19, Section 3.1.18,
Section 5.2.5, and Section 4.1.10 for details). The same is the case on RV64 or larger systems when
UXL/SXL is set to 1 for the corresponding privilege mode. Note that in RV32, the CSR bits introduced by
pointer masking are still present, for compatibility between RV32 and larger systems with UXL/SXL set to
1. Setting UXL/SXL to 1 will clear the corresponding pointer masking configuration bits.

                  Note that setting UXL/SXL to 1 and back to 0 does not preserve the previous values of the
                 PMM bits. This includes the case of entering an RV32 virtual machine from an RV64
                  hypervisor and returning.

                  Future extensions may introduce additional CSRs to allow different privilege modes to modify
                 their own pointer masking settings. This may be required for future use cases in managed
                  runtime systems that are not currently addressed as part of this extension.

6.10.2.8. Number of Masked Bits

As described in Section 6.10.2.4, the supported values of PMLEN may depend on the effective privilege
mode. The current standard only defines PMLEN=XLEN-48 and PMLEN=XLEN-57, but this assumption
may be relaxed in future extensions and profiles. Trying to enable pointer masking in an unsupported
scenario represents an illegal write to the corresponding pointer masking enable bit and follows WARL
semantics. Future profiles may choose to define certain combinations of privilege modes and supported
values of PMLEN as mandatory.

                  An option that was considered but discarded was to allow implementations to set PMLEN
                  depending on the active addressing mode. For example, PMLEN could be set to 16 for Sv48 and
                  to 25 for Sv39. However, having a single value of PMLEN (e.g., setting PMLEN to 16 for both
                  Sv39 and Sv48 rather than 25) facilitates TLB implementations in designs that support Sv39
                 and Sv48 but not Sv57. 16 bits are sufficient for current pointer masking use cases but allow
                  for a TLB implementation that matches against the same number of virtual tag bits
                  independently of whether it is running with Sv39 or Sv48. However, if Sv57 is supported, tag
                  matching may need to be conditional on the current address translation mode.

