
Chapter 8. Ss Supervisor Extensions
                  This chapter is currently being restructured. Its contents are normative, but the presentation
                 might appear disjoint.

8.1. Ssqosid Extension for Quality-of-Service (QoS) Identifiers
Quality of Service (QoS) is defined as the minimal end-to-end performance guaranteed in advance by a
service level agreement (SLA) to a workload. Performance metrics might include measures such as
instructions per cycle (IPC), latency of service, etc.

When multiple workloads execute concurrently on modern processors—equipped with large core counts,
multiple cache hierarchies, and multiple memory controllers— the performance of any given workload
becomes less deterministic, or even non-deterministic, due to shared resource contention.

To manage performance variability, system software needs resource allocation and monitoring capabilities.
These capabilities allow for the reservation of resources like cache and bandwidth, thus meeting individual
performance targets while minimizing interference. For resource management, hardware should provide
monitoring features that allow system software to profile workload resource consumption and allocate
resources accordingly.

To facilitate this, the QoS Identifiers extension (Ssqosid) introduces the srmcfg register, which configures a
hart with two identifiers: a Resource Control ID (RCID) and a Monitoring Counter ID (MCID). These
identifiers accompany each request issued by the hart to shared resource controllers.

Additional metadata, like the nature of the memory access and the ID of the originating supervisor domain,
can accompany RCID and MCID. Resource controllers may use this metadata for differentiated service such
as a different capacity allocation for code storage vs. data storage. Resource controllers can use this data for
security policies such as not exposing statistics of one security domain to another.

These identifiers are crucial for the RISC-V Capacity and Bandwidth Controller QoS Register Interface
(CBQRI) specification, which provides methods for setting resource usage limits and monitoring resource
consumption. The RCID controls resource allocations, while the MCID is used for tracking resource usage.

                 The Ssqosid extension does not require that S-mode mode be implemented.

8.1.1. Supervisor Resource Management Configuration (srmcfg) register

The srmcfg register is an SXLEN-bit read/write register used to configure a Resource Control ID (RCID) and
a Monitoring Counter ID (MCID). Both RCID and MCID are WARL fields. The register is formatted as shown in
Figure 132 when SXLEN=64 and Figure 133 when SXLEN=32.

The RCID and MCID accompany each request made by the hart to shared resource controllers. The RCID is
used to determine the resource allocations (e.g., cache occupancy limits, memory bandwidth limits, etc.) to
enforce. The MCID is used to identify a counter to monitor resource usage.

Figure 132. Supervisor Resource Management Configuration (srmcfg) register for SXLEN=64

Figure 133. Supervisor Resource Management Configuration (srmcfg) register for SXLEN=32

The RCID and MCID configured in the srmcfg CSR apply to all privilege modes of software execution on that
hart by default, but this behavior may be overridden by future extensions.

If extension Smstateen is implemented together with Ssqosid, then Ssqosid also requires the SRMCFG bit
in mstateen0 to be implemented. If mstateen0.SRMCFG is 0, attempts to access srmcfg in privilege modes
less privileged than M-mode raise an illegal-instruction exception. If mstateen0.SRMCFG is 1 or if
extension Smstateen is not implemented, attempts to access srmcfg when V=1 raise a virtual-instruction
exception.

               A reset value of 0 is suggested for the RCID field matching resource controllers' default
               behavior of associating all capacity with RCID=0. The MCID reset value does not affect
               functionality and may be implementation-defined.

               Typically, fewer bits are allocated for RCID (e.g., to support tens of RCIDs) than for MCID (e.g.,
               to support hundreds of MCIDs). A common RCID is usually used to group apps or VMs,
               pooling resource allocations to meet collective SLAs. If an SLA breach occurs, unique MCIDs
               enable granular monitoring, aiding decisions on resource adjustment, associating a different
               RCID with a subset of members, or migrating members to other machines. The larger pool of
               MCIDs speeds up this analysis.

               The RCID and MCID in srmcfg apply across all privilege levels on the hart. Typically, higher-
               privilege modes don’t modify srmcfg, as they often serve lower-privileged tasks. If
              differentiation is needed, higher privilege code can update srmcfg and restore it before
               returning to a lower privilege level.

               In VM environments, hypervisors usually manage resource allocations, keeping the Guest OS
               out of QoS flows. If needed, the hypervisor can virtualize srmcfg CSR for a VM using the
               virtual-instruction exceptions triggered upon Guest access. If the direct selection of RCID and
               MCID by the VM becomes common and emulation overhead is an issue, future extensions may
               allow VS-mode to use a selector for a hypervisor-configured set of CSRs holding RCID and
               MCID values designated for that Guest OS use.

               During context switches, the supervisor may choose to execute with the srmcfg of the outgoing
               context to attribute the execution to it. Prior to restoring the new context, it switches to the new
               VM’s srmcfg. The supervisor can also use a separate configuration for execution not to be
               attributed to either contexts.

8.2. Ssu64xl Extension for UXLEN=64 Support, Version 1.0
If the Ssu64xl extension is implemented, then sstatus.UXL must be capable of holding the value 2 (i.e.,
UXLEN=64 must be supported).

8.3. Ssccptr Extension for Main Memory Page-Table Reads, Version 1.0
If the Ssccptr extension is implemented, then main memory regions with both the cacheability and
coherence PMAs must support hardware page-table reads.

8.4. Sstvecd Extension for Direct Trap Vectoring, Version 1.0
If the Sstvecd extension is implemented, then stvec.MODE must be capable of holding the value 0 (Direct).

Furthermore, when stvec.MODE=Direct, stvec.BASE must be capable of holding any valid four-byte-
aligned address.

8.5. Sstvala Extension for Trap Value Reporting, Version 1.0
If the Sstvala extension is implemented, then stval must be written with the faulting virtual address for
load, store, and instruction page-fault, access-fault, and misaligned exceptions, and for breakpoint
exceptions that are defined to write an address to stval, other than those caused by execution of the EBREAK
or C.EBREAK instructions.

For virtual-instruction and illegal-instruction exceptions, stval must be written with the faulting
instruction.

8.6. Sscounterenw Extension for Counter-Enable Writability, Version 1.0
If the Sscounterenw extension is implemented, then for any hpmcounter that is not read-only zero, the
corresponding bit in scounteren must be writable.

8.7. Ssstrict Extension for Extension Conformance, Version 1.0
If the Ssstrict extension is implemented, then no non-conforming extensions are present.

Furthermore, attempts to execute unimplemented opcodes or access unimplemented CSRs in the standard
or reserved encoding spaces raises an illegal instruction exception that results in a contained trap to the
supervisor-mode trap handler.

8.8. Sstc Extension for Supervisor-mode Timer Interrupts
The current Privileged arch specification only defines a hardware mechanism for generating machine-
mode timer interrupts (based on the mtime and mtimecmp registers). With the resultant requirement that
timer services for S-mode/HS-mode (and for VS-mode) have to all be provided by M-mode - via SBI calls
from S/HS-mode up to M-mode (or VS-mode calls to HS-mode and then to M-mode). M-mode software
then multiplexes these multiple logical timers onto its one physical M-mode timer facility, and the M-
mode timer interrupt handler passes timer interrupts back down to the appropriate lower privilege mode.

This extension serves to provide supervisor mode with its own CSR-based timer interrupt facility that it
can directly manage to provide its own timer service (in the form of having its own stimecmp register) -
thus eliminating the large overheads for emulating S/HS-mode timers and timer interrupt generation up
in M-mode. Further, this extension adds a similar facility to the Hypervisor extension for VS-mode.

The extension name is Sstc (“Ss” for Privileged arch and Supervisor-level extensions, and “tc” for
timecmp). This extension adds the S-level stimecmp CSR (Section 4.1.12) and the VS-level vstimecmp CSR
(Section 5.2.19). This extension adds the STCE bit to the menvcfg (Section 3.1.18) and henvcfg (Section 5.2.5)
CSRs.

8.9. Sscofpmf Extension for Count Overflow and Mode-Based Filtering
The current Privileged specification defines mhpmevent CSRs to select and control event counting by the
associated hpmcounter CSRs, but provides no standardization of any fields within these CSRs. For at least
Linux-class rich-OS systems it is desirable to standardize certain basic features that are broadly desired
(and have come up over the past year plus on RISC-V lists, as well as have been the subject of past
proposals). This enables there to be standard upstream software support that eliminates the need for
implementations to provide their own custom software support.

This extension serves to accomplish exactly this within the existing mhpmevent CSRs (and correspondingly
avoids the unnecessary creation of whole new sets of CSRs - past just one new CSR).

This extension sticks to addressing two basic well-understood needs that have been requested by various
people. To make it easy to understand the deltas from the current Priv 1.11/1.12 specs, this is written as the
actual exact changes to be made to existing paragraphs of Priv spec text (or additional paragraphs within
the existing text).

The extension name is "Sscofpmf" ('Ss' for Privileged arch and Supervisor-level extensions, and 'cofpmf' for
Count OverFlow and Privilege Mode Filtering).

Note that the new count overflow interrupt will be treated as a standard local interrupt that is assigned to
bit 13 in the mip/mie/sip/sie registers.

8.9.1. Count Overflow Control

The following bits are added to mhpmevent:

        63         62             61             60              59             58               57            56
        OF       MINH            SINH           UINH          VSINH          VUINH              WPRI         WPRI

Field            Description
OF               Overflow status and interrupt disable bit that is set when counter overflows
MINH             If set, then counting of events in M-mode is inhibited
SINH             If set, then counting of events in S/HS-mode is inhibited
UINH             If set, then counting of events in U-mode is inhibited
VSINH            If set, then counting of events in VS-mode is inhibited
VUINH            If set, then counting of events in VU-mode is inhibited
WPRI             Reserved
WPRI             Reserved

For each xINH bit, if the associated privilege mode is not implemented, the bit is read-only zero.

Each of the five xINH bits, when set, inhibit counting of events while in privilege mode x. All-zeroes for
these bits results in counting of events in all modes.

The OF bit is set when the corresponding hpmcounter overflows, and remains set until written by software.
Since hpmcounter values are unsigned values, overflow is defined as unsigned overflow of the implemented
counter bits. Note that there is no loss of information after an overflow since the counter wraps around and
keeps counting while the sticky OF bit remains set.

The 32-bit scountovf register contains read-only shadow copies of the OF bits in all 29 mhpmevent

registers.

If an hpmcounter overflows while the associated OF bit is zero, then a “count overflow interrupt request” is
generated. If the OF bit is one, then no interrupt request is generated. Consequently the OF bit also
functions as a count overflow interrupt disable for the associated hpmcounter.

Count overflow never results from writes to the `mhpmcounter`n or `mhpmevent`n registers, only from
hardware increments of counter registers.

This count-overflow-interrupt-request signal is treated as a standard local interrupt that corresponds to bit
13 in the mip/mie/sip/sie registers. The mip/sip LCOFIP and mie/sie LCOFIE bits are, respectively, the
interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for this interrupt. ('LCOFI' represents 'Local Count Overflow
Interrupt'.)

Generation of a count-overflow-interrupt request by an hpmcounter sets the associated OF bit. When an OF
bit is set, it eventually, but not necessarily immediately, sets the LCOFIP bit in the mip/sip registers. The
LCOFIP bit is cleared by software before servicing the count overflow interrupt resulting from one or more
count overflows. The mideleg register controls the delegation of this interrupt to S-mode versus M-mode.

                 There are not separate overflow status and overflow interrupt enable bits. In practice, enabling
                 overflow interrupt generation (by clearing the OF bit) is done in conjunction with initializing
                the counter to a starting value. Once a counter has overflowed, it and the OF bit must be
                 reinitialized before another overflow interrupt can be generated.

                 Software can distinguish newly overflowed counters (yet to be serviced by an overflow interrupt
                 handler) from overflowed counters that have already been serviced or that are configured to
                not generate an interrupt on overflow, by maintaining a bit mask reflecting which counters are
                 active and due to eventually overflow.

8.9.2. Supervisor Count Overflow (scountovf) Register

This extension adds the scountovf CSR, a 32-bit read-only register that contains shadow copies of the OF
bits in the 29 mhpmevent CSRs (mhpmevent3 - mhpmevent31) - where scountovf bit X corresponds to
`mhpmevent`X.

This register enables supervisor-level overflow interrupt handler software to quickly and easily determine
which counter(s) have overflowed (without needing to make an execution environment call or series of
calls ultimately up to M-mode).

Read access to bit X is subject to the same mcounteren (or mcounteren and hcounteren) CSRs that mediate
access to the hpmcounter CSRs by S-mode (or VS-mode). In M-mode, scountovf bit X is always readable. In
S/HS-mode, scountovf bit X is readable when mcounteren bit X is set, and otherwise reads as zero.
Similarly, in VS mode, scountovf bit X is readable when mcounteren bit X and hcounteren bit X are both set,
and otherwise reads as zero.

8.10. Ssdbltrp Double Trap Extension
The Ssdbltrp extension addresses a double trap (See Section 3.1.6.2) privilege modes lower than M. It
enables HS-mode to invoke a critical error handler in a virtual machine on a double trap in VS-mode. It
also allows M-mode to invoke a critical error handler in the OS/Hypervisor on a double trap in S/HS-
mode.

The Ssdbltrp extension adds the menvcfg.DTE (See Section 3.1.18) and the sstatus.SDT fields (See Section
4.1.1). If the hypervisor extension is additionally implemented, then the extension adds the henvcfg.DTE

(See Section 5.2.5) and the vsstatus.SDT fields (See Section 5.2.11).

See Section 4.1.1.5 for the operational details.

