Preface

                  The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious. It is the
                  source of all true art and science.
                  Albert Einstein, What I Believe, 1930

About This Book
We believe that learning in computer science and engineering should reflect
the current state of the field, as well as introduce the principles that are shaping
computing. We also feel that readers in every specialty of computing need
to appreciate the organizational paradigms that determine the capabilities,
performance, energy, and, ultimately, the success of computer systems.
   Modern computer technology requires professionals of every computing
specialty to understand both hardware and software. The interaction between
hardware and software at a variety of levels also offers a framework for understanding
the fundamentals of computing. Whether your primary interest is hardware or
software, computer science or electrical engineering, the central ideas in computer
organization and design are the same. Thus, our emphasis in this book is to show
the relationship between hardware and software and to focus on the concepts that
are the basis for current computers.
   The recent switch from uniprocessor to multicore microprocessors confirmed
the soundness of this perspective, given since the first edition. While programmers
could ignore the advice and rely on computer architects, compiler writers, and silicon
engineers to make their programs run faster or be more energy-efficient without
change, that era is over. For programs to run faster, they must become parallel.
While the goal of many researchers is to make it possible for programmers to be
unaware of the underlying parallel nature of the hardware they are programming,
it will take many years to realize this vision. Our view is that for at least the next
decade, most programmers are going to have to understand the hardware/software
interface if they want programs to run efficiently on parallel computers.
   The audience for this book includes those with little experience in assembly
language or logic design who need to understand basic computer organization as
well as readers with backgrounds in assembly language and/or logic design who
want to learn how to design a computer or understand how a system works and
why it performs as it does.

      About the Other Book
      Some readers may be familiar with Computer Architecture: A Quantitative
      Approach, popularly known as Hennessy and Patterson. (This book in turn is
      often called Patterson and Hennessy.) Our motivation in writing the earlier book
      was to describe the principles of computer architecture using solid engineering
      fundamentals and quantitative cost/performance tradeoffs. We used an approach
      that combined examples and measurements, based on commercial systems, to
      create realistic design experiences. Our goal was to demonstrate that computer
      architecture could be learned using quantitative methodologies instead of a
      descriptive approach. It was intended for the serious computing professional who
      wanted a detailed understanding of computers.
         A majority of the readers for this book do not plan to become computer
      architects. The performance and energy efficiency of future software systems will
      be dramatically affected, however, by how well software designers understand the
      basic hardware techniques at work in a system. Thus, compiler writers, operating
      system designers, database programmers, and most other software engineers
      need a firm grounding in the principles presented in this book. Similarly,
      hardware designers must understand clearly the effects of their work on software
      applications.
         Thus, we knew that this book had to be much more than a subset of the material
      in Computer Architecture, and the material was extensively revised to match the
      different audience. We were so happy with the result that the subsequent editions of
      Computer Architecture were revised to remove most of the introductory material;
      hence, there is much less overlap today than with the first editions of both books.

      Why ARMv8 for This Edition?
      The choice of instruction set architecture is clearly critical to the pedagogy of a
      computer architecture textbook. We didn’t want an instruction set that required
      describing unnecessary baroque features for someone’s first instruction set, no
      matter how popular it is. Ideally, your initial instruction set should be an exemplar,
      just like your first love. Surprisingly, you remember both fondly.
         Since there were so many choices at the time, for the first edition of Computer
      Architecture: A Quantitative Approach we invented our own RISC-style instruction
      set. Given the growing popularity and the simple elegance of the MIPS instruction
      set, we switched to it for the first edition of this book and to later editions of the
      other book. MIPS has served us and our readers well.
         The incredible popularity of the ARM instruction set—14 billion instances were
      shipped in 2015—led some instructors to ask for a version of the book based on
      ARM. We even tried a version of it for a subset of chapters for an Asian edition
      of this book. Alas, as we feared, the baroqueness of the ARMv7 (32-bit address)
      instruction set was too much for us to bear, so we did not consider making the
      change permanent.

    To our surprise, when ARM offered a 64-bit address instruction set, it made so
many significant changes that in our opinion it bore more similarity to MIPS than
it did to ARMv7:
   ■   The registers were expanded from 16 to 32;
   ■   The PC is no longer one of these registers;
   ■   The conditional execution option for every instruction was dropped;
   ■   Load multiple and store multiple instructions were dropped;
   ■   PC-relative branches with large address fields were added;
   ■   Addressing modes were made consistent for all data transfer instructions;
   ■   Fewer instructions set condition codes;
and so on. Although ARMv8 is much, much larger than MIPS—the ARMv8
architecture reference manual is 5400 pages long—we found a subset of ARMv8
instructions that is similar in size and nature to the MIPS core used in prior editions,
which we call LEGv8 to avoid confusion. Hence, we wrote this ARMv8 edition.
   Given that ARMv8 offers both 32-bit address instructions and 64-bit address
instructions within essentially the same instruction set, we could have switched
instruction sets but kept the address size at 32 bits. Our publisher polled the faculty
who used the book and found that 75% either preferred larger addresses or were
neutral, so we increased the address space to 64 bits, which may make more sense
today than 32 bits.
   The only changes for the ARMv8 edition from the MIPS edition are those associated
with the change in instruction sets, which primarily affects Chapter 2, Chapter 3, the
virtual memory section in Chapter 5, and the short VMIPS example in Chapter 6. In
Chapter 4, we switched to ARMv8 instructions, changed several figures, and added
a few “Elaboration” sections, but the changes were simpler than we had feared.
Chapter 1 and the rest of the appendices are virtually unchanged. The extensive online
documentation and combined with the magnitude of ARMv8 make it difficult to come
up with a replacement for the MIPS version of Appendix A (“Assemblers, Linkers, and
the SPIM Simulator” in the MIPS Fifth Edition). Instead, Chapters 2, 3, and 5 include
quick overviews of the hundreds of ARMv8 instructions outside of the core ARMv8
instructions that we cover in detail in the rest of the book. We believe readers of this
edition will have a good understanding of ARMv8 without having to plow through
thousands of pages of online documentation. And for any reader that adventurous, it
would probably be wise to read these surveys first to get a framework on which to hang
on the many features of ARMv8.
   Note that we are not (yet) saying that we are permanently switching to ARMv8.
For example, both ARMv8 and MIPS versions of the fifth edition are available for
sale now. One possibility is that there will be a demand for both MIPS and ARMv8
versions for future editions of the book, or there may even be a demand for a third

        version with yet another instruction set. We’ll cross that bridge when we come to it.
        For now, we look forward to your reaction to and feedback on this effort.

        Changes for the Fifth Edition
        We had six major goals for the fifth edition of Computer Organization and Design:
        demonstrate the importance of understanding hardware with a running example;
        highlight main themes across the topics using margin icons that are introduced
        early; update examples to reflect changeover from PC era to post-PC era; spread
        the material on I/O throughout the book rather than isolating it into a single
        chapter; update the technical content to reflect changes in the industry since the
        publication of the fourth edition in 2009; and put appendices and optional sections
        online instead of including a CD to lower costs and to make this edition viable as
        an electronic book.
            Before discussing the goals in detail, let’s look at the table on the next page.
        It shows the hardware and software paths through the material. Chapters 1, 4,
        5, and 6 are found on both paths, no matter what the experience or the focus.
        Chapter 1 discusses the importance of energy and how it motivates the switch
        from single core to multicore microprocessors and introduces the eight great
        ideas in computer architecture. Chapter 2 is likely to be review material for the
        hardware-oriented, but it is essential reading for the software-oriented, especially
        for those readers interested in learning more about compilers and object-oriented
        programming languages. Chapter 3 is for readers interested in constructing a
        datapath or in learning more about floating-point arithmetic. Some will skip
        parts of Chapter 3, either because they don’t need them, or because they offer
        a review. However, we introduce the running example of matrix multiply in
        this chapter, showing how subword parallels offers a fourfold improvement, so
        don’t skip Sections 3.6 to 3.8. Chapter 4 explains pipelined processors. Sections
        4.1, 4.5, and 4.10 give overviews, and Section 4.12 gives the next performance
        boost for matrix multiply for those with a software focus. Those with a hardware
        focus, however, will find that this chapter presents core material; they may also,
        depending on their background, want to read Appendix A on logic design first.
        The last chapter on multicores, multiprocessors, and clusters, is mostly new
        content and should be read by everyone. It was significantly reorganized in this
        edition to make the flow of ideas more natural and to include much more depth
        on GPUs, warehouse-scale computers, and the hardware–software interface of
        network interface cards that are key to clusters.

       Chapter or Appendix                    Sections                     Software focus   Hardware focus

1. Computer Abstractions                1.1 to 1.11
and Technology                              1.12 (History)
                                        2.1 to 2.14
2. Instructions: Language                   2.15 (Compilers & Java)
of the Computer                         2.16 to 2.21
                                            2.22 (History)
D. RISC Instruction-Set Architectures       D.1 to D.17
                                        3.1 to 3.5

                                        3.6 to 3.9 (Subword Parallelism)
3. Arithmetic for Computers
                                        3.10 to 3.11 (Fallacies)

                                            3.12 (History)
A. The Basics of Logic Design           A.1 to A.13
                                        4.1 (Overview)
                                        4.2 (Logic Conventions)
                                        4.3 to 4.4 (Simple Implementation)
                                        4.5 (Pipelining Overview)

4. The Processor                        4.6 (Pipelined Datapath)
                                        4.7 to 4.9 (Hazards, Exceptions)
                                        4.10 to 4.12 (Parallel, Real Stuff)
                                            4.13 (Verilog Pipeline Control)
                                        4.14 to 4.15 (Fallacies)
                                            4.16 (History)
C. Mapping Control to Hardware              C.1 to C.6

                                        5.1 to 5.10

                                            5.11 (Redundant Arrays of
                                        Inexpensive Disks)
5. Large and Fast: Exploiting
Memory Hierarchy
                                            5.12 (Verilog Cache Controller)
                                        5.13 to 5.16
                                            5.17 (History)
                                        6.1 to 6.8
6. Parallel Process from Client             6.9 (Networks)
to Cloud                                6.10 to 6.14
                                            6.15 (History)

B. Graphics Processor Units                 B.1 to B.13

  Read carefully                    Read if have time                 Reference
  Review or read                    Read for culture

        The first of the six goals for this fifth edition was to demonstrate the importance
     of understanding modern hardware to get good performance and energy efficiency
     with a concrete example. As mentioned above, we start with subword parallelism
     in Chapter 3 to improve matrix multiply by a factor of 4. We double performance
     in Chapter 4 by unrolling the loop to demonstrate the value of instruction-level
     parallelism. Chapter 5 doubles performance again by optimizing for caches using
     blocking. Finally, Chapter 6 demonstrates a speedup of 14 from 16 processors by
     using thread-level parallelism. All four optimizations in total add just 24 lines of C
     code to our initial matrix multiply example.
        The second goal was to help readers separate the forest from the trees by
     identifying eight great ideas of computer architecture early and then pointing
     out all the places they occur throughout the rest of the book. We use (hopefully)
     easy-to-remember margin icons and highlight the corresponding word in the text
     to remind readers of these eight themes. There are nearly 100 citations in the book.
     No chapter has less than seven examples of great ideas, and no idea is cited less than
     five times. Performance via parallelism, pipelining, and prediction are the three
     most popular great ideas, followed closely by Moore’s Law. The processor chapter
     (4) is the one with the most examples, which is not a surprise since it probably
     received the most attention from computer architects. The one great idea found in
     every chapter is performance via parallelism, which is a pleasant observation given
     the recent emphasis in parallelism in the field and in editions of this book.
        The third goal was to recognize the generation change in computing from
     the PC era to the post-PC era by this edition with our examples and material.
     Thus, Chapter 1 dives into the guts of a tablet computer rather than a PC, and
     Chapter 6 describes the computing infrastructure of the cloud. We also feature the
     ARM, which is the instruction set of choice in the personal mobile devices of the
     post-PC era, as well as the x86 instruction set that dominated the PC era and (so
     far) dominates cloud computing.
        The fourth goal was to spread the I/O material throughout the book rather
     than have it in its own chapter, much as we spread parallelism throughout all the
     chapters in the fourth edition. Hence, I/O material in this edition can be found in
     Sections 1.4, 4.9, 5.2, 5.5, 5.11, and 6.9. The thought is that readers (and instructors)
     are more likely to cover I/O if it’s not segregated to its own chapter.
        This is a fast-moving field, and, as is always the case for our new editions, an
     important goal is to update the technical content. The running example is the ARM
     Cortex A53 and the Intel Core i7, reflecting our post-PC era. Other highlights
     include a tutorial on GPUs that explains their unique terminology, more depth on
     the warehouse-scale computers that make up the cloud, and a deep dive into 10
     Gigabyte Ethernet cards.
        To keep the main book short and compatible with electronic books, we placed
     the optional material as online appendices instead of on a companion CD as in
     prior editions.
        Finally, we updated all the exercises in the book.
        While some elements changed, we have preserved useful book elements from
     prior editions. To make the book work better as a reference, we still place definitions
     of new terms in the margins at their first occurrence. The book element called

“Understanding Program Performance” sections helps readers understand the
performance of their programs and how to improve it, just as the “Hardware/Software
Interface” book element helped readers understand the tradeoffs at this interface.
“The Big Picture” section remains so that the reader sees the forest despite all the
trees. “Check Yourself ” sections help readers to confirm their comprehension of the
material on the first time through with answers provided at the end of each chapter.
This edition still includes the green ARMv8 reference card, which was inspired by the
“Green Card” of the IBM System/360. This card has been updated and should be a
handy reference when writing ARMv8 assembly language programs.

Instructor Support
   We have collected a great deal of material to help instructors teach courses using
this book. Solutions to exercises, figures from the book, lecture slides, and other
materials are available to instructors who register with the publisher. In addition,
the companion Web site provides links to a free Community Edition of ARM DS-5
professional software suite which contains an ARMv8-A (64-bit) architecture
simulator, as well as additional advanced content for further study, appendices,
glossary, references, and recommended reading. Check the publisher’s Web site for
more information:
                     textbooks.elsevier.com/9780128017333

Concluding Remarks
If you read the following acknowledgments section, you will see that we went to
great lengths to correct mistakes. Since a book goes through many printings, we
have the opportunity to make even more corrections. If you uncover any remaining,
resilient bugs, please contact the publisher by electronic mail at codARMbugs@
mkp.com or by low-tech mail using the address found on the copyright page.
   This edition is the third break in the long-standing collaboration between
Hennessy and Patterson, which started in 1989. The demands of running one of
the world’s great universities meant that President Hennessy could no longer make
the substantial commitment to create a new edition. The remaining author felt
once again like a tightrope walker without a safety net. Hence, the people in the
acknowledgments and Berkeley colleagues played an even larger role in shaping
the contents of this book. Nevertheless, this time around there is only one author
to blame for the new material in what you are about to read.

Acknowledgments
With every edition of this book, we are very fortunate to receive help from many
readers, reviewers, and contributors. Each of these people has helped to make this
book better.
   We are grateful for the assistance of Khaled Benkrid and his colleagues at
ARM Ltd., who carefully reviewed the ARM-related material and provided helpful
feedback.

          Chapter 6 was so extensively revised that we did a separate review for ideas and
       contents, and I made changes based on the feedback from every reviewer. I’d like to
       thank Christos Kozyrakis of Stanford University for suggesting using the network
       interface for clusters to demonstrate the hardware–software interface of I/O and
       for suggestions on organizing the rest of the chapter; Mario Flagsilk of Stanford
       University for providing details, diagrams, and performance measurements of the
       NetFPGA NIC; and the following for suggestions on how to improve the chapter:
       David Kaeli of Northeastern University, Partha Ranganathan of HP Labs,
       David Wood of the University of Wisconsin, and my Berkeley colleagues Siamak
       Faridani, Shoaib Kamil, Yunsup Lee, Zhangxi Tan, and Andrew Waterman.
          Special thanks goes to Rimas Avizenis of UC Berkeley, who developed the
       various versions of matrix multiply and supplied the performance numbers as well.
       As I worked with his father while I was a graduate student at UCLA, it was a nice
       symmetry to work with Rimas at UCB.
          I also wish to thank my longtime collaborator Randy Katz of UC Berkeley, who
       helped develop the concept of great ideas in computer architecture as part of the
       extensive revision of an undergraduate class that we did together.
          I’d like to thank David Kirk, John Nickolls, and their colleagues at NVIDIA
       (Michael Garland, John Montrym, Doug Voorhies, Lars Nyland, Erik Lindholm,
       Paulius Micikevicius, Massimiliano Fatica, Stuart Oberman, and Vasily Volkov)
       for writing the first in-depth appendix on GPUs. I’d like to express again my
       appreciation to Jim Larus, recently named Dean of the School of Computer and
       Communications Science at EPFL, for his willingness in contributing his expertise
       on assembly language programming, as well as for welcoming readers of this book
       with regard to using the simulator he developed and maintains.
          I am also very grateful to Zachary Kurmas of Grand Valley State University,
       who updated and created new exercises, based on originals created by Perry
       Alexander (The University of Kansas); Jason Bakos (University of South Carolina);
       Javier Bruguera (Universidade de Santiago de Compostela); Matthew Farrens
       (University of California, Davis); David Kaeli (Northeastern University); Nicole
       Kaiyan (University of Adelaide); John Oliver (Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo); Milos
       Prvulovic (Georgia Tech); Jichuan Chang (Google); Jacob Leverich (Stanford);
       Kevin Lim (Hewlett-Packard); and Partha Ranganathan (Google).
          Additional thanks goes to Jason Bakos for updating the lecture slides.
          I am grateful to the many instructors who have answered the publisher’s
       surveys, reviewed our proposals, and attended focus groups to analyze and
       respond to our plans for this edition. They include the following individuals:
       Focus Groups: Bruce Barton (Suffolk County Community College), Jeff Braun
       (Montana Tech), Ed Gehringer (North Carolina State), Michael Goldweber
       (Xavier University), Ed Harcourt (St. Lawrence University), Mark Hill (University
       of Wisconsin, Madison), Patrick Homer (University of Arizona), Norm Jouppi
       (HP Labs), Dave Kaeli (Northeastern University), Christos Kozyrakis (Stanford
       University), Jae C. Oh (Syracuse University), Lu Peng (LSU), Milos Prvulovic
       (Georgia Tech), Partha Ranganathan (HP Labs), David Wood (University of
       Wisconsin), Craig Zilles (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign). Surveys

and Reviews: Mahmoud Abou-Nasr (Wayne State University), Perry Alexander
(The University of Kansas), Behnam Arad (Sacramento State University),
Hakan Aydin (George Mason University), Hussein Badr (State University of
New York at Stony Brook), Mac Baker (Virginia Military Institute), Ron Barnes
(George Mason University), Douglas Blough (Georgia Institute of Technology),
Kevin Bolding (Seattle Pacific University), Miodrag Bolic (University of Ottawa),
John Bonomo (Westminster College), Jeff Braun (Montana Tech), Tom Briggs
(Shippensburg University), Mike Bright (Grove City College), Scott Burgess
(Humboldt State University), Fazli Can (Bilkent University), Warren R. Carithers
(Rochester Institute of Technology), Bruce Carlton (Mesa Community College),
Nicholas Carter (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), Anthony Cocchi
(The City University of New York), Don Cooley (Utah State University), Gene
Cooperman (Northeastern University), Robert D. Cupper (Allegheny College),
Amy Csizmar Dalal (Carleton College), Daniel Dalle (Université de Sherbrooke),
Edward W. Davis (North Carolina State University), Nathaniel J. Davis (Air Force
Institute of Technology), Molisa Derk (Oklahoma City University), Andrea Di
Blas (Stanford University), Derek Eager (University of Saskatchewan), Ata Elahi
(Souther Connecticut State University), Ernest Ferguson (Northwest Missouri
State University), Rhonda Kay Gaede (The University of Alabama), Etienne M.
Gagnon (L’Université du Québec à Montréal), Costa Gerousis (Christopher
Newport University), Paul Gillard (Memorial University of Newfoundland),
Michael Goldweber (Xavier University), Georgia Grant (College of San Mateo),
Paul V. Gratz (Texas A&M University), Merrill Hall (The Master’s College), Tyson
Hall (Southern Adventist University), Ed Harcourt (St. Lawrence University),
Justin E. Harlow (University of South Florida), Paul F. Hemler (Hampden-
Sydney College), Jayantha Herath (St. Cloud State University), Martin Herbordt
(Boston University), Steve J. Hodges (Cabrillo College), Kenneth Hopkinson
(Cornell University), Bill Hsu (San Francisco State University), Dalton Hunkins
(St. Bonaventure University), Baback Izadi (State University of New York—New
Paltz), Reza Jafari, Robert W. Johnson (Colorado Technical University), Bharat
Joshi (University of North Carolina, Charlotte), Nagarajan Kandasamy (Drexel
University), Rajiv Kapadia, Ryan Kastner (University of California, Santa Barbara),
E.J. Kim (Texas A&M University), Jihong Kim (Seoul National University), Jim
Kirk (Union University), Geoffrey S. Knauth (Lycoming College), Manish M.
Kochhal (Wayne State), Suzan Koknar-Tezel (Saint Joseph’s University), Angkul
Kongmunvattana (Columbus State University), April Kontostathis (Ursinus
College), Christos Kozyrakis (Stanford University), Danny Krizanc (Wesleyan
University), Ashok Kumar, S. Kumar (The University of Texas), Zachary Kurmas
(Grand Valley State University), Adrian Lauf (University of Louisville), Robert
N. Lea (University of Houston), Alvin Lebeck (Duke University), Baoxin Li
(Arizona State University), Li Liao (University of Delaware), Gary Livingston
(University of Massachusetts), Michael Lyle, Douglas W. Lynn (Oregon
Institute of Technology), Yashwant K Malaiya (Colorado State University),
Stephen Mann (University of Waterloo), Bill Mark (University of Texas at
Austin), Ananda Mondal (Claflin University), Alvin Moser (Seattle University),

       Walid Najjar (University of California, Riverside), Vijaykrishnan Narayanan
       (Penn State University), Danial J. Neebel (Loras College), Victor Nelson (Auburn
       University), John Nestor (Lafayette College), Jae C. Oh (Syracuse University),
       Joe Oldham (Centre College), Timour Paltashev, James Parkerson (University of
       Arkansas), Shaunak Pawagi (SUNY at Stony Brook), Steve Pearce, Ted Pedersen
       (University of Minnesota), Lu Peng (Louisiana State University), Gregory D.
       Peterson (The University of Tennessee), William Pierce (Hood College), Milos
       Prvulovic (Georgia Tech), Partha Ranganathan (HP Labs), Dejan Raskovic
       (University of Alaska, Fairbanks) Brad Richards (University of Puget Sound),
       Roman Rozanov, Louis Rubinfield (Villanova University), Md Abdus Salam
       (Southern University), Augustine Samba (Kent State University), Robert Schaefer
       (Daniel Webster College), Carolyn J. C. Schauble (Colorado State University),
       Keith Schubert (CSU San Bernardino), William L. Schultz, Kelly Shaw (University
       of Richmond), Shahram Shirani (McMaster University), Scott Sigman (Drury
       University), Shai Simonson (Stonehill College), Bruce Smith, David Smith, Jeff W.
       Smith (University of Georgia, Athens), Mark Smotherman (Clemson University),
       Philip Snyder (Johns Hopkins University), Alex Sprintson (Texas A&M), Timothy
       D. Stanley (Brigham Young University), Dean Stevens (Morningside College),
       Nozar Tabrizi (Kettering University), Yuval Tamir (UCLA), Alexander Taubin
       (Boston University), Will Thacker (Winthrop University), Mithuna Thottethodi
       (Purdue University), Manghui Tu (Southern Utah University), Dean Tullsen (UC
       San Diego), Steve VanderLeest (Calvin College), Christopher Vickery (Queens
       College of CUNY), Rama Viswanathan (Beloit College), Ken Vollmar (Missouri
       State University), Guoping Wang (Indiana-Purdue University), Patricia Wenner
       (Bucknell University), Kent Wilken (University of California, Davis), David
       Wolfe (Gustavus Adolphus College), David Wood (University of Wisconsin,
       Madison), Ki Hwan Yum (University of Texas, San Antonio), Mohamed Zahran
       (City College of New York), Amr Zaky (Santa Clara University), Gerald D.
       Zarnett (Ryerson University), Nian Zhang (South Dakota School of Mines &
       Technology), Jiling Zhong (Troy University), Huiyang Zhou (North Carolina
       State University), Weiyu Zhu (Illinois Wesleyan University).
          A special thanks also goes to Mark Smotherman for making multiple passes to
       find technical and writing glitches that significantly improved the quality of this
       edition.
          We wish to thank the extended Morgan Kaufmann family for agreeing to publish
       this book again under the able leadership of Todd Green, Steve Merken and Nate
       McFadden: I certainly couldn’t have completed the book without them. We also
       want to extend thanks to Lisa Jones, who managed the book production process,
       and Matthew Limbert, who did the cover design. The cover cleverly connects the
       post-PC era content of this edition to the cover of the first edition.
       The contributions of the nearly 150 people we mentioned here have helped make
       this new edition what I hope will be our best book yet. Enjoy!

                                     David A. Patterson
This page intentionally left blank
