         4
                                                   The Processor
                                                   4.1          Introduction 256
                                                   4.2          Logic Design Conventions 260
                                                   4.3          Building a Datapath 263
In a major matter, no                              4.4          A Simple Implementation Scheme 271
details are small.                                 4.5          An Overview of Pipelining 283
                                                   4.6          Pipelined Datapath and Control 297
French Proverb
                                                   4.7          Data Hazards: Forwarding versus
                                                                Stalling 316
                                                   4.8          Control Hazards 328
                                                   4.9          Exceptions 336
                                                   4.10         Parallelism via Instructions 342

                  Computer Organization and Design. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801733-3.00011-3
                  © 2016
                    2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
4.11   Real Stuff: The ARM Cortex-A53 and Intel Core i7 Pipelines 355
4.12   Going Faster: Instruction-Level Parallelism and Matrix
       Multiply 363
4.13   Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital Design Using a
       Hardware Design Language to Describe and Model a Pipeline
       and More Pipelining Illustrations 366
4.14   Fallacies and Pitfalls 366
4.15   Concluding Remarks 367
4.16   Historical Perspective and Further Reading 368
4.17   Exercises 368

       The Five Classic Components of a Computer

        4.1          Introduction

      Chapter 1 explains that the performance of a computer is determined by three key
      factors: instruction count, clock cycle time, and clock cycles per instruction (CPI).
      Chapter 2 explains that the compiler and the instruction set architecture determine
      the instruction count required for a given program. However, the implementation
      of the processor determines both the clock cycle time and the number of clock
      cycles per instruction. In this chapter, we construct the datapath and control unit
      for two different implementations of the LEGv8 instruction set.
         This chapter contains an explanation of the principles and techniques used in
      implementing a processor, starting with a highly abstract and simplified overview
      in this section. It is followed by a section that builds up a datapath and constructs a
      simple version of a processor sufficient to implement an instruction set like LEGv8.
      The bulk of the chapter covers a more realistic pipelined LEGv8 implementation,
      followed by a section that develops the concepts necessary to implement more
      complex instruction sets, like the x86.
         For the reader interested in understanding the high-level interpretation of
      instructions and its impact on program performance, this initial section and Section
      4.5 present the basic concepts of pipelining. Current trends are covered in Section
      4.10, and Section 4.11 describes the recent Intel Core i7 and ARM Cortex-A53
      architectures. Section 4.12 shows how to use instruction-level parallelism to more
      than double the performance of the matrix multiply from Section 3.9. These sections
      provide enough background to understand the pipeline concepts at a high level.
         For the reader interested in understanding the processor and its performance in
      more depth, Sections 4.3, 4.4, and 4.6 will be useful. Those interested in learning how
      to build a processor should also cover Sections 4.2, 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9. For readers with
      an interest in modern hardware design,           Section 4.13 describes how hardware
      design languages and CAD tools are used to implement hardware, and then how to
      use a hardware design language to describe a pipelined implementation. It also gives
      several more illustrations of how pipelining hardware executes. (The hardware models
      in this chapter have been sourced by the authors and do not imply ARM-endorsed
      architectures.)

      A Basic LEGv8 Implementation
      We will be examining an implementation that includes a subset of the core LEGv8
      instruction set:
         ■   The memory-reference instructions load register unscaled (LDUR) and store
             register unscaled (STUR)
         ■   The arithmetic-logical instructions ADD,SUB,AND, and ORR
         ■   The instructions compare and branch on zero (CBZ) and branch (B), which we
             add last
                                                                       4.1   Introduction   257

   This subset does not include all the integer instructions (for example, shift,
multiply, and divide are missing), nor does it include any floating-point instructions.
However, it illustrates the key principles used in creating a datapath and designing
the control. The implementation of the remaining instructions is similar.
   In examining the implementation, we will have the opportunity to see how the
instruction set architecture determines many aspects of the implementation, and how
the choice of various implementation strategies affects the clock rate and CPI for the
computer. Many of the key design principles introduced in Chapter 1 can be illustrated
by looking at the implementation, such as Simplicity favors regularity. In addition, most
concepts used to implement the LEGv8 subset in this chapter are the same basic ideas
that are used to construct a broad spectrum of computers, from high-performance
servers to general-purpose microprocessors to embedded processors.

An Overview of the Implementation
In Chapter 2, we looked at the core LEGv8 instructions, including the integer
arithmetic-logical instructions, the memory-reference instructions, and the branch
instructions. Much of what needs to be done to implement these instructions is the
same, independent of the exact class of instruction. For every instruction, the first
two steps are identical:
   1. Send the program counter (PC) to the memory that contains the code and
      fetch the instruction from that memory.
   2. Read one or two registers, using fields of the instruction to select the registers
      to read. For the LDUR and CBZ instructions, we need to read only one register,
      but most other instructions require reading two registers.
   After these two steps, the actions required to complete the instruction depend
on the instruction class. Fortunately, for each of the three instruction classes
(memory-reference, arithmetic-logical, and branches), the actions are largely the
same, independent of the exact instruction. The simplicity and regularity of the
LEGv8 instruction set simplify the implementation by making the execution of
many of the instruction classes similar.
   For example, all instruction classes, except unconditional branch, use the arithmetic-
logical unit (ALU) after reading the registers. The memory-reference instructions use
the ALU for an address calculation, the arithmetic-logical instructions for the operation
execution, and conditional branches for comparison to zero. After using the ALU, the
actions required to complete various instruction classes differ. A memory-reference
instruction will need to access the memory either to read data for a load or write data
for a store. An arithmetic-logical or load instruction must write the data from the ALU
or memory back into a register. Lastly, for a conditional branch instruction, we may
need to change the next instruction address based on the comparison; otherwise, the
PC should be incremented by four to get the address of the subsequent instruction.
   Figure 4.1 shows the high-level view of an LEGv8 implementation, focusing on
the various functional units and their interconnection. Although this figure shows
most of the flow of data through the processor, it omits two important aspects of
instruction execution.

         First, in several places, Figure 4.1 shows data going to a particular unit as coming
      from two different sources. For example, the value written into the PC can come
      from one of two adders, the data written into the register file can come from either
      the ALU or the data memory, and the second input to the ALU can come from
      a register or the immediate field of the instruction. In practice, these data lines
      cannot simply be wired together; we must add a logic element that chooses from
      among the multiple sources and steers one of those sources to its destination. This
      selection is commonly done with a device called a multiplexor, although this device
      might better be called a data selector. Appendix A describes the multiplexor, which
      selects from among several inputs based on the setting of its control lines. The
      control lines are set based primarily on information taken from the instruction
      being executed.
         The second omission in Figure 4.1 is that several of the units must be controlled
      depending on the type of instruction. For example, the data memory must read

              4

                       Add                               Add

                                                    Data

                                                    Register #
        PC        Address      Instruction                 Registers                  ALU         Address
                                                    Register #
                                                                                                          Data
                  Instruction
                                                                                                         memory
                    memory                          Register #

                                                                                                  Data

      FIGURE 4.1 An abstract view of the implementation of the LEGv8 subset showing the
      major functional units and the major connections between them. All instructions start by using
      the program counter to supply the instruction address to the instruction memory. After the instruction is
      fetched, the register operands used by an instruction are specified by fields of that instruction. Once the
      register operands have been fetched, they can be operated on to compute a memory address (for a load or
      store), to compute an arithmetic result (for an integer arithmetic-logical instruction), or a compare to zero
      (for a branch). If the instruction is an arithmetic-logical instruction, the result from the ALU must be written
      to a register. If the operation is a load or store, the ALU result is used as an address to either store a value from
      the registers or load a value from memory into the registers. The result from the ALU or memory is written
      back into the register file. Branches require the use of the ALU output to determine the next instruction
      address, which comes either from the ALU (where the PC and branch offset are summed) or from an adder
      that increments the current PC by four. The thick lines interconnecting the functional units represent buses,
      which consist of multiple signals. The arrows are used to guide the reader in knowing how information flows.
      Since signal lines may cross, we explicitly show when crossing lines are connected by the presence of a dot
      where the lines cross.
                                                                                              4.1   Introduction                                  259

on a load and write on a store. The register file must be written only on a load or
an arithmetic-logical instruction. And, of course, the ALU must perform one of
several operations. (Appendix A describes the detailed design of the ALU.) Like
the multiplexors, control lines that are set based on various fields in the instruction
direct these operations.
   Figure 4.2 shows the datapath of Figure 4.1 with the three required multiplexors
added, as well as control lines for the major functional units. A control unit,
which has the instruction as an input, is used to determine how to set the control
lines for the functional units and two of the multiplexors. The top multiplexor,

                                                                                                           Branch

                                M
                                u
                                x

                 4

                                                            Add                           M
                          Add
                                                                                          u
                                                                                          x

                                                                                    ALU operation
                                                       Data

                                                                                                                         MemWrite
                                                       Register #
          PC         Address Instruction                        Registers                           ALU          Address
                                                       Register #                        M                Zero
                                                                                         u                                Data
                     Instruction
                                                                                         x                               memory
                       memory                          Register # RegWrite

                                                                                                                 Data
                                                                                                                         MemRead

                                                          Control

FIGURE 4.2 The basic implementation of the LEGv8 subset, including the necessary multiplexors and control lines. The
top multiplexor (“Mux”) controls what value replaces the PC (PC + 4 or the branch destination address); the multiplexor is controlled by the gate
that “ANDs” together the Zero output of the ALU and a control signal that indicates that the instruction is a branch. The middle multiplexor, whose
output returns to the register file, is used to steer the output of the ALU (in the case of an arithmetic-logical instruction) or the output of the data
memory (in the case of a load) for writing into the register file. Finally, the bottom-most multiplexor is used to determine whether the second ALU
input is from the registers (for an arithmetic-logical instruction or a branch) or from the offset field of the instruction (for a load or store). The
added control lines are straightforward and determine the operation performed at the ALU, whether the data memory should read or write, and
whether the registers should perform a write operation. The control lines are shown in color to make them easier to see.

                              which determines whether PC + 4 or the branch destination address is written
                              into the PC, is set based on the Zero output of the ALU, which is used to perform
                              the comparison of a CBZ instruction. The regularity and simplicity of the LEGv8
                              instruction set mean that a simple decoding process can be used to determine how
                              to set the control lines.
                                  In the remainder of the chapter, we refine this view to fill in the details, which
                              requires that we add further functional units, increase the number of connections
                              between units, and, of course, enhance a control unit to control what actions
                              are taken for different instruction classes. Sections 4.3 and 4.4 describe a simple
                              implementation that uses a single long clock cycle for every instruction and follows
                              the general form of Figures 4.1 and 4.2. In this first design, every instruction begins
                              execution on one clock edge and completes execution on the next clock edge.
                                  While easier to understand, this approach is not practical, since the clock cycle
                              must be severely stretched to accommodate the longest instruction. After designing
                              the control for this simple computer, we will look at pipelined implementation with
                              all its complexities, including exceptions.

               Check How many of the five classic components of a computer—shown on page 255—do
             Yourself Figures 4.1 and 4.2 include?

                                4.2          Logic Design Conventions

                              To discuss the design of a computer, we must decide how the hardware logic
                              implementing the computer will operate and how the computer is clocked. This
                              section reviews a few key ideas in digital logic that we will use extensively in this
                              chapter. If you have little or no background in digital logic, you will find it helpful
                              to read Appendix A before continuing.
                                 The datapath elements in the LEGv8 implementation consist of two different
                              types of logic elements: elements that operate on data values and elements that
combinational                 contain state. The elements that operate on data values are all combinational, which
element An operational        means that their outputs depend only on the current inputs. Given the same input, a
element, such as an AND       combinational element always produces the same output. The ALU shown in Figure
gate or an ALU
                              4.1 and discussed in Appendix A is an example of a combinational element. Given a
                              set of inputs, it always produces the same output because it has no internal storage.
                                 Other elements in the design are not combinational, but instead contain state. An
state element A memory        element contains state if it has some internal storage. We call these elements state
element, such as a register   elements because, if we pulled the power plug on the computer, we could restart it
or a memory.                  accurately by loading the state elements with the values they contained before we
                              pulled the plug. Furthermore, if we saved and restored the state elements, it would
                              be as if the computer had never lost power. Thus, these state elements completely
                              characterize the computer. In Figure 4.1, the instruction and data memories, as
                              well as the registers, are all examples of state elements.
                                                                         4.2    Logic Design Conventions                                   261

   A state element has at least two inputs and one output. The required inputs are
the data value to be written into the element and the clock, which determines when
the data value is written. The output from a state element provides the value that
was written in an earlier clock cycle. For example, one of the logically simplest
state elements is a D-type flip-flop (see Appendix A), which has exactly these two
inputs (a value and a clock) and one output. In addition to flip-flops, our LEGv8
implementation uses two other types of state elements: memories and registers,
both of which appear in Figure 4.1. The clock is used to determine when the state
element should be written; a state element can be read at any time.
   Logic components that contain state are also called sequential, because their
outputs depend on both their inputs and the contents of the internal state. For
example, the output from the functional unit representing the registers depends
both on the register numbers supplied and on what was written into the registers
previously. Appendix A discusses the operation of both the combinational and
sequential elements and their construction in more detail.

Clocking Methodology
A clocking methodology defines when signals can be read and when they can be                                        clocking
written. It is important to specify the timing of reads and writes, because if a signal                             methodology The
is written at the same time that it is read, the value of the read could correspond                                 approach used to
                                                                                                                    determine when data are
to the old value, the newly written value, or even some mix of the two! Computer
                                                                                                                    valid and stable relative to
designs cannot tolerate such unpredictability. A clocking methodology is designed                                   the clock.
to make hardware predictable.
   For simplicity, we will assume an edge-triggered clocking methodology. An                                        edge-triggered
edge-triggered clocking methodology means that any values stored in a sequential                                    clocking A clocking
logic element are updated only on a clock edge, which is a quick transition from                                    scheme in which all state
                                                                                                                    changes occur on a clock
low to high or vice versa (see Figure 4.3). Because only state elements can store a
                                                                                                                    edge.
data value, any collection of combinational logic must have its inputs come from a
set of state elements and its outputs written into a set of state elements. The inputs
are values that were written in a previous clock cycle, while the outputs are values
that can be used in a following clock cycle.

                                State                                                 State
                               element             Combinational logic               element
                                  1                                                     2

                Clock cycle

FIGURE 4.3 Combinational logic, state elements, and the clock are closely related. In a
synchronous digital system, the clock determines when elements with state will write values into internal
storage. Any inputs to a state element must reach a stable value (that is, have reached a value from which
they will not change until after the clock edge) before the active clock edge causes the state to be updated. All
state elements in this chapter, including memory, are assumed positive edge-triggered; that is, they change
on the rising clock edge.

                                Figure 4.3 shows the two state elements surrounding a block of combinational
                             logic, which operates in a single clock cycle: all signals must propagate from state
                             element 1, through the combinational logic, and to state element 2 in the time of
                             one clock cycle. The time necessary for the signals to reach state element 2 defines
                             the length of the clock cycle.
control signal A signal         For simplicity, we do not show a write control signal when a state element is
used for multiplexor         written on every active clock edge. In contrast, if a state element is not updated on
selection or for directing   every clock, then an explicit write control signal is required. Both the clock signal
the operation of a           and the write control signal are inputs, and the state element is changed only when
functional unit; contrasts
with a data signal, which
                             the write control signal is asserted and a clock edge occurs.
contains information            We will use the word asserted to indicate a signal that is logically high and assert
that is operated on by a     to specify that a signal should be driven logically high, and deassert or deasserted
functional unit.             to represent logically low. We use the terms assert and deassert because when
                             we implement hardware, at times 1 represents logically high and at times it can
asserted The signal is
                             represent logically low.
logically high or true.
                                An edge-triggered methodology allows us to read the contents of a register,
deasserted The signal is     send the value through some combinational logic, and write that register in the
logically low or false.      same clock cycle. Figure 4.4 gives a generic example. It doesn’t matter whether we
                             assume that all writes take place on the rising clock edge (from low to high) or on
                             the falling clock edge (from high to low), since the inputs to the combinational
                             logic block cannot change except on the chosen clock edge. In this book, we use
                             the rising clock edge. With an edge-triggered timing methodology, there is no
                             feedback within a single clock cycle, and the logic in Figure 4.4 works correctly.
                             In Appendix A, we briefly discuss additional timing constraints (such as setup and
                             hold times) as well as other timing methodologies.
                                For the 64-bit LEGv8 architecture, nearly all of these state and logic elements
                             will have inputs and outputs that are 64 bits wide, since that is the width of most
                             of the data handled by the processor. We will make it clear whenever a unit has an
                             input or output that is other than 64 bits in width. The figures will indicate buses,
                             which are signals wider than 1 bit, with thicker lines. At times, we will want to
                             combine several buses to form a wider bus; for example, we may want to obtain
                             a 64-bit bus by combining two 32-bit buses. In such cases, labels on the bus lines

                                                              State
                                                                                Combinational logic
                                                             element

                             FIGURE 4.4 An edge-triggered methodology allows a state element to be read and
                             written in the same clock cycle without creating a race that could lead to indeterminate
                             data values. Of course, the clock cycle still must be long enough so that the input values are stable when
                             the active clock edge occurs. Feedback cannot occur within one clock cycle because of the edge-triggered
                             update of the state element. If feedback were possible, this design could not work properly. Our designs
                             in this chapter and the next rely on the edge-triggered timing methodology and on structures like the one
                             shown in this figure.

will make it clear that we are concatenating buses to form a wider bus. Arrows
are also added to help clarify the direction of the flow of data between elements.
Finally, color indicates a control signal contrary to a signal that carries data; this
distinction will become clearer as we proceed through this chapter.

True or false: Because the register file is both read and written on the same clock       Check
cycle, any LEGv8 datapath using edge-triggered writes must have more than one             Yourself
copy of the register file.

Elaboration: There is also a 32-bit version of the ARMv8 architecture, and, naturally
enough, most paths in its implementation would be 32 bits wide.

  4.3          Building a Datapath

A reasonable way to start a datapath design is to examine the major components
required to execute each class of LEGv8 instructions. Let’s start at the top by looking
at which datapath elements each instruction needs, and then work our way down
through the levels of abstraction. When we show the datapath elements, we will
also show their control signals. We use abstraction in this explanation, starting
from the bottom up.
   Figure 4.5a shows the first element we need: a memory unit to store the
instructions of a program and supply instructions given an address. Figure 4.5b
also shows the program counter (PC), which as we saw in Chapter 2 is a register
that holds the address of the current instruction. Lastly, we will need an adder          datapath element A
to increment the PC to the address of the next instruction. This adder, which is          unit used to operate on
combinational, can be built from the ALU described in detail in Appendix A simply         or hold data within a
by wiring the control lines so that the control always specifies an add operation. We     processor. In the LEGv8
                                                                                          implementation, the
will draw such an ALU with the label Add, as in Figure 4.5, to indicate that it has       datapath elements include
been permanently made an adder and cannot perform the other ALU functions.                the instruction and data
   To execute any instruction, we must start by fetching the instruction from             memories, the register
memory. To prepare for executing the next instruction, we must also increment the         file, the ALU, and adders.
program counter so that it points at the next instruction, 4 bytes later. Figure 4.6
                                                                                          program counter
shows how to combine the three elements from Figure 4.5 to form a datapath                (PC) The register
that fetches instructions and increments the PC to obtain the address of the next         containing the address
sequential instruction.                                                                   of the instruction in the
   Now let’s consider the R-format instructions (see Figure 2.21 on page 124).            program being executed.
They all read two registers, perform an ALU operation on the contents of the
registers, and write the result to a register. We call these instructions either R-type
instructions or arithmetic-logical instructions (since they perform arithmetic or
logical operations). This instruction class includes ADD,SUB,AND, and ORR, which

                                       Instruction
                                       address

                                                     Instruction                         PC                             Add Sum

                                       Instruction
                                         memory

                              a. Instruction memory                             b. Program counter          c. Adder

                             FIGURE 4.5 Two state elements are needed to store and access instructions, and an
                             adder is needed to compute the next instruction address. The state elements are the instruction
                             memory and the program counter. The instruction memory need only provide read access because the
                             datapath does not write instructions. Since the instruction memory only reads, we treat it as combinational
                             logic: the output at any time reflects the contents of the location specified by the address input, and no read
                             control signal is needed. (We will need to write the instruction memory when we load the program; this is
                             not hard to add, and we ignore it for simplicity.) The program counter is a 64-bit register that is written at the
                             end of every clock cycle and thus does not need a write control signal. The adder is an ALU wired to always
                             add its two 64-bit inputs and place the sum on its output.

                             were introduced in Chapter 2. Recall that a typical instance of such an instruction
                             is ADD X1, X2, X3, which reads X2 and X3 and writes the sum into X1.
                                 The processor’s 32 general-purpose registers are stored in a structure called a
register file A state        register file. A register file is a collection of registers in which any register can be
element that consists        read or written by specifying the number of the register in the file. The register file
of a set of registers that   contains the register state of the computer. In addition, we will need an ALU to
can be read and written
                             operate on the values read from the registers.
by supplying a register
number to be accessed.           R-format instructions have three register operands, so we will need to read two
                             data words from the register file and write one data word into the register file for
                             each instruction. For each data word to be read from the registers, we need an input
                             to the register file that specifies the register number to be read and an output from
                             the register file that will carry the value that has been read from the registers. To
                             write a data word, we will need two inputs: one to specify the register number to be
                             written and one to supply the data to be written into the register. The register file
                             always outputs the contents of whatever register numbers are on the Read register
                             inputs. Writes, however, are controlled by the write control signal, which must be
                             asserted for a write to occur at the clock edge. Figure 4.7a shows the result; we
                             need a total of four inputs (three for register numbers and one for data) and two
                             outputs (both for data). The register number inputs are 5 bits wide to specify one
                             of 32 registers (32 = 25), whereas the data input and two data output buses are each
                             64 bits wide.
                                 Figure 4.7b shows the ALU, which takes two 64-bit inputs and produces a 64-bit
                             result, as well as a 1-bit signal if the result is 0. The 4-bit control signal of the ALU
                             is described in detail in Appendix A; we will review the ALU control shortly when
                             we need to know how to set it.

                                                                             Add

                                                               4

                                          Read
                           PC
                                          address

                                                      Instruction

                                          Instruction
                                            memory

FIGURE 4.6 A portion of the datapath used for fetching instructions and incrementing
the program counter. The fetched instruction is used by other parts of the datapath.

                   5    Read                                                                   ALU operation
                                                                                          4
                        register 1                 Read
 Register          5    Read                      data 1
 numbers                register 2                                                                Zero
                                                                      Data                    ALU ALU
                   5                 Registers
                        Write                                                                    result
                        register                   Read
                        Write                     data 2
      Data
                        Data
                                          RegWrite

 a. Registers                                                                    b. ALU

FIGURE 4.7 The two elements needed to implement R-format ALU operations are the
register file and the ALU. The register file contains all the registers and has two read ports and one
write port. The design of multiported register files is discussed in Section A.8 of Appendix A. The register
file always outputs the contents of the registers corresponding to the Read register inputs on the outputs;
no other control inputs are needed. In contrast, a register write must be explicitly indicated by asserting the
write control signal. Remember that writes are edge-triggered, so that all the write inputs (i.e., the value to
be written, the register number, and the write control signal) must be valid at the clock edge. Since writes
to the register file are edge-triggered, our design can legally read and write the same register within a clock
cycle: the read will get the value written in an earlier clock cycle, while the value written will be available to
a read in a subsequent clock cycle. The inputs carrying the register number to the register file are all 5 bits
wide, whereas the lines carrying data values are 64 bits wide. The operation to be performed by the ALU is
controlled with the ALU operation signal, which will be 4 bits wide, using the ALU designed in Appendix A.
We will use the Zero detection output of the ALU shortly to implement conditional branches.

                                  Next, consider the LEGv8 load register and store register instructions,
                              which have the general form LDUR X1,[X2,offset_value] or STUR X1,
                              [X2,offset_value]. These instructions compute a memory address by adding
                              the base register, which is X2, to the 9-bit signed offset field contained in the
                              instruction. If the instruction is a store, the value to be stored must also be read
                              from the register file where it resides in X1. If the instruction is a load, the value
                              read from memory must be written into the register file in the specified register,
                              which is X1. Thus, we will need both the register file and the ALU from Figure 4.7.
sign-extend To increase           In addition, we will need a unit to sign-extend the 9-bit offset field in the
the size of a data item by    instruction to a 64-bit signed value, and a data memory unit to read from or write
replicating the high-order    to. The data memory must be written on store instructions; hence, data memory
sign bit of the original
                              has read and write control signals, an address input, and an input for the data to be
data item in the high-
order bits of the larger,     written into memory. Figure 4.8 shows these two elements.
destination data item.            The CBZ instruction has two operands, a register that is tested for zero, and
                              a 19-bit offset used to compute the branch target address relative to the branch
branch target                 instruction address. Its form is CBZ X1,offset. To implement this instruction,
address The address           we must compute the branch target address by adding the sign-extended offset
specified in a branch,
which becomes the new         field of the instruction to the PC. There are two details in the definition of branch
program counter (PC) if       instructions (see Chapter 2) to which we must pay attention:
the branch is taken. In the
                                 ■   The instruction set architecture specifies that the base for the branch address
LEGv8 architecture, the
branch target is given by            calculation is the address of the branch instruction.
the sum of the offset field      ■   The architecture also states that the offset field is shifted left 2 bits so that it
of the instruction and the           is a word offset; this shift increases the effective range of the offset field by a
address of the branch.
                                     factor of 4.
branch taken                  To deal with the latter complication, we will need to shift the offset field by 2.
A branch where the               As well as computing the branch target address, we must also determine whether
branch condition is           the next instruction is the instruction that follows sequentially or the instruction at
satisfied and the program
                              the branch target address. When the condition is true (i.e., the operand is zero), the
counter (PC) becomes
the branch target. All        branch target address becomes the new PC, and we say that the branch is taken. If
unconditional branches        the operand is not zero, the incremented PC should replace the current PC (just as
are taken branches.           for any other normal instruction); in this case, we say that the branch is not taken.
                                 Thus, the branch datapath must do two operations: compute the branch target
branch not taken or           address and test the register contents. (Branches also affect the instruction fetch
(untaken branch)              portion of the datapath, as we will deal with shortly.) Figure 4.9 shows the structure
A branch where the            of the datapath segment that handles branches. To compute the branch target
branch condition is false
                              address, the branch datapath includes a sign extension unit, from Figure 4.8 and
and the program counter
(PC) becomes the address      an adder. To perform the compare, we need to use the register file shown in Figure
of the instruction that       4.7a to supply the register operand (although we will not need to write into the
sequentially follows the      register file). In addition, the comparison can be done using the ALU we designed
branch.                       in Appendix A. Since that ALU provides an output signal that indicates whether

                                        MemWrite

                                              Read
                           Address
                                               data
                                                                      32                  64
                                                                              Sign-
                                        Data                                 extend
                           Write       memory
                           data

                                        MemRead

                  a. Data memory unit                              b. Sign extension unit

FIGURE 4.8 The two units needed to implement loads and stores, in addition to the
register file and ALU of Figure 4.7, are the data memory unit and the sign extension unit.
The memory unit is a state element with inputs for the address and the write data, and a single output for
the read result. There are separate read and write controls, although only one of these may be asserted on
any given clock. The memory unit needs a read signal, since, unlike the register file, reading the value of
an invalid address can cause problems, as we will see in Chapter 5. The sign extension unit has a 32-bit
instruction as input that selects a 9-bit for load and store or a 19-bit field for compare and branch on zero that
is sign-extended into a 64-bit result appearing on the output (see Chapter 2). We assume the data memory is
edge-triggered for writes. Standard memory chips actually have a write enable signal that is used for writes.
Although the write enable is not edge-triggered, our edge-triggered design could easily be adapted to work
with real memory chips. See Section A.8 of Appendix A for further discussion of how real memory chips
work.

the result was 0, we can send the register operand to the ALU with the control set to
pass the register value. If the Zero signal out of the ALU unit is asserted, we know
that the register value is zero. Although the Zero output always signals if the result
is 0, we will be using it only to implement the compare test of conditional branches.
Later, we will show exactly how to connect the control signals of the ALU for use
in the datapath.
    The branch instruction operates by adding the PC with the lower 26 bits of
the instruction shifted left by 2 bits. Simply concatenating 00 to the branch offset
accomplishes this shift, as described in Chapter 2.

Creating a Single Datapath
Now that we have examined the datapath components needed for the individual
instruction classes, we can combine them into a single datapath and add the control
to complete the implementation. This simplest datapath will attempt to execute all
instructions in one clock cycle. This design means that no datapath resource can be
used more than once per instruction, so any element needed more than once must
be duplicated. We therefore need a memory for instructions separate from one for
data. Although some of the functional units will need to be duplicated, many of the
elements can be shared by different instruction flows.

                                              PC + 4 from instruction datapath

                                                                                                               Branch
                                                                                           Add Sum             target
                                                                            Shift
                                                                            left 2
                                Read                                                           ALU operation
                                register 1                                                 4
            Instruction                                   Read
                                Read                     data 1
                                register 2                                                                     To branch
                                             Registers                                     ALU Zero            control logic
                                Write
                                register                  Read
                                                         data 2
                                Write
                                data
                                     RegWrite

                                              32                64
                                                     Sign-
                                                    extend

            FIGURE 4.9 The datapath for a branch uses the ALU to evaluate the branch condition
            and a separate adder to compute the branch target as the sum of the PC and the sign-
            extended 19 bits of the instruction (the branch displacement), shifted left 2 bits. The unit
            labeled Shift left 2 is simply a routing of the signals between input and output that adds 00two to the low-order
            end of the sign-extended offset field; no actual shift hardware is needed, since the amount of the “shift” is
            constant. Since we know that the offset was sign-extended from 19 bits, the shift will throw away only “sign
            bits.” Control logic is used to decide whether the incremented PC or branch target should replace the PC,
            based on the Zero output of the ALU.

              To share a datapath element between two different instruction classes, we may
            need to allow multiple connections to the input of an element, using a multiplexor
            and control signal to select among the multiple inputs.

                 Building a Datapath
  EXAMPLE
                 The operations of arithmetic-logical (or R-type) instructions and the memory
                 instructions datapath are quite similar. The key differences are the following:
                     ■    The arithmetic-logical instructions use the ALU, with the inputs coming
                          from the two registers. The memory instructions can also use the ALU
                          to do the address calculation, although the second input is the sign-
                          extended 9-bit offset field from the instruction.

        ■     The value stored into a destination register comes from the ALU (for an
              R-type instruction) or the memory (for a load).
        Show how to build a datapath for the operational portion of the memory-
     reference and arithmetic-logical instructions that uses a single register file
     and a single ALU to handle both types of instructions, adding any necessary
     multiplexors.

     To create a datapath with only a single register file and a single ALU, we must
     support two different sources for the second ALU input, as well as two different                       ANSWER
     sources for the data stored into the register file. Thus, one multiplexor is placed
     at the ALU input and another at the data input to the register file. Figure 4.10
     shows the operational portion of the combined datapath.

   Now we can combine all the pieces to make a simple datapath for the core LEGv8
architecture by adding the datapath for instruction fetch (Figure 4.6), the datapath
from R-type and memory instructions (Figure 4.10), and the datapath for branches
(Figure 4.9). Figure 4.11 shows the datapath we obtain by composing the separate
pieces. The branch instruction uses the main ALU to test the register operand, so
we must keep the adder from Figure 4.9 for computing the branch target address.
An additional multiplexor is required to select either the sequentially following
instruction address (PC + 4) or the branch target address to be written into the PC.

                   Read                                            ALU operation
                   register 1                                  4
                                     Read                                                     MemWrite
                                    data 1
                   Read                                                                                 MemtoReg
                   register 2                                        Zero
Instruction                                   ALUSrc
                          Registers Read                       ALU ALU                        Read
                   Write                             0                            Address                  1
                                   data 2                         result                       data        M
                   register                          M
                                                      u                                                     u
                                                      x                                                     x
                   Write                             1                                                     0
                   data                                                                      Data
                                                                                  Write     memory
                    RegWrite                                                      data

                           32                64                                               MemRead
                                 Sign-
                                extend

FIGURE 4.10 The datapath for the memory instructions and the R-type instructions. This
example shows how a single datapath can be assembled from the pieces in Figures 4.7 and 4.8 by adding
multiplexors. Two multiplexors are needed, as described in the example.

                                                                                                   PCSrc

                                                                                                           M
                                 Add                                                                       u
                                                                                                           x
                                                                                           ALU
                       4                                                              Add result
                                                                         Shift
                                                                         left 2

                                           Read                         ALUSrc         ALU operation
                       Read                register 1                             4
             PC                                            Read
                       address                                                                                  MemWrite
                                           Read           data 1
                                                                                         Zero                          MemtoReg
                                           register 2
                           Instruction           Registers Read                   ALU ALU                        Read
                                           Write                                                     Address
                       Instruction                        data 2          M          result                       data    M
                                           register                                                                       u
                         memory                                           u
                                                                          x                                               x
                                           Write
                                           data
                                                                                                     Write      Data
                                           RegWrite                                                  data      memory

                                                   32              64                              MemRead
                                                         Sign-
                                                        extend

                  FIGURE 4.11 The simple datapath for the core LEGv8 architecture combines the elements
                  required by different instruction classes. The components come from Figures 4.6, 4.9, and 4.10. This
                  datapath can execute the basic instructions (load-store register, ALU operations, and branches) in a single
                  clock cycle. Just one additional multiplexor is needed to integrate branches. The support for unconditional
                  branches will be added later.

        Check        I. Which of the following is correct for a load instruction? Refer to Figure 4.10.
      Yourself
                            a. MemtoReg should be set to cause the data from memory to be sent to the
                               register file.
                            b. MemtoReg should be set to cause the correct register destination to be
                               sent to the register file.
                            c. We do not care about the setting of MemtoReg for loads.
                     II. The single-cycle datapath conceptually described in this section must have
                         separate instruction and data memories, because
                            a. the formats of data and instructions are different in LEGv8, and hence
                               different memories are needed;
                            b. having separate memories is less expensive;
                            c. the processor operates in one cycle and cannot use a (single-ported)
                               memory for two different accesses within that cycle.

   Now that we have completed this simple datapath, we can add the control unit.
The control unit must be able to take inputs and generate a write signal for each
state element, the selector control for each multiplexor, and the ALU control. The
ALU control is different in a number of ways, and it will be useful to design it first
before we design the rest of the control unit.

Elaboration: The sign extension logic must choose between sign-extending a 9-bit
field in instruction bits 20:12 for data transfer instructions or a 19-bit field (bits 23:5)
for the conditional branch. Since the input is all 32 bits of the instruction, it can use the
opcode bits of the instruction to select the proper field. LEGv8 opcode bit 26 happens to
be 0 for data transfer instructions and 1 for conditional branch. Thus, bit 26 can control
a 2:1 multiplexor inside the sign extension logic that selects the 9-bit field if it is 0 or
the 19-bit field if it is 1.

   4.4          A Simple Implementation Scheme

In this section, we look at what might be thought of as a simple implementation
of our LEGv8 subset. We build this simple implementation using the datapath of
the last section and adding a simple control function. This simple implementation
covers load register (LDUR), store register (STUR), compare and branch zero (CBZ),
and the arithmetic-logical instructions ADD,SUB,AND, and ORR. We will later
enhance the design to include an unconditional branch instruction (B).

The ALU Control
The LEGv8 ALU in Appendix A defines the six following combinations of four
control inputs:

                         ALU control lines           Function
                                0000                    AND
                                0001                     OR
                                0010                    add
                                0110                  subtract
                                0111                pass input b
                                1100                    NOR

    Depending on the instruction class, the ALU will need to perform one of these
first five functions. (NOR can be used for other parts of the LEGv8 instruction set
not found in the subset we are implementing.) For load register and store register
instructions, we use the ALU to compute the memory address by addition. For
the R-type instructions, the ALU needs to perform one of the four actions (AND,
OR, subtract, or add), depending on the value of the 11-bit opcode field in the

      instruction (see Chapter 2). For compare and branch zero, the ALU just passes the
      register input value.
         We can generate the 4-bit ALU control input using a small control unit that
      has as inputs the opcode field of the instruction and a 2-bit control field, which
      we call ALUOp. ALUOp indicates whether the operation to be performed should
      be add (00) for loads and stores, pass input b (01) for CBZ, or be determined by
      the operation encoded in the opcode field (10). The output of the ALU control
      unit is a 4-bit signal that directly controls the ALU by generating one of the 4-bit
      combinations shown previously.
         In Figure 4.12, we show how to set the ALU control inputs based on the 2-bit
      ALUOp control and the 11-bit opcode. Later in this chapter, we will see how the
      ALUOp bits are generated from the main control unit.
         This style of using multiple levels of decoding—that is, the main control unit
      generates the ALUOp bits, which then are used as input to the ALU control that
      generates the actual signals to control the ALU unit—is a common implementation
      technique. Using multiple levels of control can reduce the size of the main control
      unit. Using several smaller control units may also potentially reduce the latency of
      the control unit. Such optimizations are important, since the latency of the control
      unit is often a critical factor in determining the clock cycle time.
         There are several different ways to implement the mapping from the 2-bit
      ALUOp field and the 11-bit opcode field to the four ALU operation control bits.
      Because only a small number of the 2048 possible values of the opcode field are of
      interest and the opcode field is used only when the ALUOp bits equal 10, we can
      use a small piece of logic that recognizes the subset of possible values and generates
      the appropriate ALU control signals.
         As a step in designing this logic, it is useful to create a truth table for the
      interesting combinations of the opcode field and the ALUOp signals, as we’ve done

                                       Instruction                                Desired           ALU control
        Instruction       ALUOp         operation          Opcode field          ALU action            input
       LDUR                  00      load register          XXXXXXXXXXX        add                      0010
       STUR                  00      store register         XXXXXXXXXXX        add                      0010
       CBZ                   01      compare and            XXXXXXXXXXX        pass input b             0111
                                     branch on zero
       R-type                10      ADD                    10001011000        add                      0010
       R-type                10      SUB                    11001011000        subtract                 0110
       R-type                10      AND                    10001010000        AND                      0000
       R-type                10      ORR                    10101010000        OR                       0001

      FIGURE 4.12 How the ALU control bits are set depends on the ALUOp control bits and the
      different opcodes for the R-type instruction. The instruction, listed in the first column, determines
      the setting of the ALUOp bits. All the encodings are shown in binary. Notice that when the ALUOp code is
      00 or 01, the desired ALU action does not depend on the opcode field; in this case, we say that we “don’t care”
      about the value of the opcode, and the bits are shown as Xs. When the ALUOp value is 10, then the opcode
      is used to set the ALU control input. See Appendix A.

in Figure 4.13; this truth table shows how the 4-bit ALU control is set depending                                  truth table From logic, a
on these two input fields. Since the full truth table is very large (213 = 8192 entries),                          representation of a logical
                                                                                                                   operation by listing all the
and we don’t care about the value of the ALU control for many of these input
                                                                                                                   values of the inputs and
combinations, we show only the truth table entries for which the ALU control must                                  then in each case showing
have a specific value. Throughout this chapter, we will use this practice of showing                               what the resulting outputs
only the truth table entries for outputs that must be asserted and not showing those                               should be.
that are all deasserted or don’t care. (This practice has a disadvantage, which we
discuss in Section C.2 of Appendix C.)
   Because in many instances we do not care about the values of some of the inputs,
and because we wish to keep the tables compact, we also include don’t-care terms.                                  don’t-care term An
A don’t-care term in this truth table (represented by an X in an input column)                                     element of a logical
indicates that the output does not depend on the value of the input corresponding                                  function in which the
to that column. For example, when the ALUOp bits are 00, as in the first row of                                    output does not depend
Figure 4.13, we always set the ALU control to 0010, independent of the opcode. In                                  on the values of all the
this case, then, the opcode inputs will be don’t cares in this line of the truth table.                            inputs. Don’t-care terms
                                                                                                                   may be specified in
Later, we will see examples of another type of don’t-care term. If you are unfamiliar                              different ways.
with the concept of don’t-care terms, see Appendix A for more information.
   Once the truth table has been constructed, it can be optimized and then turned
into gates. This process is completely mechanical. Thus, rather than show the final
steps here, we describe the process and the result in Section C.2 of Appendix C.

Designing the Main Control Unit
Now that we have described how to design an ALU that uses the opcode and a 2-bit
signal as its control inputs, we can return to looking at the rest of the control. To
start this process, let’s identify the fields of an instruction and the control lines that
are needed for the datapath we constructed in Figure 4.11. To understand how to
connect the fields of an instruction to the datapath, it is useful to review the formats

               ALUOp                                                     Opcode field
     ALUOp1             ALUOp0         I[31] I[30] I[29] I[28] I[27] I[26] I[25] I[24] I[23] I[22] I[21]                        Operation
         0                  0            X       X       X       X      X       X       X       X       X      X       X            0010
         X                  1            X       X       X       X      X       X       X       X       X      X       X            0111
         1                  X            1       0       0       0      1       0       1       1       0      0       0            0010
         1                  X            1       1       0       0      1       0       1       1       0      0       0            0110
         1                  X            1       0       0       0      1       0       1       0       0      0       0            0000
         1                  X            1       0       1       0      1       0       1       0       0      0       0            0001

FIGURE 4.13 The truth table for the 4 ALU control bits (called Operation). The inputs are the ALUOp and opcode field. Only
the entries for which the ALU control is asserted are shown. Some don’t-care entries have been added. For example, the ALUOp does not use the
encoding 11, so the truth table can contain entries 1X and X1, rather than 10 and 01. While we show all 11 bits of the opcode, note that the only
bits with different values for the four R-format instructions are bits 30, 29, and 24. Thus, we only need these three opcode bits as input for ALU
control instead of all 11.

                            Field                        opcode                     Rm             shamt             Rn              Rd
                            Bit positions                 31:21                   20:16            15:10             9:5             4:0
                            a. R-type instruction

                            Field                     1986 or 1984                    address              0         Rn               Rt
                            Bit positions                 31:21                        20:12           11:10         9:5             4:0
                            b. Load or store instruction

                            Field                      180                                   address                                  Rt
                            Bit positions            31:26                                      23:5                                 4:0
                            c. Conditional branch instruction

                            FIGURE 4.14 The three instruction classes (R-type, load and store, and conditional branch)
                            use three different instruction formats. The unconditional branch instruction uses another format,
                            which we will discuss shortly. (a) Instruction format for R-format instructions, have three register operands:
                            Rn, Rm, and Rd. Fields Rn and Rm are sources, and Rd is the destination. The ALU function is in the opcode
                            field and is decoded by the ALU control design in the previous section. The R-type instructions that we
                            implement are ADD,SUB, AND, and ORR. The shamt field is used only for shifts; we will ignore it in this
                            chapter. (b) Instruction format for load (opcode = 1986ten) and store (opcode = 1984ten) instructions. The
                            register Rn is the base register that is added to the 9-bit address field to form the memory address. For loads,
                            Rt is the destination register for the loaded value. For stores, Rt is the source register whose value should be
                            stored into memory. (c) Instruction format for compare and branch on zero (opcode = 180). The register Rt
                            is the source register that is tested for zero. The 19-bit address field is sign-extended, shifted, and added to the
                            PC to compute the branch target address.

                            of the three instruction classes: the R-type, branch, and load-store instructions.
                            Figure 4.14 shows these formats.
                               There are several major observations about this instruction format that we will
                            rely on:
opcode The field that           ■   The opcode field, which as we saw in Chapter 2, is between 6 and 11 bits wide
denotes the operation and           and found in bits 31:26 to 31:21.
format of an instruction.
                                ■   The first register operand is always in bit positions 9:5 (Rn) for both R-type
                                    instructions and for the base register for load and store instructions.
                                ■   The other register operand is in one of two places. It is in bit positions 20:16
                                    (Rm) for R-type instructions and it is in bit positions 4:0 (Rt) for the register
                                    to be written by a load. That is also the field that specifies the register to be
                                    tested for zero for compare and branch on zero. Thus, we will need to add
                                    a multiplexor to select which field of the instruction is used to indicate the
                                    register number to be read.
                                ■   Another operand can also be a 19-bit offset for compare and branch on zero
                                    or a 9-bit offset for load and store.
                                ■   The destination register for R-type instructions (Rd) and for loads (Rt) is in
                                    bit positions 4:0.
                               The first design principle from Chapter 2—simplicity favors regularity—pays off
                            here in specifying control.

                                                                                                       PCSrc

                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                         M
                    Add                                                                                  u
                                                                                                         x
                                                                                              ALU
            4                                                                             Addresult      1

                                                      RegWrite                Shift
                                                                              left 2

                           Instruction [9-5]       Read
            Read                                   register 1 Read                                     MemWrite
   PC       address        Instruction [20-16] 0
                                               M   Read       data 1
                                               u   register 2                ALUSrc        Zero                      MemtoReg
             Instruction                       x
                  [31-0]                       1                                       ALU ALU               Read
                                                   Write        Read           0                      Address data      1
                                                   register    data 2                     result                        M
            Instruction    Instruction [4-0]                                   M
              memory                                                           u                                        u
                                        Reg2Loc                                x                                        x
                                                   Write                       1                                        0
                                                   data Registers                                            Data
                                                                                                      Write memory
                                                                                                      data
                           Instruction [31-0]         32                64
                                                               Sign-             ALU
                                                              extend
                                                                                control                MemRead

                                                   Instruction [31-21]
                                                                                ALUOp

FIGURE 4.15 The datapath of Figure 4.11 with all necessary multiplexors and all control
lines identified. The control lines are shown in color. The ALU control block has also been added. The PC
does not require a write control, since it is written once at the end of every clock cycle; the branch control
logic determines whether it is written with the incremented PC or the branch target address.

   Using this information, we can add the instruction labels and extra multiplexor
(for the Read register 2 number input of the register file) to the simple datapath.
Figure 4.15 shows these additions plus the ALU control block, the write signals for
state elements, the read signal for the data memory, and the control signals for the
multiplexors. Since all the multiplexors have two inputs, they each require a single
control line.
   Figure 4.15 shows seven single-bit control lines plus the 2-bit ALUOp control
signal. We have already defined how the ALUOp control signal works, and it is
useful to define what the seven other control signals do informally before we
determine how to set these control signals during instruction execution. Figure
4.16 describes the function of these seven control lines.
   Now that we have looked at the function of each of the control signals, we can
look at how to set them. The control unit can set all but one of the control signals
based solely on the opcode field of the instruction. The PCSrc control line is the
exception. That control line should be asserted if the instruction is compare and
branch on zero (a decision that the control unit can make) and the Zero output of
the ALU, which is used for the zero test, is asserted. To generate the PCSrc signal,
we will need to AND together a signal from the control unit, which we call Branch,
with the Zero signal out of the ALU.

        Signal
        name                 Effect when deasserted                           Effect when asserted
       Reg2Loc       The register number for Read register 2       The register number for Read register 2
                     comes from the Rm field (bits 20:16).         comes from the Rt field (bits 4:0).
       RegWrite      None.                                         The register on the Write register input is
                                                                   written with the value on the Write data input.
       ALUSrc        The second ALU operand comes from the The second ALU operand is the sign-
                     second register file output (Read data 2). extended, lower 16 bits of the instruction.
       PCSrc         The PC is replaced by the output of the       The PC is replaced by the output of the adder
                     adder that computes the value of PC + 4.      that computes the branch target.
       MemRead       None.                                         Data memory contents designated by the
                                                                   address input are put on the Read data output.
       MemWrite      None.                                         Data memory contents designated by the
                                                                   address input are replaced by the value on
                                                                   the Write data input.
       MemtoReg      The value fed to the register Write data      The value fed to the register Write data input
                     input comes from the ALU.                     comes from the data memory.

      FIGURE 4.16 The effect of each of the seven control signals. When the 1-bit control to a two-
      way multiplexor is asserted, the multiplexor selects the input corresponding to 1. Otherwise, if the control
      is deasserted, the multiplexor selects the 0 input. Remember that the state elements all have the clock as an
      implicit input and that the clock is used in controlling writes. Gating the clock externally to a state element
      can create timing problems. (See Appendix A for further discussion of this problem.)

         These nine control signals (seven from Figure 4.16 and two for ALUOp) can
      now be set based on the input signals to the control unit, which are the opcode
      bits 31 to 21. Figure 4.17 shows the datapath with the control unit and the control
      signals.
         Before we try to write a set of equations or a truth table for the control unit, it
      will be useful to try to define the control function informally. Because the setting
      of the control lines depends only on the opcode, we define whether each control
      signal should be 0, 1, or don’t care (X) for each of the opcode values. Figure 4.18
      defines how the control signals should be set for each opcode; this information
      follows directly from Figures 4.12, 4.16, and 4.17.

      Operation of the Datapath
      With the information contained in Figures 4.16 and 4.18, we can design the control
      unit logic, but before we do that, let’s look at how each instruction uses the datapath.
      In the next few figures, we show the flow of three different instruction classes
      through the datapath. The asserted control signals and active datapath elements
      are highlighted in each of these. Note that a multiplexor whose control is 0 has
      a definite action, even if its control line is not highlighted. Multiple-bit control
      signals are highlighted if any constituent signal is asserted.
         Figure 4.19 shows the operation of the datapath for an R-type instruction, such
      as ADD X1,X2,X3. Although everything occurs in one clock cycle, we can think

                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                              M
                              Add                                                                             u
                                                                                                              x
                                                                                                   ALU        1
                   4                                                                           Addresult
                                                                                   Shift
                                                                 Reg2Loc           left 2
                                                                 Branch
                                                                 MemRead
                                     Instruction [31–21]         MemtoReg
                                                         Control
                                                                 ALUOp
                                                                 MemWrite
                                                                 ALUSrc
                                                                 RegWrite

                                     Instruction [9-5]       Read
            PC      Read                                     register 1 Read
                    address          Instruction [20-16] 0
                                                         M   Read       data 1
                                                         u                                      Zero
                       Instruction                       x   register 2
                            [31–0]                       1                                  ALU ALU
                                                             Write        Read     0           result      AddressRead
                                                                                                                   data
                                                                                                                          1
                    Instruction                              register    data 2    M                                      M
                                     Instruction [4-0]                             u                                      u
                      memory                                                                                               x
                                                             Write                 x
                                                                                   1                                      0
                                                             data Registers
                                                                                                           Write Data
                                                                                                           data memory

                                     Instruction [31–0]      32      Sign-    64
                                                                                      ALU
                                                                    extend
                                                                                     control

                                                             Instruction [31–21]

FIGURE 4.17 The simple datapath with the control unit. The input to the control unit is the 11-bit opcode field from the instruction.
The outputs of the control unit consist of three 1-bit signals that are used to control multiplexors (Reg2Loc, ALUSrc, and MemtoReg), three
signals for controlling reads and writes in the register file and data memory (RegWrite, MemRead, and MemWrite), a 1-bit signal used in
determining whether to possibly branch (Branch), and a 2-bit control signal for the ALU (ALUOp). An AND gate is used to combine the
branch control signal and the Zero output from the ALU; the AND gate output controls the selection of the next PC. Notice that PCSrc is now
a derived signal, rather than one coming directly from the control unit. Thus, we drop the signal name in subsequent figures.

of four steps to execute the instruction; these steps are ordered by the flow of
information:
   1. The instruction is fetched, and the PC is incremented.
   2. Two registers, X2 and X3, are read from the register file; also, the main
      control unit computes the setting of the control lines during this step.
   3. The ALU operates on the data read from the register file, using portions of
      the opcode to generate the ALU function.
   4. The result from the ALU is written into the destination register (X1) in the
      register file.

  Instruction      Reg2Loc          ALUSrc      MemtoReg       RegWrite          MemRead         MemWrite        Branch    ALUOp1         ALUOp0

    R-format            0             0               0             1               0                 0            0             1          0
      LDUR              X             1               1             1               1                 0            0             0          0
      STUR              1             1               X             0               0                 1            0             0          0
       CBZ              1             0               X             0               0                 0            1             0          1

FIGURE 4.18 The setting of the control lines is completely determined by the opcode fields of the instruction. The
first row of the table corresponds to the R-format instructions (ADD,SUB, AND, and ORR). For all these instructions, the source register
fields are Rn and Rm, and the destination register field is Rd; this defines how the signals ALUSrc and Reg2Loc are set. Furthermore, an
R-type instruction writes a register (RegWrite = 1), but neither reads nor writes data memory. When the Branch control signal is 0, the PC is
unconditionally replaced with PC + 4; otherwise, the PC is replaced by the branch target if the Zero output of the ALU is also high. The ALUOp
field for R-type instructions is set to 10 to indicate that the ALU control should be generated from the opcode field. The second and third rows
of this table give the control signal settings for LDUR and STUR. These ALUSrc and ALUOp fields are set to perform the address calculation.
The MemRead and MemWrite are set to perform the memory access. Finally, Reg2Loc and RegWrite are set for a load to cause the result to be
stored in the Rt register. The ALUOp field for branch is set for a pass input b (ALU control = 01), which is used to test for zero. Notice that the
MemtoReg field is irrelevant when the RegWrite signal is 0: since the register is not being written, the value of the data on the register data write
port is not used. Thus, the entry MemtoReg in the last two rows of the table is replaced with X for don’t care. A don't care can also be added to
Reg2Loc for LDUR, which doesn't use a second register. This type of don’t care must be added by the designer, since it depends on knowledge
of how the datapath works.

                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                    M
                              Add                                                                                   u
                                                                                                                    x
                                                                                                         ALU        1
                    4                                                                               Add result
                                                                                        Shift
                                                                 Reg2Loc                left 2
                                                                 Branch
                                                                 MemRead
                                     Instruction [31–21]         MemtoReg
                                                         Control
                                                                 ALUOp
                                                                 MemWrite
                                                                 ALUSrc
                                                                 RegWrite

                                      Instruction [9-5]      Read
             PC     Read                                     register 1 Read
                    address          Instruction [20-16] 0
                                                         M   Read       data 1
                                                         u                                           Zero
                      Instruction                        x   register 2
                           [31–0]                        1                                       ALU ALU
                                                             Write       Read           0           result       Address Read
                                                                                                                          data
                                                                                                                                     1
                    Instruction                              register   data 2          M                                            M
                      memory          Instruction [4-0]                                 u                                            u
                                                                                        x                                             x
                                                             Write                                                                   0
                                                             data Registers             1
                                                                                                                 Write Data
                                                                                                                 data memory

                                     Instruction [31–0]       32     Sign-    64
                                                                                           ALU
                                                                    extend
                                                                                          control

                                                             Instruction [31–21]

FIGURE 4.19 The datapath in operation for an R-type instruction, such as ADD X1,X2,X3. The control lines, datapath units,
and connections that are active are highlighted.

Similarly, we can illustrate the execution of a load register, such as
       LDUR      X1,      [X2,offset]
in a style similar to Figure 4.19. Figure 4.20 shows the active functional units and
asserted control lines for a load. We can think of a load instruction as operating in
five steps (similar to how the R-type executed in four):
   1. An instruction is fetched from the instruction memory, and the PC is
      incremented.
   2. A register (X2) value is read from the register file.
   3. The ALU computes the sum of the value read from the register file and the
      sign-extended 9 bits of the instruction (offset).
   4. The sum from the ALU is used as the address for the data memory.
   5. The data from the memory unit is written into the register file (X1).

                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                               M
                              Add                                                                              u
                                                                                                               x
                                                                                                    ALU        1
                    4                                                                          Add result
                                                                                  Shift
                                                                Reg2Loc           left 2
                                                                Branch
                                                                MemRead
                                    Instruction [31–21]         MemtoReg
                                                        Control
                                                                ALUOp
                                                                MemWrite
                                                                ALUSrc
                                                                RegWrite

                                    Instruction [9-5]       Read
            PC      Read                                    register 1 Read
                    address         Instruction [20-16] 0
                                                        M   Read       data 1
                                                        u                                      Zero
                     Instruction                        x   register 2
                          [31–0]                        1                                  ALU ALU
                                                            Write        Read      0          result        Address Read
                                                                                                                     data
                                                                                                                             1
                    Instruction                             register    data 2     M                                         M
                                    Instruction [4-0]                              u                                         u
                      memory                                                                                                  x
                                                            Write                  x
                                                                                   1                                         0
                                                            data Registers
                                                                                                            Write Data
                                                                                                            data memory

                                    Instruction [31–0]       32     Sign-    64
                                                                                      ALU
                                                                   extend
                                                                                     control

                                                            Instruction [31–21]

FIGURE 4.20 The datapath in operation for a load instruction. The control lines, datapath units, and connections that are active
are highlighted. A store instruction would operate very similarly. The main difference would be that the memory control would indicate a write
rather than a read, the second register value read would be used for the data to store, and the operation of writing the data memory value to
the register file would not occur.

                                      Finally, we can show the operation of the compare-and-branch-on-zero
                                   instruction, such as CBZ X1, offset, in the same fashion. It operates much like
                                   an R-format instruction, but the ALU output is used to determine whether the PC
                                   is written with PC + 4 or the branch target address. Figure 4.21 shows the four
                                   steps in execution:
                                      1. An instruction is fetched from the instruction memory, and the PC is
                                         incremented.
                                      2. The register, X1 is read from the register file using bits 4:0 of the instruction (Rt).
                                      3. The ALU passes the data value read from the register file. The value of PC is
                                         added to the sign-extended, 19 bits of the instruction (offset) are shifted
                                         left by two; the result is the branch target address.
                                      4. The Zero status information from the ALU is used to decide which adder
                                         result to store in the PC.

                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                M
                            Add                                                                                 u
                                                                                                                x
                                                                                                     ALU        1
                    4                                                                           Add result
                                                                                    Shift
                                                                Reg2Loc             left 2
                                                                Branch
                                                                MemRead
                                    Instruction [31–21]         MemtoReg
                                                        Control
                                                                ALUOp
                                                                MemWrite
                                                                ALUSrc
                                                                RegWrite

                                    Instruction [9-5]       Read
            PC      Read                                    register 1 Read
                    address         Instruction [20-16] 0
                                                        M   Read       data 1
                                                        u                                        Zero
                     Instruction                        x   register 2
                          [31–0]                        1                                    ALU ALU
                                                            Write       Read        0           result       Address Read
                                                                                                                      data
                                                                                                                               1
                    Instruction                             register   data 2       M                                          M
                                    Instruction [4-0]                               u                                          u
                      memory                                                                                                    x
                                                            Write                   x
                                                                                    1                                          0
                                                            data Registers
                                                                                                             Write Data
                                                                                                             data memory

                                    Instruction [31–0]       32    Sign-    64
                                                                                       ALU
                                                                  extend
                                                                                      control

                                                            Instruction [31–21]

FIGURE 4.21 The datapath in operation for a compare-and-branch-on-zero instruction. The control lines, datapath units, and
connections that are active are highlighted. After using the register file and ALU to perform the compare, the Zero output is used to select the
next program counter from between the two candidates.

Finalizing Control
Now that we have seen how the instructions operate in steps, let’s continue with
the control implementation. The control function can be precisely defined using
the contents of Figure 4.18. The outputs are the control lines, and the input is the
opcode field. Thus, we can create a truth table for each of the outputs based on the
binary encoding of the opcodes.
   Figure 4.22 defines the logic in the control unit as one large truth table that                                single-cycle
combines all the outputs and that uses the opcode bits as inputs. It completely                                   implementation Also
specifies the control function, and we can implement it directly in gates in an                                   called single clock cycle
automated fashion. We show this final step in Section C.2 in Appendix C.                                          implementation. An
                                                                                                                  implementation in which
   Now that we have a single-cycle implementation of most of the LEGv8 core                                       an instruction is executed
instruction set, let’s add the unconditional branch instruction to show how the                                   in one clock cycle. While
basic datapath and control can be extended to handle other instructions in the                                    easy to understand, it is
instruction set.                                                                                                  too slow to be practical.

 Input or output             Signal name              R-format         LDUR          STUR            CBZ
       Inputs                      I[31]                   1             1              1             1
                                   I[30]                   X             1              1             0
                                   I[29]                   X             1              1             1
                                   I[28]                   0             1              1             1
                                   I[27]                   1             1              1             0
                                   I[26]                   0             0              0             1
                                   I[25]                   1             0              0             0
                                   I[24]                   X             0              0             0
                                   I[23]                   0             0              0             X
                                   I[22]                   0             1              0             X
                                   I[21]                   0             0              0             X
      Outputs                    Reg2Loc                   0             X              1             1
                                 ALUSrc                    0             1              1             0
                               MemtoReg                    0             1              X             X
                                RegWrite                   1             1              0             0
                                MemRead                    0             1              0             0
                                MemWrite                   0             0              1             0
                                 Branch                    0             0              0             1
                                 ALUOp1                    1             0              0             0
                                 ALUOp0                    0             0              0             1

FIGURE 4.22 The control function for the simple single-cycle implementation is
completely specified by this truth table. The top half of the table gives the combinations of input
signals that correspond to the four instruction classes, one per column, that determine the control output
settings. The bottom portion of the table gives the outputs for each of the four opcodes. Thus, the output
RegWrite is asserted for two different combinations of the inputs. We simplified the truth table by using don’t
cares in the input portion to combine the four R-format instructions together in one column; we could have
instead replaced that single column with four columns for the instructions ADD, SUB, AND, and ORR. The
outputs would have been the same for all four of these R-format instructions.

                                           Implementing Unconditional Branches
    EXAMPLE
                                           Figure 4.17 shows the implementation of many of the instructions we looked
                                           at in Chapter 2. One instruction that is missing is the unconditional branch
                                           instruction. Extend the datapath and control of Figure 4.17 to include the
                                           unconditional branch instruction. Describe how to set any new control lines.

                                           The unconditional branch instruction looks like a branch instruction with a
      ANSWER                               longer offset but it is not conditional. Like a branch, the low-order 2 bits of a
                                           branch address are always 00two. The next 26 bits of this 64-bit address come
                                           from the 26-bit immediate field in the instruction and then are sign extended.
                                           Thus, we can implement a branch by storing into the PC sum of the PC and the
                                           sign extended and shifted 26-bit offset. Figure 4.23 shows the addition of the
                                           control for branch added to Figure 4.17. An additional OR-gate is used with a
                                           control signal to select the branch target PC always. This control signal, called
                                           UncondBranch, is asserted only when the instruction is an unconditional branch.

                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                  M
                                  Add                                                                                             u
                                                                                                                                  x
                                                                                                          ALU                     1
                        4                                                                            Add result
                                                                       Reg2Loc           Shift
                                                                       Uncondbranch      left 2
                                                                       Branch
                                                                       MemRead
                                           Instruction [31–21]         MemtoReg
                                                               Control ALUOp
                                                                       MemWrite
                                                                       ALUSrc
                                                                       RegWrite

                                           Instruction [9-5]       Read
                            Read                                   register 1 Read
                  PC        address        Instruction [20-16] 0
                                                               M   Read       data 1
                                                               u                                      Zero
                             Instruction                       x   register 2
                                  [31–0]                       1                                  ALU ALU
                                                                   Write       Read      0           result       Address Read
                                                                                                                           data
                                                                                                                                  1
                            Instruction                            register   data 2     M                                        M
                                           Instruction [4-0]                             u                                        u
                              memory                                                                                               x
                                                                   Write                 x
                                                                                         1                                        0
                                                                   data Registers
                                                                                                                  Write Data
                                                                                                                  data memory

                                           Instruction [31-0]       32    Sign-    64
                                                                                            ALU
                                                                         extend
                                                                                           control

                                                                   Instruction [31–21]

FIGURE 4.23 The simple control and datapath are extended to handle the unconditional branch instruction. An
additional OR-gate (at the upper right) is used to control the multiplexor that chooses between the branch target and the sequential instruction
following this one. One input to the OR-gate is the Uncondbranch control signal. Although not shown, the Sign-extend logic would recognize
the unconditional branch opcode and sign-extend the lower 26 bits of the branch instruction to form a 64-bit address to be added to the PC.

Elaboration: We also need to modify the sign-extend unit to include the 26-bit address
of this instruction. We solve the problem by expanding the 2:1 multiplexor that was
controlled by opcode bit 26 mentioned in an earlier elaboration to include this address
and then control it with the two opcode bits 31 and 26. The value 01 means select the
address for B, 10 means address for LDUR or STUR, and 11 for CBZ.

Why a Single-Cycle Implementation is not Used Today
Although the single-cycle design will work correctly, it is too inefficient to be used
in modern designs. To see why this is so, notice that the clock cycle must have the
same length for every instruction in this single-cycle design. Of course, the longest
possible path in the processor determines the clock cycle. This path is most likely a
load instruction, which uses five functional units in series: the instruction memory,
the register file, the ALU, the data memory, and the register file. Although the CPI
is 1 (see Chapter 1), the overall performance of a single-cycle implementation is
likely to be poor, since the clock cycle is too long.
    The penalty for using the single-cycle design with a fixed clock cycle is significant,
but might be considered acceptable for this small instruction set. Historically, early
computers with very simple instruction sets did use this implementation technique.
However, if we tried to implement the floating-point unit or an instruction set with
more complex instructions, this single-cycle design wouldn’t work well at all.
    Because we must assume that the clock cycle is equal to the worst-case delay
for all instructions, it’s useless to try implementation techniques that reduce the
delay of the common case but do not improve the worst-case cycle time. A single-
cycle implementation thus violates the great idea from Chapter 1 of making the
common case fast.
    In next section, we’ll look at another implementation technique, called
pipelining, that uses a datapath very similar to the single-cycle datapath but is
much more efficient by having a much higher throughput. Pipelining improves
efficiency by executing multiple instructions simultaneously.
Look at the control signals in Figure 4.22. Can you combine any together? Can                Check
any control signal output in the figure be replaced by the inverse of another?               Yourself
(Hint: take into account the don’t cares.) If so, can you use one signal for the other
without adding an inverter?

  4.5           An Overview of Pipelining

Pipelining is an implementation technique in which multiple instructions are                 Never waste time.
overlapped in execution. Today, pipelining is nearly universal.                              American proverb
   This section relies heavily on one analogy to give an overview of the pipelining
terms and issues. If you are interested in just the big picture, you should concentrate      pipelining An
                                                                                             implementation technique
on this section and then skip to Sections 4.10 and 4.11 to see an introduction to            in which multiple
the advanced pipelining techniques used in recent processors such as the Intel               instructions are overlapped
Core i7 and ARM Cortex-A53. If you are curious about exploring the anatomy of a              in execution, much like an
pipelined computer, this section is a good introduction to Sections 4.6 through 4.9.         assembly line.

         Anyone who has done a lot of laundry has intuitively used pipelining. The non-
      pipelined approach to laundry would be as follows:
         1. Place one dirty load of clothes in the washer.
         2. When the washer is finished, place the wet load in the dryer.
         3. When the dryer is finished, place the dry load on a table and fold.
         4. When folding is finished, ask your roommate to put the clothes away.
      When your roommate is done, start over with the next dirty load.
         The pipelined approach takes much less time, as Figure 4.24 shows. As soon as the
      washer is finished with the first load and placed in the dryer, you load the washer
      with the second dirty load. When the first load is dry, you place it on the table to start
      folding, move the wet load to the dryer, and put the next dirty load into the washer.
      Next, you have your roommate put the first load away, you start folding the second
      load, the dryer has the third load, and you put the fourth load into the washer. At this
      point all steps—called stages in pipelining—are operating concurrently. As long as we
      have separate resources for each stage, we can pipeline the tasks.

                                                                                                    A
         Time
         Task
         order
              A

              B

              C

              D

                                                                                                    A
         Time

         Task
         order
              A

              B

              C

              D

      FIGURE 4.24 The laundry analogy for pipelining. Ann, Brian, Cathy, and Don each have dirty
      clothes to be washed, dried, folded, and put away. The washer, dryer, “folder,” and “storer” each take 30
      minutes for their task. Sequential laundry takes 8 hours for four loads of washing, while pipelined laundry
      takes just 3.5 hours. We show the pipeline stage of different loads over time by showing copies of the four
      resources on this two-dimensional time line, but we really have just one of each resource.

   The pipelining paradox is that the time from placing a single dirty sock in the
washer until it is dried, folded, and put away is not shorter for pipelining; the reason
pipelining is faster for many loads is that everything is working in parallel, so more
loads are finished per hour. Pipelining improves throughput of our laundry system.
Hence, pipelining would not decrease the time to complete one load of laundry,
but when we have many loads of laundry to do, the improvement in throughput
decreases the total time to complete the work.
   If all the stages take about the same amount of time and there is enough work
to do, then the speed-up due to pipelining is equal to the number of stages in the
pipeline, in this case four: washing, drying, folding, and putting away. Therefore,
pipelined laundry is potentially four times faster than nonpipelined: 20 loads would
take about five times as long as one load, while 20 loads of sequential laundry takes
20 times as long as one load. It’s only 2.3 times faster in Figure 4.24, because we
only show four loads. Notice that at the beginning and end of the workload in the
pipelined version in Figure 4.24, the pipeline is not completely full; this start-up and
wind-down affects performance when the number of tasks is not large compared
to the number of stages in the pipeline. If the number of loads is much larger than
four, then the stages will be full most of the time and the increase in throughput
will be very close to four.
   The same principles apply to processors where we pipeline instruction
execution. LEGv8 instructions classically take five steps:
   1. Fetch instruction from memory.
   2. Read registers and decode the instruction.
   3. Execute the operation or calculate an address.
   4. Access an operand in data memory (if necessary).
   5. Write the result into a register (if necessary).
   Hence, the LEGv8 pipeline we explore in this chapter has five stages. The
following example shows that pipelining speeds up instruction execution just as it
speeds up the laundry.

    Single-Cycle versus Pipelined Performance
                                                                                           EXAMPLE
    To make this discussion concrete, let’s create a pipeline. In this example, and
    in the rest of this chapter, we limit our attention to seven instructions: load
    register (LDUR), store register (STUR), add (ADD), subtract (SUB), AND (AND),
    OR (ORR), and compare and branch on zero (CBZ).
       Contrast the average time between instructions of a single-cycle
    implementation, in which all instructions take one clock cycle, to a pipelined
    implementation. Assume that the operation times for the major functional

                    units in this example are 200 ps for memory access for instructions or data,
                    200 ps for ALU operation, and 100 ps for register file read or write. In the
                    single-cycle model, every instruction takes exactly one clock cycle, so the clock
                    cycle must be stretched to accommodate the slowest instruction.

                    Figure 4.25 shows the time required for each of the seven instructions. The
      ANSWER        single-cycle design must allow for the slowest instruction—in Figure 4.25 it is
                    LDUR—so the time required for every instruction is 800 ps. Similarly to Figure
                    4.24, Figure 4.26 compares nonpipelined and pipelined execution of three load
                    register instructions. Thus, the time between the first and fourth instructions
                    in the nonpipelined design is 3 × 800 ps or 2400 ps.
                       All the pipeline stages take a single clock cycle, so the clock cycle must be
                    long enough to accommodate the slowest operation. Just as the single-cycle
                    design must take the worst-case clock cycle of 800 ps, even though some
                    instructions can be as fast as 500 ps, the pipelined execution clock cycle must
                    have the worst-case clock cycle of 200 ps, even though some stages take only
                    100 ps. Pipelining still offers a fourfold performance improvement: the time
                    between the first and fourth instructions is 3 × 200 ps or 600 ps.

                  We can turn the pipelining speed-up discussion above into a formula. If the
               stages are perfectly balanced, then the time between instructions on the pipelined
               processor—assuming ideal conditions—is equal to

                                                                    Time between instructions nonpipelined
                    Time between instructions pipelined =
                                                                             Number of pipestages

                  Under ideal conditions and with a large number of instructions, the speed-up
               from pipelining is approximately equal to the number of pipe stages; a five-stage
               pipeline is nearly five times faster.
                  The formula suggests that a five-stage pipeline should offer nearly a fivefold
               improvement over the 800 ps nonpipelined time, or a 160 ps clock cycle. The

                                              Instruction     Register      ALU          Data      Register      Total
                    Instruction class            fetch         read       operation     access      write        time
               Load register (LDUR)              200 ps        100 ps       200 ps       200 ps     100 ps      800 ps
               Store register (STUR)             200 ps        100 ps        200 ps      200 ps                 700 ps
               R-format (ADD, SUB, AND,          200 ps        100 ps        200 ps                 100 ps      600 ps
               ORR)
               Branch (CBZ)                      200 ps        100 ps        200 ps                             500 ps

               FIGURE 4.25 Total time for each instruction calculated from the time for each component.
               This calculation assumes that the multiplexors, control unit, PC accesses, and sign extension unit have no
               delay.

Program
execution                     200            400           600           800         1000     1200      1400      1600         1800
              Time
order
(in instructions)
                      Instruction                        Data
 LDUR X1, [X4,#100]               Reg      ALU                     Reg
                         fetch                          access

                                                                          Instruction                    Data
 LDUR X2, [X4,#200]                       800 ps                             fetch
                                                                                      Reg        ALU
                                                                                                        access
                                                                                                                 Reg

                                                                                                                       Instruction
 LDUR X3, [X4,#400]                                                                          800 ps                       fetch

                                                                                                                       800 ps

Program
execution                     200            400           600           800         1000     1200      1400
              Time
order
(in instructions)
                      Instruction                                Data
 LDUR X1, [X4,#100]                       Reg       ALU                   Reg
                         fetch                                  access

                                    Instruction                             Data
 LDUR X2, [X4,#200]   200 ps                            Reg      ALU                   Reg
                                       fetch                               access

                                                  Instruction                            Data
 LDUR X3, [X4,#400]                 200 ps                         Reg         ALU                Reg
                                                     fetch                              access

                                                  200 ps 200 ps 200 ps 200 ps 200 ps

FIGURE 4.26 Single-cycle, nonpipelined execution (top) versus pipelined execution
(bottom). Both use the same hardware components, whose time is listed in Figure 4.25. In this case, we see
a fourfold speed-up on average time between instructions, from 800 ps down to 200 ps. Compare this figure
to Figure 4.24. For the laundry, we assumed all stages were equal. If the dryer were slowest, then the dryer
stage would set the stage time. The pipeline stage times of a computer are also limited by the slowest resource,
either the ALU operation or the memory access. We assume the write to the register file occurs in the first
half of the clock cycle and the read from the register file occurs in the second half. We use this assumption
throughout this chapter.

example shows, however, that the stages may be imperfectly balanced. Moreover,
pipelining involves some overhead, the source of which will be clearer shortly.
Thus, the time per instruction in the pipelined processor will exceed the minimum
possible, and speed-up will be less than the number of pipeline stages.
   However, even our claim of fourfold improvement for our example is not reflected
in the total execution time for the three instructions: it’s 1400 ps versus 2400 ps. Of
course, this is because the number of instructions is not large. What would happen
if we increased the number of instructions? We could extend the previous figures
to 1,000,003 instructions. We would add 1,000,000 instructions in the pipelined
example; each instruction adds 200 ps to the total execution time. The total execution
time would be 1,000,000 × 200 ps + 1400 ps, or 200,001,400 ps. In the nonpipelined
example, we would add 1,000,000 instructions, each taking 800 ps, so total execution
time would be 1,000,000 × 800 ps + 2400 ps, or 800,002,400 ps. Under these

                               conditions, the ratio of total execution times for real programs on nonpipelined to
                               pipelined processors is close to the ratio of times between instructions:

                                                           800, 002, 400 ps 800 ps
                                                                                     4.00
                                                           200, 001, 400 ps 200 ps

                                  Pipelining improves performance by increasing instruction throughput, in
                               contrast to decreasing the execution time of an individual instruction, but instruction
                               throughput is the important metric because real programs execute billions of
                               instructions.

                               Designing Instruction Sets for Pipelining
                               Even with this simple explanation of pipelining, we can get insight into the design
                               of the LEGv8 instruction set, which was designed for pipelined execution.
                                  First, all LEGv8 instructions are the same length. This restriction makes it much
                               easier to fetch instructions in the first pipeline stage and to decode them in the
                               second stage. In an instruction set like the x86, where instructions vary from 1 byte
                               to 15 bytes, pipelining is considerably more challenging. Modern implementations
                               of the x86 architecture actually translate x86 instructions into simple operations
                               that look like LEGv8 instructions and then pipeline the simple operations rather
                               than the native x86 instructions! (See Section 4.10.)
                                  Second, LEGv8 has just a few instruction formats, with the first source register
                               and destination register fields being located in the same place in each instruction.
                                  Third, memory operands only appear in loads or stores in LEGv8. This
                               restriction means we can use the execute stage to calculate the memory address and
                               then access memory in the following stage. If we could operate on the operands in
                               memory, as in the x86, stages 3 and 4 would expand to an address stage, memory
                               stage, and then execute stage. We will shortly see the downside of longer pipelines.

                               Pipeline Hazards
                               There are situations in pipelining when the next instruction cannot execute in the
                               following clock cycle. These events are called hazards, and there are three different
                               types.

                               Structural Hazard
structural hazard When         The first hazard is called a structural hazard. It means that the hardware cannot
a planned instruction          support the combination of instructions that we want to execute in the same clock
cannot execute in the          cycle. A structural hazard in the laundry room would occur if we used a washer-
proper clock cycle because
                               dryer combination instead of a separate washer and dryer, or if our roommate was
the hardware does not
support the combination        busy doing something else and wouldn’t put clothes away. Our carefully scheduled
of instructions that are set   pipeline plans would then be foiled.
to execute.

    As we said above, the LEGv8 instruction set was designed to be pipelined,
making it fairly easy for designers to avoid structural hazards when designing a
pipeline. Suppose, however, that we had a single memory instead of two memories.
If the pipeline in Figure 4.26 had a fourth instruction, we would see that in the
same clock cycle, the first instruction is accessing data from memory while the
fourth instruction is fetching an instruction from that same memory. Without two
memories, our pipeline could have a structural hazard.

Data Hazards
Data hazards occur when the pipeline must be stalled because one step must wait             data hazard Also
for another to complete. Suppose you found a sock at the folding station for which          called a pipeline data
no match existed. One possible strategy is to run down to your room and search              hazard. When a planned
                                                                                            instruction cannot
through your clothes bureau to see if you can find the match. Obviously, while you
                                                                                            execute in the proper
are doing the search, loads that have completed drying are ready to fold and those          clock cycle because data
that have finished washing are ready to dry.                                                that are needed to execute
   In a computer pipeline, data hazards arise from the dependence of one                    the instruction are not yet
instruction on an earlier one that is still in the pipeline (a relationship that does not   available.
really exist when doing laundry). For example, suppose we have an add instruction
followed immediately by a subtract instruction that uses that sum (X19):

      ADD X19, X0, X1
      SUB X2, X19, X3

   Without intervention, a data hazard could severely stall the pipeline. The add
instruction doesn’t write its result until the fifth stage, meaning that we would have
to waste three clock cycles in the pipeline.                                                forwarding Also called
   Although we could try to rely on compilers to remove all such hazards, the               bypassing. A method of
results would not be satisfactory. These dependences happen just too often and the          resolving a data hazard
delay is far too long to expect the compiler to rescue us from this dilemma.                by retrieving the missing
                                                                                            data element from
   The primary solution is based on the observation that we don’t need to wait for          internal buffers rather
the instruction to complete before trying to resolve the data hazard. For the code          than waiting for it to
sequence above, as soon as the ALU creates the sum for the add, we can supply it as         arrive from programmer-
an input for the subtract. Adding extra hardware to retrieve the missing item early         visible registers or
from the internal resources is called forwarding or bypassing.                              memory.

    Forwarding with Two Instructions
                                                                                                EXAMPLE
    For the two instructions above, show what pipeline stages would be connected
    by forwarding. Use the drawing in Figure 4.27 to represent the datapath during
    the five stages of the pipeline. Align a copy of the datapath for each instruction,
    similar to the laundry pipeline in Figure 4.24.

                                                       200            400            600            800          1000
                                  Time

                      ADD X1, X2, X3            IF             ID              EX            MEM          WB

               FIGURE 4.27 Graphical representation of the instruction pipeline, similar in spirit to
               the laundry pipeline in Figure 4.24. Here we use symbols representing the physical resources with
               the abbreviations for pipeline stages used throughout the chapter. The symbols for the five stages: IF for
               the instruction fetch stage, with the box representing instruction memory; ID for the instruction decode/
               register file read stage, with the drawing showing the register file being read; EX for the execution stage,
               with the drawing representing the ALU; MEM for the memory access stage, with the box representing data
               memory; and WB for the write-back stage, with the drawing showing the register file being written. The
               shading indicates the element is used by the instruction. Hence, MEM has a white background because ADD
               does not access the data memory. Shading on the right half of the register file or memory means the element
               is read in that stage, and shading of the left half means it is written in that stage. Hence the right half of ID is
               shaded in the second stage because the register file is read, and the left half of WB is shaded in the fifth stage
               because the register file is written.

                     Figure 4.28 shows the connection to forward the value in X1 after the
      ANSWER         execution stage of the ADD instruction as input to the execution stage of the
                     SUB instruction.

                  In this graphical representation of events, forwarding paths are valid only if the
               destination stage is later in time than the source stage. For example, there cannot
               be a valid forwarding path from the output of the memory access stage in the first
               instruction to the input of the execution stage of the following, since that would
               mean going backward in time.
                  Forwarding works very well and is described in detail in Section 4.7. It cannot
               prevent all pipeline stalls, however. For example, suppose the first instruction was
               a load of X1 instead of an add. As we can imagine from looking at Figure 4.28, the

                Program
                execution                               200            400             600          800           1000
                order             Time
                (in instructions)
                    ADD X1, X2, X3                IF             ID             EX           MEM            WB

                    SUB X4, X1, X5                               IF               ID           EX           MEM            WB

               FIGURE 4.28 Graphical representation of forwarding. The connection shows the forwarding path
               from the output of the EX stage of ADD to the input of the EX stage for SUB, replacing the value from register
               X1 read in the second stage of SUB.

Program
execution
                                200         400           600         800        1000      1200        1400
order           Time
(in instructions)
  LDUR X1, [X2, #0]        IF          ID          EX           MEM         WB

                                      bubble      bubble        bubble         bubble   bubble

  SUB X4, X1, X5                                     IF            ID            EX     MEM          WB

FIGURE 4.29 We need a stall even with forwarding when an R-format instruction following
a load tries to use the data. Without the stall, the path from memory access stage output to execution
stage input would be going backward in time, which is impossible. This figure is actually a simplification,
since we cannot know until after the subtract instruction is fetched and decoded whether or not a stall will be
necessary. Section 4.7 shows the details of what really happens in the case of a hazard.

                                                                                                                  load-use data hazard
desired data would be available only after the fourth stage of the first instruction                              A specific form of data
in the dependence, which is too late for the input of the third stage of SUB. Hence,                              hazard in which the
even with forwarding, we would have to stall one stage for a load-use data hazard,                                data being loaded by a
as Figure 4.29 shows. This figure shows an important pipeline concept, officially                                 load instruction have
called a pipeline stall, but often given the nickname bubble. We shall see stalls                                 not yet become available
                                                                                                                  when they are needed by
elsewhere in the pipeline. Section 4.7 shows how we can handle hard cases like                                    another instruction.
these, using either hardware detection and stalls or software that reorders code to
try to avoid load-use pipeline stalls, as this example illustrates.                                               pipeline stall Also called
                                                                                                                  bubble. A stall initiated
                                                                                                                  in order to resolve a
                                                                                                                  hazard.

     Reordering Code to Avoid Pipeline Stalls

     Consider the following code segment in C:
                                                                                                                      EXAMPLE
         a = b + e;
         c = b + f;

        Here is the generated LEGv8 code for this segment, assuming all variables
     are in memory and are addressable as offsets from X0:

         LDUR   X1, [X0,#0] // Load b
         LDUR   X2, [X0,#8] // Load e
         ADD  	X3, X1,X2     // b + e
         STUR   X3, [X0,#24] // Store a
         LDUR   X4, [X0,#16] // Load f
         ADD  	X5, X1,X4     // b + f
         STUR 	X5, [X0,#32] // Store c

                                  Find the hazards in the preceding code segment and reorder the instructions
                                  to avoid any pipeline stalls.

                                  Both ADD instructions have a hazard because of their respective dependence on
      ANSWER                      the previous LDUR instruction. Notice that forwarding eliminates several other
                                  potential hazards, including the dependence of the first ADD on the first LDUR
                                  and any hazards for store instructions. Moving up the third LDUR instruction
                                  to become the third instruction eliminates both hazards:

                                     LDUR  X1, [X0,#0]
                                     LDUR  X2, [X0,#8]
                                     LDUR  X4, [X0,#16]
                                     ADD  	 X3,   X1,X2
                                     STUR  X3, [X0,#24]
                                     ADD  	X5, X1,X4
                                     STUR  X5, [X0,#32]

                                  On a pipelined processor with forwarding, the reordered sequence will
                                  complete in two fewer cycles than the original version.

                                 Forwarding yields another insight into the LEGv8 architecture, in addition to
                              the three mentioned on page 288. Each LEGv8 instruction writes at most one result
                              and does this in the last stage of the pipeline. Forwarding is harder if there are
                              multiple results to forward per instruction or if there is a need to write a result early
                              on in instruction execution.

                              Elaboration: The name “forwarding” comes from the idea that the result is passed
                              forward from an earlier instruction to a later instruction. “Bypassing” comes from
                              passing the result around the register file to the desired unit.

                              Control Hazards
control hazard Also           The third type of hazard is called a control hazard, arising from the need to make a
called branch hazard.         decision based on the results of one instruction while others are executing.
When the proper                   Suppose our laundry crew was given the happy task of cleaning the uniforms
instruction cannot
                              of a football team. Given how filthy the laundry is, we need to determine whether
execute in the proper
pipeline clock cycle          the detergent and water temperature setting we select are strong enough to get the
because the instruction       uniforms clean but not so strong that the uniforms wear out sooner. In our laundry
that was fetched is not the   pipeline, we have to wait until the second stage to examine the dry uniform to see
one that is needed; that      if we need to change the washer setup or not. What to do?
is, the flow of instruction       Here is the first of two solutions to control hazards in the laundry room and its
addresses is not what the     computer equivalent.
pipeline expected.
                                 Stall: Just operate sequentially until the first batch is dry and then repeat until
                                     you have the right formula.
                                 This conservative option certainly works, but it is slow.

   The equivalent decision task in a computer is the conditional branch instruction.
Notice that we must begin fetching the instruction following the branch on the
following clock cycle. Nevertheless, the pipeline cannot possibly know what the
next instruction should be, since it only just received the branch instruction from
memory! Just as with laundry, one possible solution is to stall immediately after we
fetch a branch, waiting until the pipeline determines the outcome of the branch
and knows what instruction address to fetch from.
   Let’s assume that we put in enough extra hardware so that we can test a register,
calculate the branch address, and update the PC during the second stage of the
pipeline (see Section 4.8 for details). Even with this added hardware, the pipeline
involving conditional branches would look like Figure 4.30. The instruction to be
executed if the branch fails is stalled one extra 200 ps clock cycle before starting.

      Performance of “Stall on Branch”
                                                                                                                        EXAMPLE
      Estimate the impact on the clock cycles per instruction (CPI) of stalling on
      branches. Assume all other instructions have a CPI of 1.

      Figure 3.28 in Chapter 3 shows that conditional branches are 17% of the
      instructions executed in SPECint2006. Since the other instructions run have a                                     ANSWER
      CPI of 1, and conditional branches took one extra clock cycle for the stall, then
      we would see a CPI of 1.17 and hence a slowdown of 1.17 versus the ideal case.

    Program
    execution Time                 200          400           600         800        1000         1200    1400
    order
    (in instructions)
                          Instruction                              Data
     ADD X4, X5, X6          fetch
                                              Reg       ALU
                                                                  access
                                                                              Reg

                                        Instruction                             Data
     CBZ X1,40                             fetch
                                                          Reg       ALU
                                                                               access
                                                                                          Reg
                           200 ps
                                                      bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble

     ORR X7, X8, X9                                             Instruction
                                                                                    Reg     ALU
                                                                                                      Data
                                                                                                              Reg
                                               400 ps              fetch                             access

FIGURE 4.30 Pipeline showing stalling on every conditional branch as solution to control
hazards. This example assumes the conditional branch is taken, and the instruction at the destination of the
branch is the ORR instruction. There is a one-stage pipeline stall, or bubble, after the branch. In reality, the
process of creating a stall is slightly more complicated, as we will see in Section 4.8. The effect on performance,
however, is the same as would occur if a bubble were inserted.

         If we cannot resolve the branch in the second stage, as is often the case for longer
      pipelines, then we’d see an even larger slowdown if we stall on conditional branches.
      The cost of this option is too high for most computers to use and motivates a second
      solution to the control hazard using one of our great ideas from Chapter 1:
         Predict: If you’re sure you have the right formula to wash uniforms, then just
         predict that it will work and wash the second load while waiting for the first load
         to dry.
         This option does not slow down the pipeline when you are correct. When you
      are wrong, however, you need to redo the load that was washed while guessing the
      decision.
         Computers do indeed use prediction to handle conditional branches. One
      simple approach is to predict always that conditional branches will be untaken.
      When you’re right, the pipeline proceeds at full speed. Only when conditional
      branches are taken does the pipeline stall. Figure 4.31 shows such an example.

          Program
          execution Time                200           400            600            800         1000       1200     1400
          order
          (in instructions)
                                Instruction                                  Data
           ADD X4, X5, X6          fetch
                                                    Reg        ALU
                                                                            access
                                                                                        Reg

                                              Instruction                                 Data
           CBZ X1,40                             fetch
                                                                  Reg        ALU
                                                                                         access
                                                                                                    Reg
                                 200 ps
                                                            Instruction                               Data
           LDUR X3, [X0,#400]                 200 ps           fetch
                                                                                Reg       ALU
                                                                                                     access
                                                                                                              Reg

          Program
          execution Time                200           400            600            800         1000       1200     1400
          order
          (in instructions)
                                Instruction                                 Data
           ADD X4, X5, X6          fetch
                                                    Reg        ALU
                                                                           access
                                                                                        Reg

                                              Instruction                                Data
           CBZ X1,40                             fetch
                                                                  Reg        ALU
                                                                                        access
                                                                                                    Reg
                                 200 ps
                                                            bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble

                   ORR X7, X8, X9                                         Instruction
                                                                                              Reg    ALU
                                                                                                               Data
                                                                                                                       Reg
                                                     400 ps                  fetch                            access

      FIGURE 4.31 Predicting that branches are not taken as a solution to control hazard. The
      top drawing shows the pipeline when the branch is not taken. The bottom drawing shows the pipeline when
      the branch is taken. As we noted in Figure 4.30, the insertion of a bubble in this fashion simplifies what
      actually happens, at least during the first clock cycle immediately following the branch. Section 4.8 will reveal
      the details.

   A more sophisticated version of branch prediction would have some conditional
branches predicted as taken and some as untaken. In our analogy, the dark or                 branch prediction
home uniforms might take one formula while the light or road uniforms might                  A method of resolving
take another. In the case of programming, at the bottom of loops are conditional             a branch hazard that
                                                                                             assumes a given outcome
branches that branch back to the top of the loop. Since they are likely to be taken          for the conditional branch
and they branch backward, we could always predict taken for conditional branches             and proceeds from that
that branch to an earlier address.                                                           assumption rather than
   Such rigid approaches to branch prediction rely on stereotypical behavior                 waiting to ascertain the
and don’t account for the individuality of a specific branch instruction. Dynamic            actual outcome.
hardware predictors, in stark contrast, make their guesses depending on the
behavior of each conditional branch and may change predictions for a conditional
branch over the life of a program. Following our analogy, in dynamic prediction a
person would look at how dirty the uniform was and guess at the formula, adjusting
the next prediction depending on the success of recent guesses.
   One popular approach to dynamic prediction of conditional branches is keeping
a history for each conditional branch as taken or untaken, and then using the
recent past behavior to predict the future. As we will see later, the amount and
type of history kept have become extensive, with the result being that dynamic
branch predictors can correctly predict conditional branches with more than 90%
accuracy (see Section 4.8). When the guess is wrong, the pipeline control must
ensure that the instructions following the wrongly guessed conditional branch
have no effect and must restart the pipeline from the proper branch address. In our
laundry analogy, we must stop taking new loads so that we can restart the load that
we incorrectly predicted.
   As in the case of all other solutions to control hazards, longer pipelines exacerbate
the problem, in this case by raising the cost of misprediction. Solutions to control
hazards are described in more detail in Section 4.8.

Elaboration: There is a third approach to the control hazard, called a delayed decision.
In our analogy, whenever you are going to make such a decision about laundry, just place
a load of non-football clothes in the washer while waiting for football uniforms to dry.
As long as you have enough dirty clothes that are not affected by the test, this solution
works fine.
    Called the delayed branch in computers, this is the solution actually used by the
MIPS architecture. The delayed branch always executes the next sequential instruction,
with the branch taking place after that one instruction delay. It is hidden from the MIPS
assembly language programmer because the assembler can automatically arrange the
instructions to get the branch behavior desired by the programmer. MIPS software will
place an instruction immediately after the delayed branch instruction that is not affected
by the branch, and a taken branch changes the address of the instruction that follows
this safe instruction. In our example, the ADD instruction before the branch in Figure
4.30 does not affect the branch and can be moved after the branch to hide the branch
delay fully. Since delayed branches are useful when the branches are short, it is rare to
see a processor with a delayed branch of more than one cycle. For longer branch delays,
hardware-based branch prediction is usually used.

                   Pipeline Overview Summary
                   Pipelining is a technique that exploits parallelism between the instructions in
                   a sequential instruction stream. It has the substantial advantage that, unlike
                   programming a multiprocessor (see Chapter 6), it is fundamentally invisible to the
                   programmer.
                      In the next few sections of this chapter, we cover the concept of pipelining using
                   the LEGv8 instruction subset from the single-cycle implementation in Section 4.4
                   and show a simplified version of its pipeline. We then look at the problems that
                   pipelining introduces and the performance attainable under typical situations.
                      If you wish to focus more on the software and the performance implications of
                   pipelining, you now have sufficient background to skip to Section 4.10. Section
                   4.10 introduces advanced pipelining concepts, such as superscalar and dynamic
                   scheduling, and Section 4.11 examines the pipelines of recent microprocessors.
                      Alternatively, if you are interested in understanding how pipelining is
                   implemented and the challenges of dealing with hazards, you can proceed to
                   examine the design of a pipelined datapath and the basic control, explained in
                   Section 4.6. You can then use this understanding to explore the implementation of
                   forwarding and stalls in Section 4.7. You can next read Section 4.8 to learn more
                   about solutions to branch hazards, and finally see how exceptions are handled in
                   Section 4.9.

        Check For each code sequence below, state whether it must stall, can avoid stalls using
      Yourself only forwarding, or can execute without stalling or forwarding.
                               Sequence 1                   Sequence 2               Sequence 3
                        LDUR X0, [X0,#0]              ADD     X1, X0, X0         ADDI X1, X0, #1
                        ADD      X1, X0, X0           ADDI X2, X0, #5            ADDI X2, X0, #2
                                                      ADDI    X4, X1, #5         ADDI   X3, X0, #3
                                                                                 ADDI   X4, X0, #4
                                                                                 ADDI   X5, X0, #5

Understanding      Outside the memory system, the effective operation of the pipeline is usually
                   the most important factor in determining the CPI of the processor and hence its
     Program       performance. As we will see in Section 4.10, understanding the performance of a
 Performance       modern multiple-issue pipelined processor is complex and requires understanding
                   more than just the issues that arise in a simple pipelined processor. Nonetheless,
                   structural, data, and control hazards remain important in both simple pipelines
                   and more sophisticated ones.
                      For modern pipelines, structural hazards usually revolve around the floating-
                   point unit, which may not be fully pipelined, while control hazards are usually
                   more of a problem in integer programs, which tend to have higher conditional
                   branch frequencies as well as less predictable branches. Data hazards can be

performance bottlenecks in both integer and floating-point programs. Often it
is easier to deal with data hazards in floating-point programs because the lower
conditional branch frequency and more regular memory access patterns allow the
compiler to try to schedule instructions to avoid hazards. It is more difficult to
perform such optimizations in integer programs that have less regular memory
accesses, involving more use of pointers. As we will see in Section 4.10, there are
more ambitious compiler and hardware techniques for reducing data dependences
through scheduling.

    Pipelining increases the number of simultaneously executing instructions
                                                                                         The    BIG
    and the rate at which instructions are started and completed. Pipelining
                                                                                         Picture
    does not reduce the time it takes to complete an individual instruction,             latency (pipeline) The
    also called the latency. For example, the five-stage pipeline still takes five       number of stages in a
    clock cycles for the instruction to complete. In the terms used in Chapter 1,        pipeline or the number
                                                                                         of stages between two
    pipelining improves instruction throughput rather than individual                    instructions during
    instruction execution time or latency.                                               execution.
       Instruction sets can either make life harder or simpler for pipeline
    designers, who must already cope with structural, control, and data
    hazards. Branch prediction and forwarding help make a computer fast
    while still getting the right answers.

  4.6          Pipelined Datapath and Control

Figure 4.32 shows the single-cycle datapath from Section 4.4 with the pipeline
stages identified. The division of an instruction into five stages means a five-stage
pipeline, which in turn means that up to five instructions will be in execution
during any single clock cycle. Thus, we must separate the datapath into five pieces,
with each piece named corresponding to a stage of instruction execution:
  1. IF: Instruction fetch
                                                                                         There is less in this
  2. ID: Instruction decode and register file read                                       than meets the eye.
  3. EX: Execution or address calculation                                                Tallulah
                                                                                         Bankhead, remark
  4. MEM: Data memory access
                                                                                         to Alexander
  5. WB: Write back                                                                      Woollcott, 1922

   In Figure 4.32, these five components correspond roughly to the way the data-
path is drawn; instructions and data move generally from left to right through the

                          IF: Instruction fetch              ID: Instruction decode/               EX: Execute/                     MEM: Memory access        WB: Write back
                                                                 register file read              address calculation

                      4

                                    Add

                                                                                                                      Add
                                                                                                              ADD
                                                                                                                    result
                                                                                             Shift
                                                                                             left 2

              0
                                                                  Read             Read
                  M                                               register 1
                                     Address                                      data 1
                  u        PC                                                                                                Zero
                  x                                               Read                                              ALU ALU
              1                                                   register 2                                                                Address
                                           Instruction                                                                 result                         Read
                                                                        Registers                     0                                                           1
                                                                                                          M                                            data
                                                                  Write           Read                                                           Data                 M
                                          Instruction             register       data 2                   u                                                           u
                                                                                                                                                memory
                                            memory                                                        x                                                           x
                                                                  Write                               1
                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                  data                                                                      Write
                                                                                                                                            data

                                                                    32                  64
                                                                                Sign-
                                                                               extend

FIGURE 4.32 The single-cycle datapath from Section 4.4 (similar to Figure 4.17). Each step of the instruction can be mapped
onto the datapath from left to right. The only exceptions are the update of the PC and the write-back step, shown in color, which sends either
the ALU result or the data from memory to the left to be written into the register file. (Normally we use color lines for control, but these are
data lines.)

                                           five stages as they complete execution. Returning to our laundry analogy, clothes
                                           get cleaner, drier, and more organized as they move through the line, and they
                                           never move backward.
                                              There are, however, two exceptions to this left-to-right flow of instructions:
                                                  ■      The write-back stage, which places the result back into the register file in the
                                                         middle of the datapath
                                                  ■      The selection of the next value of the PC, choosing between the incremented
                                                         PC and the branch address from the MEM stage
                                              Data flowing from right to left do not affect the current instruction; these reverse
                                           data movements influence only later instructions in the pipeline. Note that the first

right-to-left flow of data can lead to data hazards and the second leads to control
hazards.
   One way to show what happens in pipelined execution is to pretend that each
instruction has its own datapath, and then to place these datapaths on a timeline to
show their relationship. Figure 4.33 shows the execution of the instructions in Figure
4.26 by displaying their private datapaths on a common timeline. We use a stylized
version of the datapath in Figure 4.32 to show the relationships in Figure 4.33.
   Figure 4.33 seems to suggest that three instructions need three datapaths.
Instead, we add registers to hold data so that portions of a single datapath can be
shared during instruction execution.
   For example, as Figure 4.33 shows, the instruction memory is used during
only one of the five stages of an instruction, allowing it to be shared by following
instructions during the other four stages. To retain the value of an individual
instruction for its other four stages, the value read from instruction memory must
be saved in a register. Similar arguments apply to every pipeline stage, so we must
place registers wherever there are dividing lines between stages in Figure 4.32.
Returning to our laundry analogy, we might have a basket between each pair of
stages to hold the clothes for the next step.

                               Time (in clock cycles)
     Program
     execution                 CC 1        CC 2        CC 3        CC 4        CC 5        CC 6        CC 7
     order
     (in instructions)

       LDUR X1, [X4,#100] IM               Reg          ALU         DM          Reg

       LDUR X2, [X4,#200]                   IM         Reg          ALU         DM          Reg

       LDUR X3, [X4,#400]                               IM         Reg           ALU        DM          Reg

FIGURE 4.33 Instructions being executed using the single-cycle datapath in Figure 4.32,
assuming pipelined execution. Similar to Figures 4.27 through 4.29, this figure pretends that each
instruction has its own datapath, and shades each portion according to use. Unlike those figures, each stage
is labeled by the physical resource used in that stage, corresponding to the portions of the datapath in Figure
4.32. IM represents the instruction memory and the PC in the instruction fetch stage, Reg stands for the
register file and sign extender in the instruction decode/register file read stage (ID), and so on. To maintain
proper time order, this stylized datapath breaks the register file into two logical parts: registers read during
register fetch (ID) and registers written during write back (WB). This dual use is represented by drawing
the unshaded left half of the register file using dashed lines in the ID stage, when it is not being written, and
the unshaded right half in dashed lines in the WB stage, when it is not being read. As before, we assume the
register file is written in the first half of the clock cycle and the register file is read during the second half.

                                          Figure 4.34 shows the pipelined datapath with the pipeline registers high-
                                      lighted. All instructions advance during each clock cycle from one pipeline register
                                      to the next. The registers are named for the two stages separated by that register.
                                      For example, the pipeline register between the IF and ID stages is called IF/ID.
                                          Notice that there is no pipeline register at the end of the write-back stage. All
                                      instructions must update some state in the processor—the register file, memory,
                                      or the PC—so a separate pipeline register is redundant to the state that is updated.
                                      For example, a load instruction will place its result in one of the 32 registers, and
                                      any later instruction that needs that data will simply read the appropriate register.
                                          Of course, every instruction updates the PC, whether by incrementing it or by
                                      setting it to a branch destination address. The PC can be thought of as a pipeline
                                      register: one that feeds the IF stage of the pipeline. Unlike the shaded pipeline
                                      registers in Figure 4.34, however, the PC is part of the visible architectural state;
                                      its contents must be saved when an exception occurs, while the contents of the
                                      pipeline registers can be discarded. In the laundry analogy, you could think of
                                      the PC as corresponding to the basket that holds the load of dirty clothes before
                                      the wash step.
                                          To show how the pipelining works, throughout this chapter we show sequences
                                      of figures to demonstrate operation over time. These extra pages would seem to
                                      require much more time for you to understand. Fear not; the sequences take much

                                           IF/ID                                                   ID/EX                                 EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                             Add

                    4                                                                                                    Add Add
                                                                                                                            result
                                                                                                           Shift
                                                                                                           left 2

      0
       M
                                                   Instruction

       u   PC      Address                                         Read
       x                                                           register 1        Read
      1                                                                              data 1
                                                                   Read                                                          Zero
                        Instruction                                register 2                                                ALU ALU
                                                                           Registers Read                                                                          Read
                          memory                                                                                                result            Address          data            1
                                                                   Write                                            0
                                                                                     data 2                                                                                        M
                                                                   register                                          M
                                                                                                                                                           Data                     u
                                                                                                                     u
                                                                   Write                                                                                  memory                    x
                                                                                                                     x                                                             0
                                                                   data                                             1

                                                                                                                                                  Write
                                                                                                                                                  data

                                                                           32      Sign-      64
                                                                                  extend

FIGURE 4.34 The pipelined version of the datapath in Figure 4.32. The pipeline registers, in color, separate each pipeline stage.
They are labeled by the stages that they separate; for example, the first is labeled IF/ID because it separates the instruction fetch and instruction
decode stages. The registers must be wide enough to store all the data corresponding to the lines that go through them. For example, the IF/ID
register must be 96 bits wide, because it must hold both the 64-bit instruction fetched from memory and the incremented 64-bit PC address.
We will expand these registers over the course of this chapter, but for now the other three pipeline registers contain 256, 193, and 128 bits,
respectively.

less time than it might appear, because you can compare them to see what changes
occur in each clock cycle. Section 4.7 describes what happens when there are data
hazards between pipelined instructions; ignore them for now.
   Figures 4.35 through 4.37, our first sequence, show the active portions of the
datapath highlighted as a load instruction goes through the five stages of pipelined
execution. We show a load first because it is active in all five stages. As in Figures
4.27 through 4.29, we highlight the right half of registers or memory when they are
being read and highlight the left half when they are being written.
   We show the instruction LDUR with the name of the pipe stage that is active in
each figure. The five stages are the following:
   1. Instruction fetch: The top portion of Figure 4.35 shows the instruction being
      read from memory using the address in the PC and then being placed in the
      IF/ID pipeline register. The PC address is incremented by 4 and then written
      back into the PC to be ready for the next clock cycle. This incremented
      address is also saved in the IF/ID pipeline register in case it is needed later
      for an instruction, such as CBZ. The computer cannot know which type of
      instruction is being fetched, so it must prepare for any instruction, passing
      potentially needed information down the pipeline.
   2. Instruction decode and register file read: The bottom portion of Figure 4.35
      shows the instruction portion of the IF/ID pipeline register supplying the
      immediate field, which is sign-extended to 64 bits, and the register numbers
      to read the two registers. All three values are stored in the ID/EX pipeline
      register, along with the incremented PC address. We again transfer everything
      that might be needed by any instruction during a later clock cycle.
   3. Execute or address calculation: Figure 4.36 shows that the load instruction
      reads the contents of a register and the sign-extended immediate from the
      ID/EX pipeline register and adds them using the ALU. That sum is placed in
      the EX/MEM pipeline register.
   4. Memory access: The top portion of Figure 4.37 shows the load instruction
      reading the data memory using the address from the EX/MEM pipeline
      register and loading the data into the MEM/WB pipeline register.
   5. Write-back: The bottom portion of Figure 4.37 shows the final step: reading
      the data from the MEM/WB pipeline register and writing it into the register
      file in the middle of the figure.
   This walk-through of the load instruction shows that any information needed
in a later pipe stage must be passed to that stage via a pipeline register. Walking
through a store instruction shows the similarity of instruction execution, as well
as passing the information for later stages. Here are the five pipe stages of the store
instruction:

                               LDUR

                       Instruction fetch

                                               IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                                Add

                      4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                                 result
                                                                                                                Shift
                                                                                                                left 2

        0
         M
                                                       Instruction

         u   PC      Address                                           Read
         x                                                             register 1         Read
        1                                                                                 data 1
                                                                       Read                                                               Zero
                           Instruction                                 register 2                                                 ALU
                                                                                Registers Read                                             ALU                               Read
                             memory                                                                                                       result            Address          data            1
                                                                       Write                                             0
                                                                                          data 2                                                                                              M
                                                                       register                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                     Data                     u
                                                                                                                          u
                                                                       Write                                                                                        memory                    x
                                                                                                                          x                                                                  0
                                                                       data                                              1

                                                                                                                                                            Write
                                                                                                                                                            data

                                                                                32       Sign-     64
                                                                                        extend

                                                                                     LDUR

                                                                       Instruction decode

                                               IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                                Add

                      4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                                 result
                                                                                                                Shift
                                                                                                                left 2

        0
         M
                                                       Instruction

         u   PC      Address                                           Read
         x                                                             register 1         Read
        1                                                                                 data 1
                                                                       Read                                                               Zero
                           Instruction                                 register 2                                                 ALU
                                                                                Registers Read                                             ALU                               Read
                             memory                                                                                                       result            Address          data            1
                                                                       Write                                             0
                                                                                          data 2                                                                                              M
                                                                       register                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                     Data                     u
                                                                                                                          u
                                                                       Write                                                                                        memory                    x
                                                                                                                          x                                                                  0
                                                                       data                                              1

                                                                                                                                                            Write
                                                                                                                                                            data

                                                                                32       Sign-     64
                                                                                        extend

FIGURE 4.35 IF and ID: First and second pipe stages of an instruction, with the active portions of the datapath in
Figure 4.34 highlighted. The highlighting convention is the same as that used in Figure 4.27. As in Section 4.2, there is no confusion when
reading and writing registers, because the contents change only on the clock edge. Although the load needs only the top register in stage 2, it
doesn’t hurt to do potentially extra work, so it sign-extends the constant and reads both registers into the ID/EX pipeline register. We don’t need
all three operands, but it simplifies control to keep all three.

                                                                                                              LDUR

                                                                                                             Execution

                                      IF/ID                                            ID/EX                                   EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                           Add

                 4                                                                                             Add Add
                                                                                               Shift             result
                                                                                               left 2

    0
    M
     u   PC     Address                                 Read
                                          Instruction

     x                                                  register 1      Read
    1                                                                   data 1
                                                        Read                                                           Zero
                     Instruction                        register 2                                                 ALU ALU                               Read
                       memory                                  Registers                                                                Address                          1
                                                        Write           Read                            0             result                             data            M
                                                        register        data 2                           M                                                                u
                                                                                                         u                                       Data
                                                        Write                                                                                   memory                    x
                                                        data                                            1x                                                               0

                                                                                                                                        Write
                                                                                                                                        data

                                                                32     Sign-     64
                                                                      extend

FIGURE 4.36 EX: The third pipe stage of a load instruction, highlighting the portions of the datapath in Figure 4.34
used in this pipe stage. The register is added to the sign-extended immediate, and the sum is placed in the EX/MEM pipeline register.

   1. Instruction fetch: The instruction is read from memory using the address in
      the PC and then is placed in the IF/ID pipeline register. This stage occurs
      before the instruction is identified, so the top portion of Figure 4.35 works
      for store as well as load.
   2. Instruction decode and register file read: The instruction in the IF/ID pipeline
      register supplies the register numbers for reading two registers and extends
      the sign of the immediate operand. These three 64-bit values are all stored
      in the ID/EX pipeline register. The bottom portion of Figure 4.35 for load
      instructions also shows the operations of the second stage for stores. These
      first two stages are executed by all instructions, since it is too early to know
      the type of the instruction. (While the store instruction uses the Rt field to
      read the second register in this pipe stage, that detail is not shown in this
      pipeline diagram, so we can use the same figure for both.)
   3. Execute and address calculation: Figure 4.38 shows the third step; the effective
      address is placed in the EX/MEM pipeline register.
   4. Memory access: The top portion of Figure 4.39 shows the data being written
      to memory. Note that the register containing the data to be stored was read in
      an earlier stage and stored in ID/EX. The only way to make the data available
      during the MEM stage is to place the data into the EX/MEM pipeline register
      in the EX stage, just as we stored the effective address into EX/MEM.

                                                                                                                                                                   LDUR

                                                                                                                                                               Memory

                                              IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                               Add

                     4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                                result
                                                                                                               Shift
                                                                                                               left 2

       0
        M
                                                      Instruction

        u   PC      Address                                           Read
        x                                                             register 1         Read
       1                                                                                 data 1
                                                                      Read                                                               Zero
                          Instruction                                 register 2                                                 ALU
                                                                               Registers Read                                             ALU                               Read
                            memory                                                                                                       result            Address          data            0
                                                                      Write                                             0
                                                                                         data 2                                                                                              M
                                                                      register                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                    Data                     u
                                                                                                                         u
                                                                      Write                                                                                        memory                    x
                                                                                                                         x                                                                  1
                                                                      data                                              1

                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data

                                                                               32      Sign-      64
                                                                                      extend

                                                                                                                                                                                        LDUR

                                                                                                                                                                                      Write-back

                                              IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                               Add

                     4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                                result
                                                                                                               Shift
                                                                                                               left 2

       0
        M
                                                      Instruction

        u   PC      Address                                           Read
        x                                                             register 1         Read
       1                                                                                 data 1
                                                                      Read                                                               Zero
                          Instruction                                 register 2                                                 ALU
                                                                               Registers Read                                             ALU                               Read
                            memory                                                                                                       result            Address          data            1
                                                                      Write                                             0
                                                                                         data 2                                                                                              M
                                                                      register                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                    Data                     u
                                                                                                                         u
                                                                      Write                                                                                        memory                    x
                                                                                                                         x                                                                  0
                                                                      data                                              1

                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data

                                                                               32      Sign-      64
                                                                                      extend

FIGURE 4.37 MEM and WB: The fourth and fifth pipe stages of a load instruction, highlighting the portions of the
datapath in Figure 4.34 used in this pipe stage. Data memory is read using the address in the EX/MEM pipeline registers, and the
data are placed in the MEM/WB pipeline register. Next, data are read from the MEM/WB pipeline register and written into the register file in
the middle of the datapath. Note: there is a bug in this design that is repaired in Figure 4.40.

                                                                                                                        STUR

                                                                                                                     Execution

                                         IF/ID                                                 ID/EX                                   EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                             Add

                   4                                                                                                   Add Add
                                                                                                       Shift             result
                                                                                                       left 2

     0
     M
      u   PC      Address                                      Read
                                                 Instruction

                                                               register 1       Read
      x
     1                                                                          data 1
                                                               Read                                                            Zero
                       Instruction                             register 2                                                  ALU ALU                               Read
                         memory                                       Registers                                               result            Address                          1
                                                                                Read                            0                                                data            M
                                                               Write
                                                                                                                M
                                                               register         data 2                                                                   Data                     u
                                                                                                                 u
                                                                                                                                                        memory                    x
                                                               Write                                             x                                                               0
                                                               data                                             1
                                                                                                                                                Write
                                                                                                                                                data

                                                                       32      Sign-     64
                                                                              extend

FIGURE 4.38 EX: The third pipe stage of a store instruction. Unlike the third stage of the load instruction in Figure 4.36, the
second register value is loaded into the EX/MEM pipeline register to be used in the next stage. Although it wouldn’t hurt to always write this
second register into the EX/MEM pipeline register, we write the second register only on a store instruction to make the pipeline easier to
understand.

   5. Write-back: The bottom portion of Figure 4.39 shows the final step of the
      store. For this instruction, nothing happens in the write-back stage. Since
      every instruction behind the store is already in progress, we have no way
      to accelerate those instructions. Hence, an instruction passes through a
      stage even if there is nothing to do, because later instructions are already
      progressing at the maximum rate.
   The store instruction again illustrates that to pass something from an early pipe
stage to a later pipe stage, the information must be placed in a pipeline register;
otherwise, the information is lost when the next instruction enters that pipeline
stage. For the store instruction, we needed to pass one of the registers read in the
ID stage to the MEM stage, where it is stored in memory. The data were first placed
in the ID/EX pipeline register and then passed to the EX/MEM pipeline register.
   Load and store illustrate a second key point: each logical component of the
datapath—such as instruction memory, register read ports, ALU, data memory,
and register write port—can be used only within a single pipeline stage. Otherwise,
we would have a structural hazard (see page 288). Hence, these components, and
their control, can be associated with a single pipeline stage.
   Now we can uncover a bug in the design of the load instruction. Did you see
it? Which register is changed in the final stage of the load? More specifically,

                                                                                                                                                                   STUR

                                                                                                                                                               Memory

                                              IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                            MEM/WB

                               Add

                     4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                                result
                                                                                                               Shift
                                                                                                               left 2

       0
        M
                                                      Instruction

        u    PC     Address                                           Read
        x                                                             register 1         Read
       1                                                                                 data 1
                                                                      Read                                                               Zero
                          Instruction                                 register 2                                                 ALU
                                                                               Registers Read                                             ALU                                Read
                            memory                                                                                                       result            Address           data            0
                                                                      Write                                             0
                                                                                         data 2                                                                                               M
                                                                      register                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                     Data                     u
                                                                                                                         u
                                                                      Write                                                                                         memory                    x
                                                                                                                         x                                                                   1
                                                                      data                                              1

                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data

                                                                               32      Sign-      64
                                                                                      extend

                                                                                                                                                                                         STUR

                                                                                                                                                                                       Write-back

                                              IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                            MEM/WB

                               Add

                     4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                                result
                                                                                                               Shift
                                                                                                               left 2

       0
        M
                                                      Instruction

        u    PC     Address                                           Read
        x                                                             register 1         Read
       1                                                                                 data 1
                                                                      Read                                                               Zero
                          Instruction                                 register 2                                                 ALU
                                                                               Registers Read                                             ALU                                Read
                            memory                                                                                                       result            Address           data            1
                                                                      Write                                             0
                                                                                         data 2                                                                                               M
                                                                      register                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                     Data                     u
                                                                                                                         u
                                                                      Write                                                                                         memory                    x
                                                                                                                         x                                                                   0
                                                                      data                                              1

                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data

                                                                               32      Sign-      64
                                                                                      extend

FIGURE 4.39 MEM and WB: The fourth and fifth pipe stages of a store instruction. In the fourth stage, the data are written
into data memory for the store. Note that the data come from the EX/MEM pipeline register and that nothing is changed in the MEM/WB
pipeline register. Once the data are written in memory, there is nothing left for the store instruction to do, so nothing happens in stage 5.

which instruction supplies the write register number? The instruction in the IF/
ID pipeline register supplies the write register number, yet this instruction occurs
considerably after the load instruction!
   Hence, we need to preserve the destination register number in the load
instruction. Just as store passed the register value from the ID/EX to the EX/MEM
pipeline registers for use in the MEM stage, load must pass the register number
from the ID/EX through EX/MEM to the MEM/WB pipeline register for use in the
WB stage. Another way to think about the passing of the register number is that to
share the pipelined datapath, we need to preserve the instruction read during the
IF stage, so each pipeline register contains a portion of the instruction needed for
that stage and later stages.
   Figure 4.40 shows the correct version of the datapath, passing the write register
number first to the ID/EX register, then to the EX/MEM register, and finally to the
MEM/WB register. The register number is used during the WB stage to specify
the register to be written. Figure 4.41 is a single drawing of the corrected datapath,
highlighting the hardware used in all five stages of the load register instruction in
Figures 4.35 through 4.37. See Section 4.8 for an explanation of how to make the
branch instruction work as expected.

Graphically Representing Pipelines
Pipelining can be difficult to master, since many instructions are simultaneously
executing in a single datapath in every clock cycle. To aid understanding, there are

                                         IF/ID                                                   ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                              Add

                     4                                                                                                 Add Add
                                                                                                                          result
                                                                                                         Shift
                                                                                                         left 2

       0
        M
                                                 Instruction

        u   PC     Address                                     Read
        x                                                      register 1         Read
       1                                                                          data 1
                                                               Read                                                                Zero
                         Instruction                           register 2                                                  ALU
                                                                        Registers Read                                              ALU                               Read
                           memory                                                                                                  result            Address          data            1
                                                               Write                                              0
                                                                                  data 2                                                                                               M
                                                               register                                            M
                                                                                                                                                              Data                     u
                                                                                                                   u
                                                               Write                                                                                         memory                    x
                                                                                                                   x                                                                  0
                                                               data                                               1

                                                                                                                                                     Write
                                                                                                                                                     data

                                                                        32      Sign-      64
                                                                               extend

FIGURE 4.40 The corrected pipelined datapath to handle the load instruction properly. The write register number now
comes from the MEM/WB pipeline register along with the data. The register number is passed from the ID pipe stage until it reaches the MEM/
WB pipeline register, adding five more bits to the last three pipeline registers. This new path is shown in color.

                                     two basic styles of pipeline figures: multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams, such as
                                     Figure 4.33 on page 299, and single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams, such as Figures
                                     4.35 through 4.39. The multiple-clock-cycle diagrams are simpler but do not contain
                                     all the details. For example, consider the following five-instruction sequence:

                                           LDUR    X10, [X1,#40]
                                           SUB    X11, X2, X3
                                           ADD    X12, X3, X4
                                           LDUR    X13, [X1,#48]
                                           ADD    X14, X5, X6

                                        Figure 4.42 shows the multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram for these
                                     instructions. Time advances from left to right across the page in these diagrams,
                                     and instructions advance from the top to the bottom of the page, similar to the
                                     laundry pipeline in Figure 4.24. A representation of the pipeline stages is placed
                                     in each portion along the instruction axis, occupying the proper clock cycles.
                                     These stylized datapaths represent the five stages of our pipeline graphically, but
                                     a rectangle naming each pipe stage works just as well. Figure 4.43 shows the more
                                     traditional version of the multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram. Note that Figure
                                     4.42 shows the physical resources used at each stage, while Figure 4.43 uses the
                                     name of each stage.
                                        Single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams show the state of the entire datapath
                                     during a single clock cycle, and usually all five instructions in the pipeline are
                                     identified by labels above their respective pipeline stages. We use this type of figure
                                     to show the details of what is happening within the pipeline during each clock

                                           IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                                      EX/MEM                           MEM/WB

                            Add

                  4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                             result
                                                                                                            Shift
                                                                                                            left 2

      0
       M
                                                   Instruction

       u   PC    Address                                           Read
       x                                                           register 1         Read
      1                                                                               data 1
                                                                   Read                                                               Zero
                       Instruction                                 register 2                                                 ALU
                                                                            Registers Read                                             ALU                               Read
                         memory                                                                                                       result            Address          data            1
                                                                   Write                                             0
                                                                                      data 2                                                                                              M
                                                                   register                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                 Data                     u
                                                                                                                      u
                                                                   Write                                                                                        memory                    x
                                                                                                                      x                                                                  0
                                                                   data                                              1

                                                                                                                                                        Write
                                                                                                                                                        data

                                                                            32      Sign-      64
                                                                                   extend

FIGURE 4.41 The portion of the datapath in Figure 4.40 that is used in all five stages of a load instruction.

                                 Time (in clock cycles)
                                 CC 1       CC 2      CC 3            CC 4      CC 5       CC 6        CC 7        CC 8       CC 9

        Program
        execution
        order
        (in instructions)

          LDUR X10, [X1,#40] IM              Reg          ALU         DM        Reg

          SUB X11, X2, X3                     IM         Reg           ALU       DM         Reg

          ADD X12, X3, X4                                 IM          Reg         ALU        DM         Reg

          LDUR X13, [X1,#48]                                           IM        Reg          ALU        DM         Reg

          ADD X14, X5, X6                                                         IM         Reg         ALU         DM         Reg

FIGURE 4.42 Multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram of five instructions. This style of pipeline representation shows the complete
execution of instructions in a single figure. Instructions are listed in instruction execution order from top to bottom, and clock cycles move
from left to right. Unlike Figure 4.27, here we show the pipeline registers between each stage. Figure 4.43 shows the traditional way to draw
this diagram.

cycle; typically, the drawings appear in groups to show pipeline operation over a
sequence of clock cycles. We use multiple-clock-cycle diagrams to give overviews
of pipelining situations. ( Section 4.13 gives more illustrations of single-clock
diagrams if you would like to see more details about Figure 4.42.) A single-clock-
cycle diagram represents a vertical slice of one clock cycle through a set of multiple-
clock-cycle diagrams, showing the usage of the datapath by each of the instructions
in the pipeline at the designated clock cycle. For example, Figure 4.44 shows the
single-clock-cycle diagram corresponding to clock cycle 5 of Figures 4.42 and 4.43.
Obviously, the single-clock-cycle diagrams have more detail and take significantly
more space to show the same number of clock cycles. The exercises ask you to
create such diagrams for other code sequences.

A group of students were debating the efficiency of the five-stage pipeline when                                Check
one student pointed out that not all instructions are active in every stage of the                              Yourself
pipeline. After deciding to ignore the effects of hazards, they made the following
four statements. Which ones are correct?

                                         Time (in clock cycles)
                                         CC 1       CC 2        CC 3                                     CC 4               CC 5                   CC 6          CC 7                    CC 8        CC 9
   Program
   execution
   order
   (in instructions)

                         Instruction Instruction                Data
      LDUR X10, [X1,#40]                          Execution              Write-back
                            fetch      decode                  access
                                     Instruction Instruction                Data
      SUB X11, X2, X3                                         Execution              Write-back
                                        fetch      decode                  access
                                                 Instruction Instruction                Data
      ADD X12, X3, X4                                                    Execution               Write-back
                                                    fetch      decode                  access
                                                             Instruction Instruction               Data
      LDUR X13, [X1,#48]                                                             Execution              Write-back
                                                                fetch      decode                 access
                                                                         Instruction Instruction              Data
      ADD X14, X5, X6                                                                            Execution             Write-back
                                                                            fetch      decode                access

FIGURE 4.43 Traditional multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram of five instructions in Figure 4.42.

                ADD X14, X5, X6                                       LDUR X13, [X1,48]                                    ADD X12, X3, X4                      SUB X11, X2, X3              LDUR X10, [X1,40]
                Instruction fetch                                     Instruction decode                                        Execution                          Memory                       Write-back

                                                IF/ID                                                     ID/EX                                        EX/MEM                            MEM/WB

                                 Add

                                                                                                                                       Add
                       4                                                                                                          Add
                                                                                                                                     result
                                                                                                                  Shift
                                                                                                                  left 2

      0
       M
       u   PC        Address                                           Read
                                                                                           Read
                                                        Instruction

       x                                                               register 1
      1                                                                                    data 1
                                                                        Read                                                                  Zero
                           Instruction                                  register 2                                                    ALU
                                                                                 Registers Read                                                ALU                                Read
                             memory                                                                                                                              Address                             1
                                                                        Write                                              0                  result                              data
                                                                                           data 2                                                                                                     M
                                                                        register                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                          Data                        u
                                                                                                                            u
                                                                        Write                                                                                            memory                       x
                                                                                                                            x                                                                        0
                                                                        data                                               1

                                                                                                                                                                 Write
                                                                                                                                                                 data

                                                                                32       Sign-      64
                                                                                        extend

FIGURE 4.44 The single-clock-cycle diagram corresponding to clock cycle 5 of the pipeline in Figures 4.42 and 4.43.
As you can see, a single-clock-cycle figure is a vertical slice through a multiple-clock-cycle diagram.

                                               1. Allowing branches and ALU instructions to take fewer stages than the five
                                                  required by the load instruction will increase pipeline performance under all
                                                  circumstances.

   2. Trying to allow some instructions to take fewer cycles does not help, since
      the throughput is determined by the clock cycle; the number of pipe stages
      per instruction affects latency, not throughput.
   3. You cannot make ALU instructions take fewer cycles because of the write-
      back of the result, but branches can take fewer cycles, so there is some
      opportunity for improvement.
   4. Instead of trying to make instructions take fewer cycles, we should explore
      making the pipeline longer, so that instructions take more cycles, but the
      cycles are shorter. This could improve performance.

Pipelined Control                                                                                                                                             In the 6600 Computer,
                                                                                                                                                              perhaps even more
Just as we added control to the single-cycle datapath in Section 4.3, we now add                                                                              than in any previous
control to the pipelined datapath. We start with a simple design that views the                                                                               computer, the control
problem through rose-colored glasses.                                                                                                                         system is the difference.
   The first step is to label the control lines on the existing datapath. Figure 4.45
                                                                                                                                                              James Thornton, Design
shows those lines. We borrow as much as we can from the control for the simple
                                                                                                                                                              of a Computer: The
                                                                                                                                                              Control Data 6600, 1970

                                                                                                                                                                      PCSrc

                                     IF/ID                                                          ID/EX                                   EX/MEM                                   MEM/WB

                           Add

                  4                                                                                                       Add Add
                                                                                                                            result                   Branch
                                                                                                            Shift
                                                                                                            left 2

     0                                                     Reg2Loc           RegWrite
     M
          PC     Address
                                             Instruction

      u                                                              Read
      x                                                              register 1       Read                                                                        MemWrite
                                                             0                        data 1
     1                                                       M
                                                                     Read                                                           Zero                                                      MemtoReg
                                                              u                                                  ALUSrc
                      Instruction                                    register 2                                                 Add ALU
                                                              x             Registers                                                                                        Read
                        memory                               1                                                                     result                Address                                 1
                                                                     Write           Read                            0                                                        data
                                                                                     data 2                          M                                                                           M
                                                                     register                                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                                      u                                            Data
                                                                                                                      x                                           memory                         x
                                                                     Write                                                                                                                       0
                                                                     data                                            1
                                                                                                                                                          Write
                                                                                                                                                          data
                                                              Instruction
                                                              [31–0]      32        Sign-      64
                                                                                   extend                                                                         MemRead
                                                              Instruction
                                                                                                                       ALU
                                                              [31-21]
                                                                                                                      control

                                                              Instruction
                                                              [4-0]                                                   ALUOp

FIGURE 4.45 The pipelined datapath of Figure 4.40 with the control signals identified. This datapath borrows the control
logic for PC source, register destination number, and ALU control from Section 4.4. Note that we now need the opcode field of the instruction
in the EX stage as input to ALU control, so these bits must also be included in the ID/EX pipeline register.

      datapath in Figure 4.17. In particular, we use the same ALU control logic, branch
      logic, read-register2-number multiplexor, and control lines. These functions are
      defined in Figures 4.12, 4.16, and 4.18. We reproduce the key information in
      Figures 4.46 through 4.48 on a single page to make the following discussion easier
      to absorb.
         As was the case for the single-cycle implementation, we assume that the PC is
      written on each clock cycle, so there is no separate write signal for the PC. By the
      same argument, there are no separate write signals for the pipeline registers (IF/
      ID, ID/EX, EX/MEM, and MEM/WB), since the pipeline registers are also written
      during each clock cycle.
         To specify control for the pipeline, we need only set the control values during
      each pipeline stage. Because each control line is associated with a component active
      in only a single pipeline stage, we can divide the control lines into five groups
      according to the pipeline stage.

        1. Instruction fetch: The control signals to read instruction memory and to
           write the PC are always asserted, so there is nothing special to control in this
           pipeline stage.
        2. Instruction decode/register file read: We need to select the correct register
           number for read register 2, so the signal Reg2Loc is set. The signal selects
           instruction bits 20:16 (Rm) or 4:0 (Rt).
        3. Execution/address calculation: The signals to be set are ALUOp and ALUSrc
           (see Figures 4.46 and 4.47). The signals select the ALU operation and either
           Read data 2 or a sign-extended immediate as inputs to the ALU.
        4. Memory access: The control lines set in this stage are Branch, MemRead, and
           MemWrite. The compare and branch on zero, load, and store instructions
           set these signals, respectively. Recall that PCSrc in Figure 4.47 selects the
           next sequential address unless control asserts Branch and the ALU result
           was 0.
        5. Write-back: The two control lines are MemtoReg, which decides between
           sending the ALU result or the memory value to the register file, and
           RegWrite, which writes the chosen value.

         Since pipelining the datapath leaves the meaning of the control lines unchanged,
      we can use the same control values. Figure 4.48 has the same values as in Section
      4.4, but now the nine control lines are grouped by pipeline stage.
         Implementing control means setting the nine control lines to these values in
      each stage for each instruction. We need to set Reg2Loc to read the right register
      while we are still decoding the instruction during the ID pipeline stage. We need to

                                                 Instruction                                              Desired              ALU control
   Instruction           ALUOp                    operation                      Opcode                  ALU action               input
 LDUR                         00        load register                        XXXXXXXXXXX           add                             0010
 STUR                         00        store register                       XXXXXXXXXXX           add                             0010
 CBZ                          01        compare and branch on zero           XXXXXXXXXXX           pass input b                    0111
 R-type                       10        ADD                                  10001011000           add                             0010
 R-type                       10        SUB                                  11001011000           subtract                        0110
 R-type                       10        AND                                  10001010000           AND                             0000
 R-type                       10        ORR                                  10101010000           OR                              0001

FIGURE 4.46 A copy of Figure 4.12. This figure shows how the ALU control bits are set depending on the ALUOp control bits and the
different opcodes for the R-type instruction.

   Signal name                  Effect when deasserted (0)                                      Effect when asserted (1)
 Reg2Loc              The register number for Read register 2 comes           The register number for Read register 2 comes from the
                      from the Rm field (bits 20:16).                         Rt field (bits 4:0).
 RegWrite             None.                                                   The register on the Write register input is written with the
                                                                              value on the Write data input.
 ALUSrc               The second ALU operand comes from the second            The second ALU operand is the immediate field of the
                      register file output (Read data 2).                     instruction.
 PCSrc                The PC is replaced by the output of the adder           The PC is replaced by the output of the adder that
                      that computes the value of PC + 4.                      computes the branch target.
 MemRead              None.                                                   Data memory contents designated by the address input
                                                                              are put on the Read data output.
 MemWrite             None.                                                   Data memory contents designated by the address input
                                                                              are replaced by the value on the Write data input.
 MemtoReg             The value fed to the register Write data input          The value fed to the register Write data input comes
                      comes from the ALU.                                     from the data memory

FIGURE 4.47 A copy of Figure 4.16. The function of each of seven control signals is defined. The ALU control lines (ALUOp) are
defined in the second column of Figure 4.46. When a 1-bit control to a two-way multiplexor is asserted, the multiplexor selects the input
corresponding to 1. Otherwise, if the control is deasserted, the multiplexor selects the 0 input. Note that PCSrc is controlled by an AND gate
in Figure 4.45. If the Branch signal and the ALU Zero signal are both set, then PCSrc is 1; otherwise, it is 0. Control sets the Branch signal only
during a CBZ instruction; otherwise, PCSrc is set to 0.

                 Instruction             Execution/address                        Memory access                        Write-back stage
                decode stage              calculation stage                      stage control lines                     control lines
                 control lines               control lines

 Instruction        Reg2Loc         ALUOp1       ALUOp0      ALUSrc      Branch      MemRead        MemWrite         RegWrite      MemtoReg
   R-format             0               1            0           0           0            0                0              1               0
     LDUR               X               0            0           1           0            1                0              1               1
     STUR               1               0            0           1           0            0                1              0               X
       CBZ              1               0            1           0           1            0                0              0               X

FIGURE 4.48 The values of the control lines are the same as in Figure 4.18, but they have been shuffled into four
groups corresponding to the last four pipeline stages.

                                        WB

      Instruction
                    Control              M                              WB

                                        EX                               M                              WB

       IF/ID                           ID/EX                         EX/MEM                          MEM/WB

      FIGURE 4.49 The eight control lines for the final three stages. Note that three of the eight
      control lines are used in the EX phase, with the remaining five control lines passed on to the EX/MEM
      pipeline register extended to hold the control lines; three are used during the MEM stage, and the last two are
      passed to MEM/WB for use in the WB stage.

      use bits of the opcode to control this multiplexor, just as we did for sign extension
      as explained in the elaboration earlier. If you look at the opcodes carefully—such as
      in Figure 4.22—you can see that instruction bit 28 is a 0 for R-format instructions
      and a 1 for the rest. This is exactly what we need to control the register address
      multiplexor, so we simply connect instruction bit 28 to Reg2Loc.
         Since the rest of the control lines starts with the EX stage, we can create the
      control information during instruction decode for the later stages. The simplest
      way to pass these control signals is to extend the pipeline registers to include
      control information. Figure 4.49 above shows that these control signals are then
      used in the appropriate pipeline stage as the instruction moves down the pipeline,
      just as the destination register number for loads moves down the pipeline in Figure
      4.40. Figure 4.50 shows the full datapath with the extended pipeline registers and
      with the control lines connected to the proper stage along with the instruction
      bit 28 controlling the Reg2Loc register address multiplexor. ( Section 4.13 gives
      more examples of LEGv8 code executing on pipelined hardware using single-clock
      diagrams, if you would like to see more details.)

                            PCSrc

                                                                                                      ID/EX

                                                                                                       WB
                                                                                                                                                 EX/MEM

                                                                                          Control      M                                          WB
                                                                                                                                                                                        MEM/WB

                                                                                                       EX                                          M                                     WB
                                    IF/ID

                           Add

                 4                                                                                                            Add Add
                                                                                                              Shift             result
                                                                                                                                                          Branch

                                                                             RegWrite
                                                                                                              left 2
                                                                                                                                     ALUSrc
                                                          Instruction

                                                                                                                                                                   MemWrite
   0
                                                          [28] Reg2Loc

                                                                                                                                                                                                 MemtoReg
        PC      Address
                                            Instruction

                                                                    Read
                                                                    register 1      Read
   1                                                         0                      data 1
                                                             M                                                                            Zero
                                                              u     Read
                     Instruction                                    register 2                                                       ALU ALU                                    Read
                                                              x            Registers                                                                                                                   1
                       memory                                1                                                                          result             Address              data
                                                                    Write           Read                               0
                                                                    register        data 2
                                                                                                                                                                    Data
                                                                    Write                                                                                          memory
                                                                                                                       1                                                                               0
                                                                    data
                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data
                                                               Instruction
                                                               [31–0]      32            Sign-   64
                                                                                        extend                                                                                MemRead
                                                               Instruction                                                  ALU
                                                               [31-21]                                                     control

                                                               Instruction                                                           ALUOp
                                                               [4-0]

FIGURE 4.50 The pipelined datapath of Figure 4.45, with the control signals connected to the control portions of the
pipeline registers. The control values for the last three stages are created during the instruction decode stage and then placed in the ID/EX
pipeline register. The control lines for each pipe stage are used, and remaining control lines are then passed to the next pipeline stage.

Elaboration: Because one of the source registers for LEGv8 instructions is found
in different places in different instructions, the LEGv8 computer designer has a more
difficult challenge than the MIPS computer designer, where the source registers are
always in the same location in the MIPS instruction formats. Thus, the MIPS decode
stage can read two registers without doing any decoding. In the ID stage for LEGv8,
either you need a three-ported register file to read the three possible registers, or you
need to do some partial decoding, as we have done in this chapter.

What do you mean,
why’s it got to be built?
It’s a bypass. You’ve got     4.7          Data Hazards: Forwarding versus Stalling
to build bypasses.
Douglas Adams, The             The examples in the previous section show the power of pipelined execution
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the   and how the hardware performs the task. It’s now time to take off the rose-colored
Galaxy, 1979
                            glasses and look at what happens with real programs. The LEGv8 instructions
                            in Figures 4.42 through 4.44 were independent; none of them used the results
                            calculated by any of the others. Yet, in Section 4.5, we saw that data hazards are
                            obstacles to pipelined execution.
                               Let’s look at a sequence with many dependences, shown in color:

                                  SUB		 X2, X1,X3    // Register X2 written by SUB
                                  AND		 X12,X2,X5    // ?
                                                        1st operand(X2) depends on SUB
                                  OR		X13,X6,X2      // 2nd operand(X2) depends on SUB
                                  ADD		 X14,X2,X2    // 1st(X2) & 2nd(X2) depend on SUB
                                  STUR X15,[X2,#100] // Base (X2) depends on SUB

                                The last four instructions are all dependent on the result in register X2 of the
                            first instruction. If register X2 had the value 10 before the subtract instruction and
                            −20 afterwards, the programmer intends that −20 will be used in the following
                            instructions that refer to register X2.
                                How would this sequence perform with our pipeline? Figure 4.51 illustrates the
                            execution of these instructions using a multiple-clock-cycle pipeline representation.
                            To demonstrate the execution of this instruction sequence in our current pipeline,
                            the top of Figure 4.51 shows the value of register X2, which changes during the
                            middle of clock cycle 5, when the SUB instruction writes its result.
                                The last potential hazard can be resolved by the design of the register file
                            hardware: What happens when a register is read and written in the same clock
                            cycle? We assume that the write is in the first half of the clock cycle and the read
                            is in the second half, so the read delivers what is written. As is the case for many
                            implementations of register files, we have no data hazard in this case.
                                Figure 4.51 shows that the values read for register X2 would not be the result
                            of the SUB instruction unless the read occurred during clock cycle 5 or later.
                            Thus, the instructions that would get the correct value of −20 are ADD and
                            STUR; the AND and ORR instructions would get the incorrect value 10! Using this
                            style of drawing, such problems become apparent when a dependence line goes
                            backward in time.
                                As mentioned in Section 4.5, the desired result is available at the end of the EX
                            stage of the SUB instruction or clock cycle 3. When are the data actually needed by
                            the AND and ORR instructions? The answer is at the beginning of the EX stage of
                            the AND and ORR instructions, or clock cycles 4 and 5, respectively. Thus, we can
                            execute this segment without stalls if we simply forward the data as soon as it is
                            available to any units that need it before it is ready to read from the register file.

                     Time (in clock cycles)
                    alue o        CC 1      CC 2            CC 3        CC 4        CC 5        CC 6         CC 7        CC 8        CC 9
                   register X2        10          10          10          10        10 20         20          20          20          20
           Program
           execution
           order
           (in instructions)

              SUB X2, X1, X3         IM         Reg                      DM          Reg

              AND X12, X2, X5                     IM         Reg                      DM         Reg

              ORR X13, X6, X2                                 IM         Reg                      DM          Reg

              ADD X14, X2, X2                                             IM         Reg                      DM          Reg

              STUR X15, [X2,#100]                                                      IM         Reg                      DM         Reg

FIGURE 4.51 Pipelined dependences in a five-instruction sequence using simplified datapaths to show the
dependences. All the dependent actions are shown in color, and “CC 1” at the top of the figure means clock cycle 1. The first instruction
writes into X2, and all the following instructions read X2. This register is written in clock cycle 5, so the proper value is unavailable before clock
cycle 5. (A read of a register during a clock cycle returns the value written at the end of the first half of the cycle, when such a write occurs.) The
colored lines from the top datapath to the lower ones show the dependences. Those that must go backward in time are pipeline data hazards.

    How does forwarding work? For simplicity in the rest of this section, we consider
only the challenge of forwarding to an operation in the EX stage, which may be
either an ALU operation or an effective address calculation. This means that when
an instruction tries to use a register in its EX stage that an earlier instruction
intends to write in its WB stage, we actually need the values as inputs to the ALU.
    A notation that names the fields of the pipeline registers allows for a more
precise notation of dependences. For example, “ID/EX.RegisterRn1” refers to the
number of one register whose value is found in the pipeline register ID/EX; that
is, the one from the first read port of the register file. The first part of the name,
to the left of the period, is the name of the pipeline register; the second part is
the name of the field in that register. Using this notation, the two pairs of hazard
conditions are

                 1a. EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRn1
                 1b. EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRm2
                 2a. MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRn1
                 2b. MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRm2
                  The first hazard in the sequence on page 316 is on register X2, between the result
               of SUB X2,X1,X3 and the first read operand of AND X12,X2,X5. This hazard can
               be detected when the AND instruction is in the EX stage and the prior instruction is
               in the MEM stage, so this is hazard 1a:

                                 EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRn1 = X2

                   Dependence Detection
  EXAMPLE
                   Classify the dependences in this sequence from page 316:

                            SUB X2,        X1, X3       // Register X2 set by SUB
                            AND X12,       X2, X5       // 1st operand(X2) set by SUB
                            OR   X13,      X6, X2       // 2nd operand(X2) set by SUB
                            ADD X14,       X2, X2       // 1st(X2) & 2nd(X2) set by SUB
                            STUR X15,      [X2,#100]    // Index(X2) set by SUB

                   As mentioned above, the SUB–AND is a type 1a hazard. The remaining hazards
      ANSWER       are as follows:
                      ■    The SUB–ORR is a type 2b hazard:
                                MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRm2 = X2
                      ■    The two dependences on SUB–ADD are not hazards because the register
                           file supplies the proper data during the ID stage of ADD.
                      ■    There is no data hazard between SUB and STUR because STUR reads X2
                           the clock cycle after SUB writes X2.

                   Because some instructions do not write registers, this policy is inaccurate;
               sometimes it would forward when it shouldn’t. One solution is simply to check
               to see if the RegWrite signal will be active: examining the WB control field of the
               pipeline register during the EX and MEM stages determines whether RegWrite is
               asserted. Recall that LEGv8 requires that every use of XZR(X31) as an operand
               must yield an operand value of 0. If an instruction in the pipeline has XZR as
               its destination (for example, SUBS XZR,X1,2), we want to avoid forwarding its
               possibly nonzero result value. Not forwarding results destined for XZR frees the

assembly programmer and the compiler of any requirement to avoid using XZR
as a destination. The conditions above thus work properly as long as we add EX/
MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 31 to the first hazard condition and MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠
31 to the second.
    The last detail is to recall that two instructions—STUR and CBZ—use Rt (bits
4:0) to specify the second register operand instead of the Rm field (bits 20:16).
The pipeline resolves this decision in the ID stage using a 2:1 multiplexor and the
Reg2Loc control signal. We can simplify pipeline control by using the output of this
multiplexor instead of the actual Rm field so that control always sees the proper
second register number. We’ll still call the number RegisterRm, but remember it
handles STUR and CBZ correctly too.
    Now that we can detect hazards, half of the problem is resolved—but we must
still forward the proper data.
    Figure 4.52 shows the dependences between the pipeline registers and the inputs
to the ALU for the same code sequence as in Figure 4.51. The change is that the
                            Time (in clock cycles)
                                CC 1        CC 2             CC 3        CC 4        CC 5        CC 6        CC 7         CC 8        CC 9
          alue o register X2      10         10                10          10        10 20         20         20         20         20
            alue o X M M           X          X                 X          20           X           X          X           X             X
           alue o M M B            X          X                 X           X          20           X          X            X            X

           Program
           execution
           order
           (in instructions)

               SUB X2, X1, X3         IM         Reg                      DM          Reg

               AND X12, X2, X5                     IM         Reg                      DM         Reg

               ORR X13, X6, X2                                 IM         Reg                      DM          Reg

               ADD X14, X2, X2                                                        Reg
                                                                           IM                                  DM          Reg

               STUR X15, [X2,#100]
                                                                                        IM         Reg                     DM          Reg

FIGURE 4.52 The dependences between the pipeline registers move forward in time, so it is possible to supply the
inputs to the ALU needed by the AND instruction and ORR instruction by forwarding the results found in the pipeline
registers. The values in the pipeline registers show that the desired value is available before it is written into the register file. We assume that
the register file forwards values that are read and written during the same clock cycle, so the ADD does not stall, but the values come from the
register file instead of a pipeline register. Register file “forwarding”—that is, the read gets the value of the write in that clock cycle—is why clock
cycle 5 shows register X2 having the value 10 at the beginning and −20 at the end of the clock cycle.

      dependence begins from a pipeline register, rather than waiting for the WB stage
      to write the register file. Thus, the required data exist in time for later instructions,
      with the pipeline registers holding the data to be forwarded.
         If we can take the inputs to the ALU from any pipeline register rather than just
      ID/EX, then we can forward the correct data. By adding multiplexors to the input
      of the ALU, and with the proper controls, we can run the pipeline at full speed in
      the presence of these data hazards.
         For now, we will assume the only instructions we need to forward are the four
      R-format instructions: ADD,SUB,AND, and ORR. Figure 4.53 shows a close-up of
      the ALU and pipeline register before and after adding forwarding. Figure 4.54
      shows the values of the control lines for the ALU multiplexors that select either the
      register file values or one of the forwarded values.
         This forwarding control will be in the EX stage, because the ALU forwarding
      multiplexors are found in that stage. Thus, we must pass the operand register
      numbers from the ID stage via the ID/EX pipeline register to determine whether to
      forward values. Before forwarding, the ID/EX register had no need to include space
      to hold the Rn and Rm fields. Hence, they were added to ID/EX.
         Let’s now write both the conditions for detecting hazards, and the control signals
      to resolve them:
         1. EX hazard:

             if (EX/MEM.RegWrite
             and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
             and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRn1)) ForwardA = 10
             if (EX/MEM.RegWrite
             and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
             and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRm2)) ForwardB = 10

                This case forwards the result from the previous instruction to either input
             of the ALU. If the previous instruction is going to write to the register file,
             and the write register number matches the read register number of ALU
             inputs A or B, provided it is not register 31, then steer the multiplexor to pick
             the value instead from the pipeline register EX/MEM.
         2. MEM hazard:
             if (MEM/WB.RegWrite
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRn1)) ForwardA = 01
             if (MEM/WB.RegWrite
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRm2)) ForwardB = 01

         As mentioned above, there is no hazard in the WB stage, because we assume that
      the register file supplies the correct result if the instruction in the ID stage reads
      the same register written by the instruction in the WB stage. Such a register file
      performs another form of forwarding, but it occurs within the register file.

                    ID/EX                                    EX/MEM                     MEM/WB

    Registers
                                              ALU

                                                                            Data
                                                                           memory

a. No forwarding

                    ID/EX                                    EX/MEM                     MEM/WB

    Registers                          ForwardA
                                                       ALU

                                                                            Data
                                                                           memory

                                   ForwardB

                          Rn
                          Rm
                                                                       EX/MEM.RegisterRd
                          Rd

                                                    Forwarding
                                                                       MEM/WB.RegisterRd
                                                       unit

b. With forwarding

FIGURE 4.53 On the top are the ALU and pipeline registers before adding forwarding. On
the bottom, the multiplexors have been expanded to add the forwarding paths, and we show the forwarding
unit. The new hardware is shown in color. This figure is a stylized drawing, however, leaving out details from
the full datapath such as the sign extension hardware.

        Mux control        Source                                  Explanation
      ForwardA = 00      ID/EX          The first ALU operand comes from the register file.
      ForwardA = 10      EX/MEM         The first ALU operand is forwarded from the prior ALU result.
      ForwardA = 01      MEM/WB         The first ALU operand is forwarded from data memory or an earlier
                                        ALU result.
      ForwardB = 00      ID/EX          The second ALU operand comes from the register file.
      ForwardB = 10      EX/MEM         The second ALU operand is forwarded from the prior ALU result.
      ForwardB = 01      MEM/WB         The second ALU operand is forwarded from data memory or an
                                        earlier ALU result.

      FIGURE 4.54 The control values for the forwarding multiplexors in Figure 4.53. The signed
      immediate that is another input to the ALU is described in the Elaboration at the end of this section.

         One complication is potential data hazards between the result of the instruction
      in the WB stage, the result of the instruction in the MEM stage, and the source
      operand of the instruction in the ALU stage. For example, when summing a vector
      of numbers in a single register, a sequence of instructions will all read and write to
      the same register:

              ADD X1,X1,X2
              ADD X1,X1,X3
              ADD X1,X1,X4
              . . .

         In this case, the result should be forwarded from the MEM stage because the
      result in the MEM stage is the more recent result. Thus, the control for the MEM
      hazard would be (with the additions highlighted):

             if (MEM/WB.RegWrite
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
             and not(EX/MEM.RegWrite and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
                     and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ ID/EX.RegisterRn1))
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRn1)) ForwardA = 01

             if (MEM/WB.RegWrite
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
             and not(EX/MEM.RegWrite and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ 31)
                     and (EX/MEM.RegisterRd ≠ ID/EX.RegisterRm2))
             and (MEM/WB.RegisterRd = ID/EX.RegisterRm2)) ForwardB = 01

          Figure 4.55 shows the hardware necessary to support forwarding for operations
      that use results during the EX stage. Note that the EX/MEM.RegisterRd field is
      the register destination for either an ALU instruction (which comes from the Rd
      field of the instruction) or a load (which comes from the Rt field, but we’ll use the
      notation Rd in this section).

                                                               ID/EX
                                                               WB
                                                                                                  EX/MEM
                                           Control              M                                    WB
                                                                                                                             MEM/WB

                        IF/ID                                   EX                                   M                          WB

                            Instruction

                                               Registers
                                                                                            ALU
        Instruction
PC
          memory                                                                                                  Data
                                                                                                                 memory

                                            IF/ID.RegisterRn         Rn
                                            IF/ID.RegisterRm         Rm
                                            IF/ID.RegisterRd         Rd                                     EX/MEM.RegisterRd

                                                                                        Forwarding          MEM/WB.RegisterRd
                                                                                           unit

FIGURE 4.55 The datapath modified to resolve hazards via forwarding. Compared with the datapath in Figure 4.50, the additions
are the multiplexors to the inputs to the ALU. This figure is a more stylized drawing, however, leaving out details from the full datapath, such
as the branch hardware and the sign extension hardware.

   If you would like to see more illustrated examples using single-cycle pipeline
drawings,     Section 4.13 has figures that show two pieces of LEGv8 code with
hazards that cause forwarding.

Elaboration: Forwarding can also help with hazards when store instructions are
dependent on other instructions. Since they use just one data value during the MEM
stage, forwarding is easy. However, consider loads immediately followed by stores, useful
when performing memory-to-memory copies in the LEGv8 architecture. Since copies are
frequent, we need to add more forwarding hardware to make them run faster. If we were
to redraw Figure 4.52, replacing the SUB and AND instructions with LDUR and STUR,
we would see that it is possible to avoid a stall, since the data exist in the MEM/WB
register of a load instruction in time for its use in the MEM stage of a store instruction.
We would need to add forwarding into the memory access stage for this option. We leave
this modification as an exercise to the reader.
   In addition, the signed-immediate input to the ALU, needed by loads and stores, is
missing from the datapath in Figure 4.55. Since central control decides between register
and immediate, and since the forwarding unit chooses the pipeline register for a register
input to the ALU, the easiest solution is to add a 2:1 multiplexor that chooses between the
ForwardB multiplexor output and the signed immediate. Figure 4.56 shows this addition.

                        ID/EX                                   EX/MEM                    MEM/WB

        Registers
                                             ALUSrc
                                                       ALU

                                                                              Data
                                                                             memory

                                                   Forwarding
                                                      unit

FIGURE 4.56 A close-up of the datapath in Figure 4.53 shows a 2:1 multiplexor, which has been added to select the
signed immediate as an ALU input.

                           Data Hazards and Stalls
If at first you don’t      As we said in Section 4.5, one case where forwarding cannot save the day is when
succeed, redefine          an instruction tries to read a register following a load instruction that writes the
success.                   same register. Figure 4.57 illustrates the problem. The data are still being read
Anonymous                  from memory in clock cycle 4 while the ALU is performing the operation for the
                           following instruction. Something must stall the pipeline for the combination of
                           load followed by an instruction that reads its result.
                              Hence, in addition to a forwarding unit, we need a hazard detection unit. It
                           operates during the ID stage so that it can insert the stall between the load and
                           the instruction dependent on it. Checking for load instructions, the control for the
                           hazard detection unit is this single condition:

                                if     (ID/EX.MemRead and
                                       ((ID/EX.RegisterRd = IF/ID.RegisterRn1) or
                                         (ID/EX.RegisterRd = IF/ID.RegisterRm2)))
                                         stall the pipeline

             Time (in clock cycles)
                          CC 1         CC 2         CC 3         CC 4         CC 5         CC 6         CC 7         CC 8          CC 9

Program
execution
order
(in instructions)

    SUB X2, X1, X3          IM          Reg                        DM          Reg

    AND X4, X2, X5                       IM          Reg                        DM          Reg

    ORR X8, X2, X6                                    IM          Reg                        DM          Reg

    ADD X9, X4, X2                                                 IM          Reg                        DM          Reg

    SUB X1, X6, X7                                                               IM         Reg                        DM          Reg

FIGURE 4.57 A pipelined sequence of instructions. Since the dependence between the load and the following instruction (and)
goes backward in time, this hazard cannot be solved by forwarding. Hence, this combination must result in a stall by the hazard detection unit.

    Recall that we are using the RegisterRd to refer the register specified in instruction
bits 4:0 for both load and R-type instructions. The first line tests to see if the instruction
is a load: the only instruction that reads data memory is a load. The next two lines
check to see if the destination register field of the load in the EX stage matches
either source register of the instruction in the ID stage. If the condition holds, the
instruction stalls one clock cycle. After this one-cycle stall, the forwarding logic can
handle the dependence and execution proceeds. (If there were no forwarding, then
the instructions in Figure 4.57 would need another stall cycle.)
    If the instruction in the ID stage is stalled, then the instruction in the IF stage
must also be stalled; otherwise, we would lose the fetched instruction. Preventing
these two instructions from making progress is accomplished simply by preventing
the PC register and the IF/ID pipeline register from changing. Provided these
registers are preserved, the instruction in the IF stage will continue to be read
using the same PC, and the registers in the ID stage will continue to be read using

                                   the same instruction fields in the IF/ID pipeline register. Returning to our favorite
                                   analogy, it’s as if you restart the washer with the same clothes and let the dryer
                                   continue tumbling empty. Of course, like the dryer, the back half of the pipeline
                                   starting with the EX stage must be doing something; what it is doing is executing
nop An instruction that            instructions that have no effect: nops.
does no operation to                  How can we insert these nops, which act like bubbles, into the pipeline? In Figure
change state.                      4.48, we see that deasserting all eight control signals (setting them to 0) in the EX,
                                   MEM, and WB stages will create a “do nothing” or nop instruction. By identifying
                                   the hazard in the ID stage, we can insert a bubble into the pipeline by changing the
                                   EX, MEM, and WB control fields of the ID/EX pipeline register to 0. These benign
                                   control values are percolated forward at each clock cycle with the proper effect: no
                                   registers or memories are written if the control values are all 0.
                                      Figure 4.58 shows what really happens in the hardware: the pipeline execution
                                   slot associated with the AND instruction is turned into a nop and all instructions
                                   beginning with the AND instruction are delayed one cycle. Like an air bubble in

                             Time (in clock cycles)
                             CC 1       CC 2      CC 3           CC 4       CC 5        CC 6        CC 7        CC 8        CC 9       CC 10

     Program
     execution
     order
     (in instructions)

      LDUR X2, [X1,#20] IM               Reg                      DM         Reg

                                                                                        bubble

      AND becomes nop                     IM         Reg                      DM         Reg

      AND X4, X2, X5                                  IM         Reg                      DM         Reg

      ORR X8, X2, X6                                               IM        Reg                      DM         Reg

      ADD X9, X4, X2                                                           IM        Reg                      DM         Reg

FIGURE 4.58 The way stalls are really inserted into the pipeline. A bubble is inserted beginning in clock cycle 4, by changing
the AND instruction to a nop. Note that the AND instruction is really fetched and decoded in clock cycles 2 and 3, but its EX stage is delayed
until clock cycle 5 (versus the unstalled position in clock cycle 4). Likewise, the ORR instruction is fetched in clock cycle 3, but its ID stage is
delayed until clock cycle 5 (versus the unstalled clock cycle 4 position). After insertion of the bubble, all the dependences go forward in time
and no further hazards occur.

a water pipe, a stall bubble delays everything behind it and proceeds down the
instruction pipe one stage each clock cycle until it exits at the end. In this example,
the hazard forces the AND and ORR instructions to repeat in clock cycle 4 what they
did in clock cycle 3: AND reads registers and decodes, and ORR is refetched from
instruction memory. Such repeated work is what a stall looks like, but its effect is
to stretch the time of the AND and ORR instructions and delay the fetch of the ADD
instruction.
    Figure 4.59 highlights the pipeline connections for both the hazard detection
unit and the forwarding unit. As before, the forwarding unit controls the ALU
multiplexors to replace the value from a general-purpose register with the value
from the proper pipeline register. The hazard detection unit controls the writing
of the PC and IF/ID registers plus the multiplexor that chooses between the real
control values and all 0s. The hazard detection unit stalls and deasserts the control
fields if the load-use hazard test above is true. If you would like to see more details,
    Section 4.13 gives an example illustrated using single-clock pipeline diagrams
of LEGv8 code with hazards that cause stalling.

                                                     Hazard
                                                                                   ID/EX.MemRead
                                                    detection
                                                      unit
                          IF/DWrite

                                                                                      ID/EX
                                                                                       WB
                                                                                                                     EX/MEM
                                                           Control                     M                                 WB            MEM/WB
  PCWrite

                          IF/ID                                             0          EX                                M              WB
                                      Instruction

                                                                     Registers
                                                                                                        ForwardA
                                                                                                                   ALU
    PC
            Instruction
              memory                                                                                                           Data
                                                                                                                              memory

                                                                                               ForwardB
                                                                IF/ID.RegisterRn
                                                                IF/ID.RegisterRm

                                                                IF/ID.RegisterRd                   Rd

                                                                                                   Rn       Forwarding
                                                                                                   Rm          unit

FIGURE 4.59 Pipelined control overview, showing the two multiplexors for forwarding, the hazard detection unit, and
the forwarding unit. Although the ID and EX stages have been simplified—the sign-extended immediate and branch logic are missing—
this drawing gives the essence of the forwarding hardware requirements.

                              Although the compiler generally relies upon the hardware to resolve hazards
       The    BIG             and thereby ensure correct execution, the compiler must understand the
                              pipeline to achieve the best performance. Otherwise, unexpected stalls
         Picture              will reduce the performance of the compiled code.

                          Elaboration: Regarding the remark earlier about setting control lines to 0 to avoid
                          writing registers or memory: only the signals RegWrite and MemWrite need be 0, while
                          the other control signals can be don’t cares.

There are a thousand
hacking at the
branches of evil to one     4.8          Control Hazards
who is striking at the
root.
                          Thus far, we have limited our concern to hazards involving arithmetic operations
Henry David Thoreau,      and data transfers. However, as we saw in Section 4.5, there are also pipeline hazards
Walden, 1854              involving conditional branches. Figure 4.60 shows a sequence of instructions and
                          indicates when the branch would occur in this pipeline. An instruction must be
                          fetched at every clock cycle to sustain the pipeline, yet in our design the decision
                          about whether to branch doesn’t occur until the MEM pipeline stage. As mentioned
                          in Section 4.5, this delay in determining the proper instruction to fetch is called
                          a control hazard or branch hazard, in contrast to the data hazards we have just
                          examined.
                             This section on control hazards is shorter than the previous sections on data
                          hazards. The reasons are that control hazards are relatively simple to understand,
                          they occur less frequently than data hazards, and there is nothing as effective
                          against control hazards as forwarding is against data hazards. Hence, we use
                          simpler schemes. We look at two schemes for resolving control hazards and one
                          optimization to improve these schemes.

                          Assume Branch Not Taken
                          As we saw in Section 4.5, stalling until the branch is complete is too slow. One
                          improvement over branch stalling is to predict that the conditional branch will
                          not be taken and thus continue execution down the sequential instruction stream.
                          If the conditional branch is taken, the instructions that are being fetched and
                          decoded must be discarded. Execution continues at the branch target. If conditional
                          branches are untaken half the time, and if it costs little to discard the instructions,
                          this optimization halves the cost of control hazards.

     Time (in clock cycles)
                              CC 1       CC 2          CC 3        CC 4        CC 5         CC 6        CC 7         CC 8         CC 9

  Program
  execution
  order
  (in instructions)

     40 CBZ X1, 8              IM         Reg                       DM          Reg

     44 AND X12, X2, X5                     IM         Reg                       DM          Reg

     48 ORR X13, X6, X2                                 IM          Reg                      DM          Reg

     52 ADD X14, X2, X2                                              IM         Reg                       DM          Reg

     72 LDUR X4, [X7,#100]                                                       IM          Reg                      DM           Reg

FIGURE 4.60 The impact of the pipeline on the branch instruction. The numbers to the left of the instruction (40, 44, …)
are the addresses of the instructions. Since the branch instruction decides whether to branch in the MEM stage—clock cycle 4 for the CBZ
instruction above—the three sequential instructions that follow the branch will be fetched and begin execution. Without intervention, those
three following instructions will begin execution before CBZ branches to LDUR at location 72. (Figure 4.30 assumed extra hardware to reduce
the control hazard to one clock cycle; this figure uses the nonoptimized datapath.)

   To discard instructions, we merely change the original control values to 0s,
much as we did to stall for a load-use data hazard. The difference is that we must
also change the three instructions in the IF, ID, and EX stages when the branch
reaches the MEM stage; for load-use stalls, we just change control to 0 in the ID                            flush To discard
stage and let them percolate through the pipeline. Discarding instructions, then,                            instructions in a pipeline,
means we must be able to flush instructions in the IF, ID, and EX stages of the                              usually due to an
pipeline.                                                                                                    unexpected event.

      Reducing the Delay of Branches
      One way to improve conditional branch performance is to reduce the cost of the
      taken branch. Thus far, we have assumed the next PC for a branch is selected in the
      MEM stage, but if we move the conditional branch execution earlier in the pipeline,
      then fewer instructions need be flushed. Moving the branch decision up requires
      two actions to occur earlier: computing the branch target address and evaluating
      the branch decision. The easy part of this change is to move up the branch address
      calculation. We already have the PC value and the immediate field in the IF/ID
      pipeline register, so we just move the branch adder from the EX stage to the ID
      stage; of course, the address calculation for branch targets will be performed for all
      instructions, but only used when needed.
         The harder part is the branch decision itself. For compare and branch zero,
      we would compare a register read during the ID stage to see if it is zero. Zero
      can be tested by ORing all 64 bits. Moving the branch test to the ID stage implies
      additional forwarding and hazard detection hardware, since a branch dependent
      on a result still in the pipeline must still work properly with this optimization.
      For example, to implement compare and branch on zero (and its inverse), we will
      need to forward results to the zero test logic that operates during ID. There are two
      complicating factors:
         1. During ID, we must decode the instruction, decide whether a bypass to the
            zero test unit is needed, and complete the zero test so that if the instruction
            is a branch, we can set the PC to the branch target address. Forwarding for
            the operand of branches was formerly handled by the ALU forwarding logic,
            but the introduction of the zero test unit in ID will require new forwarding
            logic. Note that the bypassed source operands of a branch can come from
            either the ALU/MEM or MEM/WB pipeline latches.
         2. Because the value in a branch comparison is needed during ID but may be
            produced later in time, it is possible that a data hazard can occur and a stall
            will be needed. For example, if an ALU instruction immediately preceding
            a branch produces the operand for the test in the conditional branch, a stall
            will be required, since the EX stage for the ALU instruction will occur after
            the ID cycle of the branch. By extension, if a load is immediately followed by
            a conditional branch that depends on the load result, two stall cycles will be
            needed, as the result from the load appears at the end of the MEM cycle but
            is needed at the beginning of ID for the branch.
         Despite these difficulties, moving the conditional branch execution to the ID
      stage is an improvement, because it reduces the penalty of a branch to only one
      instruction if the branch is taken, namely, the one currently being fetched. The
      exercises explore the details of implementing the forwarding path and detecting
      the hazard.
         To flush instructions in the IF stage, we add a control line, called IF.Flush,
      that zeros the instruction field of the IF/ID pipeline register. Clearing the register
      transforms the fetched instruction into a nop, an instruction that has no action and
      changes no state.

    Pipelined Branch
                                                                                             EXAMPLE
    Show what happens when the branch is taken in this instruction sequence,
    assuming the pipeline is optimized for branches that are not taken, and that we
    moved the branch execution to the ID stage:

       36 SUB X10, X4, X8
       40 CBZ X1, X3, 8 // PC-relative branch to 40+8*4=72
       44 AND X12, X2, X5
       48 ORR X13, X2, X6
       52 ADD X14, X4, X2
       56 SUB X15, X6, X7
       . . .
       72 LDUR X4, [X7,#50]

    Figure 4.61 shows what happens when a conditional branch is taken. Unlike
    Figure 4.60, there is only one pipeline bubble on a taken branch.                        ANSWER

Dynamic Branch Prediction
Assuming a conditional branch is not taken is one simple form of branch prediction.
In that case, we predict that conditional branches are untaken, flushing the
pipeline when we are wrong. For the simple five-stage pipeline, such an approach,
possibly coupled with compiler-based prediction, is probably adequate. With
deeper pipelines, the branch penalty increases when measured in clock cycles.
Similarly, with multiple issue (see Section 4.10), the branch penalty increases in
terms of instructions lost. This combination means that in an aggressive pipeline,
a simple static prediction scheme will probably waste too much performance. As
we mentioned in Section 4.5, with more hardware it is possible to try to predict
branch behavior during program execution.                                                dynamic branch
   One approach is to look up the address of the instruction to see if the conditional   prediction Prediction of
branch was taken the last time this instruction was executed, and, if so, to begin       branches at runtime using
fetching new instructions from the same place as the last time. This technique is        runtime information.
called dynamic branch prediction.
   One implementation of that approach is a branch prediction buffer or branch           branch prediction
history table. A branch prediction buffer is a small memory indexed by the lower         buffer Also called
portion of the address of the branch instruction. The memory contains a bit that         branch history table.
                                                                                         A small memory that
says whether the branch was recently taken or not.                                       is indexed by the lower
   This prediction uses the simplest sort of buffer; we don’t know, in fact, if the      portion of the address of
prediction is the right one—it may have been put there by another conditional            the branch instruction
branch that has the same low-order address bits. However, this doesn’t affect            and that contains one
correctness. Prediction is just a hint that we hope is correct, so fetching begins in    or more bits indicating
the predicted direction. If the hint turns out to be wrong, the incorrectly predicted    whether the branch was
                                                                                         recently taken or not.

                   AND X12, X2, X5                             CBZ X1, 8                                                 SUB X10, X4, X8                 before<1>         before<2>

        IF.Flush

                                                                        Hazard
                                                                       detection
                                                                         unit
                                                                                                            ID/EX

                                                                                                             WB
                                                                                                                                            EX/MEM
                                                             Control                                         M                                 WB                   MEM/WB
                                                                           32

                                      48        IF/ID                           +             0                                                M                      WB
                                                                                                             EX
                                                        40
                                                                                 72
                                           44
                                  +                                         Shift                                                X4
                              4                                             left 2

                                                                                     Registers    =0
                                                                                                                                      ALU

                             Instruction                                                               X1
                       PC                                                                                                        X8
                               memory                                                                                                                      Data
                    72    44
                                                                            7                                                                             memory

                                                                            Sign-
                                                                           extend

                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                  Forwarding
                                                                                                                                     unit

                    Clock 3

                    LDUR X4, [X7,100]                          Bubble (nop)                                              CBZ X1, 8                       SUB X10, . . .    before<1>
         IF.Flush

                                                                        Hazard
                                                                       detection
                                                                         unit
                                                                                                        ID/EX
                                                                                                            WB
                                                                                                                                            EX/MEM
                                                             Control                                         M                                 WB                   MEM/WB
                                                IF/ID                           +             0              EX                                M                      WB
                                      76
                                           72
                                  +                                         Shift
                              4                                             left 2

                                                                                      Registers   =0
                                                                                                                                      ALU

                       PC
                             Instruction
                    76    72 memory                                                                                              X1                        Data
                                                                                                                                                          memory
                                                                            Sign-
                                                                           extend

                                                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                  Forwarding
                                                                                                                                     unit

                    Clock 4

FIGURE 4.61 The ID stage of clock cycle 3 determines that a branch must be taken, so it selects 72 as the next PC
address and zeros the instruction fetched for the next clock cycle. Clock cycle 4 shows the instruction at location 72 being
fetched and the single bubble or nop instruction in the pipeline because of the taken branch.

instructions are deleted, the prediction bit is inverted and stored back, and the
proper sequence is fetched and executed.
   This simple 1-bit prediction scheme has a performance shortcoming: even if a
conditional branch is almost always taken, we can predict incorrectly twice, rather
than once, when it is not taken. The following example shows this dilemma.

    Loops and Prediction
                                                                                                EXAMPLE
    Consider a loop branch that branches nine times in a row, and then is not taken
    once. What is the prediction accuracy for this branch, assuming the prediction
    bit for this branch remains in the prediction buffer?

    The steady-state prediction behavior will mispredict on the first and last loop
    iterations. Mispredicting the last iteration is inevitable since the prediction              ANSWER
    bit will indicate taken, as the branch has been taken nine times in a row at
    that point. The misprediction on the first iteration happens because the bit is
    flipped on prior execution of the last iteration of the loop, since the branch
    was not taken on that exiting iteration. Thus, the prediction accuracy for this
    branch that is taken 90% of the time is only 80% (two incorrect predictions and
    eight correct ones).

   Ideally, the accuracy of the predictor would match the taken branch frequency for
these highly regular branches. To remedy this weakness, 2-bit prediction schemes
are often used. In a 2-bit scheme, a prediction must be wrong twice before it is
changed. Figure 4.62 shows the finite-state machine for a 2-bit prediction scheme.
   A branch prediction buffer can be implemented as a small, special buffer accessed
with the instruction address during the IF pipe stage. If the instruction is predicted
as taken, fetching begins from the target as soon as the PC is known; as mentioned
on page 329, it can be as early as the ID stage. Otherwise, sequential fetching and         branch target buffer
                                                                                            A structure that caches
executing continue. If the prediction turns out to be wrong, the prediction bits are
                                                                                            the destination PC or
changed as shown in Figure 4.62.                                                            destination instruction
                                                                                            for a branch. It is usually
Elaboration: A branch predictor tells us whether a conditional branch is taken,             organized as a cache with
but still requires the calculation of the branch target. In the five-stage pipeline, this   tags, making it more
                                                                                            costly than a simple
calculation takes one cycle, meaning that taken branches will have a one-cycle penalty.
                                                                                            prediction buffer.
One approach is to use a cache to hold the destination program counter or destination
instruction using a branch target buffer.                                                   correlating predictor
                                                                                            A branch predictor that
                                                                                            combines local behavior
   The 2-bit dynamic prediction scheme uses only information about a particular
                                                                                            of a particular branch
branch. Researchers noticed that using information about both a local branch                and global information
and the global behavior of recently executed branches together yields greater               about the behavior of
prediction accuracy for the same number of prediction bits. Such predictors are             some recent number of
called correlating predictors. A typical correlating predictor might have two 2-bit         executed branches.

                                             Taken

                                                                             Not taken
                                          Predict taken                                                     Predict taken
                                                                               Taken

                                                                                                     Not taken          Taken

                                                                             Not taken
                                        Predict not taken                                                 Predict not taken
                                                                               Taken

                                           Not taken

                            FIGURE 4.62 The states in a 2-bit prediction scheme. By using 2 bits rather than 1, a branch that
                            strongly favors taken or not taken—as many branches do—will be mispredicted only once. The 2 bits are used
                            to encode the four states in the system. The 2-bit scheme is a general instance of a counter-based predictor,
                            which is incremented when the prediction is accurate and decremented otherwise, and uses the mid-point of
                            its range as the division between taken and not taken.

                            predictors for each branch, with the choice between predictors made based on
                            whether the last executed branch was taken or not taken. Thus, the global branch
                            behavior can be thought of as adding additional index bits for the prediction
                            lookup.
                               Another approach to branch prediction is the use of tournament predictors. A
tournament branch           tournament branch predictor uses multiple predictors, tracking, for each branch,
predictor A branch          which predictor yields the best results. A typical tournament predictor might
predictor with multiple     contain two predictions for each branch index: one based on local information and
predictions for each
                            one based on global branch behavior. A selector would choose which predictor
branch and a selection
mechanism that chooses      to use for any given prediction. The selector can operate similarly to a 1- or 2-bit
which predictor to enable   predictor, favoring whichever of the two predictors has been more accurate. Some
for a given branch.         recent microprocessors use such ensemble predictors.

                            Elaboration: One way to reduce the number of conditional branches is to add conditional
                            move instructions. Instead of changing the PC with a conditional branch, the instruction
                            conditionally changes the destination register of the move. For example, the full ARMv8
                            instruction set architecture has a conditional select instruction called CSEL. It specifies a
                            destination register, two source registers, and a condition. The destination register gets a
                            value of the first operand if the condition is true and the second operand otherwise. Thus,
                            CSEL X8, X11, X4, NE copies the contents of register 11 into register 8 if the condition
                            codes say the result of the operation was not equal zero or a copy of register 4 into register
                            11 if it was zero. Hence, programs using the full ARMv8 instruction set could have fewer
                            conditional branches than in programs using just the LEGv8 core.

Pipeline Summary
   We started in the laundry room, showing principles of pipelining in an
everyday setting. Using that analogy as a guide, we explained instruction
pipelining step-by-step, starting with the single-cycle datapath and then adding
pipeline registers, forwarding paths, data hazard detection, branch prediction,
and flushing instructions on mispredicted branches or load-use data hazards.
Figure 4.63 shows the final evolved datapath and control. We now are ready for
yet another control hazard: the sticky issue of exceptions.

Consider three branch prediction schemes: predict not taken, predict taken, and                                     Check
dynamic prediction. Assume that they all have zero penalty when they predict                                        Yourself
correctly and two cycles when they are wrong. Assume that the average predict
accuracy of the dynamic predictor is 90%. Which predictor is the best choice for
the following branches?

      IF.Flush

                                                 Hazard
                                                detection
                                                  unit
                                                                                ID/EX

                                                                                WB
                                                                                                           MEM/WB

                                                 Control                         M                          WB               EX/MEM
                                                                      0

                                        IF/ID                                    EX                          M                WB
                                                               +
                               +

                      4                               Shift
                                                      left 2

                                                               Registers   =0
                          Instruction                                                                                Data
                 PC                                                                              ALU
                            memory                                                                                  memory

                                                       Sign-
                                                      extend

                                                                                               Fowarding
                                                                                                 unit

FIGURE 4.63 The final datapath and control for this chapter. Note that this is a stylized figure rather than a detailed datapath, so
it’s missing the ALUsrc Mux from Figure 4.56 and the multiplexor controls from Figure 4.50.

                              1. A conditional branch that is taken with 5% frequency
                              2. A conditional branch that is taken with 95% frequency
                              3. A conditional branch that is taken with 70% frequency

To make a computer
with automatic
program-interruption          4.9            Exceptions
facilities behave
[sequentially] was
                               Control is the most challenging aspect of processor design: it is both the hardest
not an easy matter,
                            part to get right and the toughest part to make fast. One of the demanding tasks of
because the number of
                            control is implementing exceptions and interrupts—events other than branches
instructions in various
                            that change the normal flow of instruction execution. They were initially created to
stages of processing
                            handle unexpected events from within the processor, like floating-point overflow.
when an interrupt
                            The same basic mechanism was extended for I/O devices to communicate with the
signal occurs may be
                            processor, as we will see in Chapter 5.
large.
                               Many architectures and authors do not distinguish between interrupts and
Fred Brooks, Jr.,           exceptions, often using either name to refer to both types of events. For example,
Planning a Computer         the Intel x86 uses interrupt. We use the term exception to refer to any unexpected
System: Project Stretch,
                            change in control flow without distinguishing whether the cause is internal or
1962
                            external; we use the term interrupt only when the event is externally caused. Here
                            are examples showing whether the situation is internally generated by the processor
exception Also              or externally generated and the name that ARM uses:
called interrupt. An
unscheduled event
                                             Type of event                       From where?    ARMv8 terminology
that disrupts program
execution; used to detect   System reset                                      External         Exception
overflow.                   I/O device request                                External         Interrupt
                            Invoke the operating system from user program     Internal         Exception
interrupt An exception      Floating-point arithmetic overflow or underflow   Internal         Exception
that comes from outside     Using an undefined instruction                    Internal         Exception
of the processor. (Some     Hardware malfunctions                             Either           Exception or interrupt
architectures use the
term interrupt for all         Many of the requirements to support exceptions come from the specific
exceptions.)                situation that causes an exception to occur. Accordingly, we will return to this
                            topic in Chapter 5, when we will better understand the motivation for additional
                            capabilities in the exception mechanism. In this section, we deal with the control
                            implementation for detecting types of exceptions that arise from the portions of
                            the instruction set and implementation that we have already discussed.
                               Detecting exceptional conditions and taking the appropriate action is often
                            on the critical timing path of a processor, which determines the clock cycle time
                            and thus performance. Without proper attention to exceptions during design of
                            the control unit, attempts to add exceptions to an intricate implementation can
                            significantly reduce performance, as well as complicate the task of getting the
                            design correct.
                                                                          4.9   Exceptions                          337

How Exceptions are Handled in the LEGv8 Architecture
The types of exceptions that our current implementation can generate are execution
of an undefined instruction, floating-point overflow and underflow, or a hardware
malfunction. We’ll assume a hardware malfunction occurs during the instruction
ADD X1,X2,X1 as the example exception in the next few pages. The basic action
that the processor must perform when an exception occurs is to save the address
of the unfortunate instruction in the exception link register (ELR) and then transfer
control to the operating system at some specified address.
   The operating system can then take the appropriate action, which may involve
providing some service to the user program, taking some predefined action in
response to a malfunction, or stopping the execution of the program and reporting
an error. After performing whatever action is required because of the exception, the
operating system can terminate the program or may continue its execution, using
the ELR to determine where to restart the execution of the program. In Chapter 5,
we will look more closely at the issue of restarting the execution.
   For the operating system to handle the exception, it must know the reason for
the exception, in addition to the instruction that caused it. There are two main
methods used to communicate the reason for an exception. The method used in the
LEGv8 architecture is to include a register (called the Exception Syndrome Register
or ESR), which holds a field that indicates the reason for the exception.
   A second method is to use vectored interrupts. In a vectored interrupt, the                vectored interrupt An
address to which control is transferred is determined by the cause of the exception,          interrupt for which
possibly added to a base register that points to memory range for vectored                    the address to which
                                                                                              control is transferred is
interrupts. For example, we might define the following exception vector addresses
                                                                                              determined by the cause
to accommodate these exception types:                                                         of the exception.

                                              Exception vector address to be added
             Exception type                      to a Vector Table Base Register
              Unknown Reason                                 00 0000two
     Floating-point arithmetic exception                     10 1100two
    System Error (hardware malfunction)                      10 1111two

    The operating system knows the reason for the exception by the address at which it
is initiated. When the exception is not vectored, as in LEGv8, a single entry point for all
exceptions can be used, and the operating system decodes the status register to find the
cause. For architectures with vectored exceptions, the addresses might be separated by,
say, 32 bytes or eight instructions, and the operating system must record the reason for
the exception and may perform some limited processing in this sequence.
    We can perform the processing required for exceptions by adding a few extra
registers and control signals to our basic implementation and by slightly extending
control. Let’s assume that we are implementing the exception system with the single
interrupt entry point being the address 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex. (Implementing
vectored exceptions is no more difficult.) We will need to add two additional
registers to our current LEGv8 implementation:

         ■   ELR: A 64-bit register used to hold the address of the affected instruction.
             (Such a register is needed even when exceptions are vectored.)
         ■   ESR: A register used to record the cause of the exception. In the LEGv8
             architecture, this register is 32 bits, although some bits are currently
             unused. Assume there is a field that encodes the three possible exception
             sources mentioned above, with 8 representing an undefined instruction, 10
             representing arithmetic overflow or underflow, and 12 representing hardware
             malfunction.

      Exceptions in a Pipelined Implementation
      A pipelined implementation treats exceptions as another form of control hazard.
      For example, suppose there is a hardware malfunction in an add instruction. Just as
      we did for the taken branch in the previous section, we must flush the instructions
      that follow the ADD instruction from the pipeline and begin fetching instructions
      from the new address. We will use the same mechanism we used for taken branches,
      but this time the exception causes the deasserting of control lines.
          When we dealt with branch misprediction, we saw how to flush the instruction
      in the IF stage by turning it into a nop. To flush instructions in the ID stage, we
      use the multiplexor already in the ID stage that zeros control signals for stalls. A
      new control signal, called ID.Flush, is ORed with the stall signal from the hazard
      detection unit to flush during ID. To flush the instruction in the EX phase, we use
      a new signal called EX.Flush to cause new multiplexors to zero the control lines.
      To start fetching instructions from location 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex, which we are
      using as the LEGv8 exception address, we simply add an additional input to the PC
      multiplexor that sends 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex to the PC. Figure 4.64 shows these
      changes.
          This example points out a problem with exceptions: if we do not stop execution
      in the middle of the instruction, the programmer will not be able to see the original
      value of register X1 because it will be clobbered as the Destination register of the
      ADD instruction. If we assume the exception is detected during the EX stage, we
      can use the EX.Flush signal to prevent the instruction in the EX stage from writing
      its result in the WB stage. Many exceptions require that we eventually complete
      the instruction that caused the exception as if it executed normally. The easiest
      way to do this is to flush the instruction and restart it from the beginning after the
      exception is handled.
          The final step is to save the address of the offending instruction in the exception
      link register (ELR). Figure 4.64 shows a stylized version of the datapath, including
      the branch hardware and necessary accommodations to handle exceptions.
                                                                                                     4.9   Exceptions                                339

                                                                                                               EX.Flush
           IF.Flush

                                                                             ID.Flush
                                                      Hazard
                                                     detection
                                                       unit

                                                                                             ID/EX

                                                                                              WB       0                  EX/MEM
                                                                                    M
                                                     Control                        u          M                              WB            MEM/WB
                                                                                    x                ESR
                                             IF/ID                      ?      0                                              M              WB
                                                                                              EX     ELR   0

                                                               Shift
                           4                                   left 2

                                                                        Registers       =0
                                                                                                                    ALU
1C090000              PC       Instruction
                                 memory                                                                                             Data
                                                                                                                                   memory

                                                                Sign-
                                                               extend

                                                                                                                 Forwarding
                                                                                                                    unit

FIGURE 4.64 The datapath with controls to handle exceptions. The key additions include a new input with the value 0000 0000
1C09 0000hex in the multiplexor that supplies the new PC value; an ESR register to record the cause of the exception; and an ELR register to
save the address of the instruction that caused the exception. The 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex input to the multiplexor is the initial address to begin
fetching instructions in the event of an exception.

     Exception in a Pipelined Computer
                                                                                                                                   EXAMPLE
     Given this instruction sequence,

           40hex SUB                   X11, X2, X4
           44hex AND                   X12, X2, X5
           48hex ORR                   X13, X2, X6
           4Chex ADD                   X1, X2, X1
           50hex SUB                   X15, X6, X7
           54hex LDUR                  X16, [X7,#100]
           . . .

     assume the instructions to be invoked on an exception begin like this:

           1C090000hex                  STUR   X26, [X0,#1000]
           1C090004hex                  STUR   X27, [X0,#1008]
           . . .

                         Show what happens in the pipeline if an exception occurs in the ADD
                      instruction.

                      Figure 4.65 shows the events, starting with the add instruction in the EX stage.
      ANSWER          Assume the hardware malfunction is detected during that phase, and 0000
                      0000 1C09 0000hex is forced into the PC. Clock cycle 7 shows that the ADD and
                      following instructions are flushed, and the first instruction of the exception
                      code is fetched. Note that the address of the instruction following the ADD is
                      saved: 4Chex+4= 50hex.

                      We mentioned several examples of exceptions on page 326, and we will see
                  others in Chapter 5. With five instructions active in any clock cycle, the challenge
                  is to associate an exception with the appropriate instruction. Moreover, multiple
                  exceptions can occur simultaneously in a single clock cycle. The solution is to
                  prioritize the exceptions so that it is easy to determine which is serviced first.
                  In LEGv8 implementations, the hardware sorts exceptions so that the earliest
                  instruction is interrupted.
                      I/O device requests and hardware malfunctions are not associated with a specific
                  instruction, so the implementation has some flexibility as to when to interrupt the
                  pipeline. Hence, the mechanism used for other exceptions works just fine.
                      The ELR captures the address of the interrupted instructions, and the ESR
                  records the highest priority exception in a clock cycle if more than one exception
                  occurs.

      Hardware/   The hardware and the operating system must work in conjunction so that
                  exceptions behave as you would expect. The hardware contract is normally to
      Software    stop the offending instruction in midstream, let all prior instructions complete,
      Interface   flush all following instructions, set a register to show the cause of the exception,
                  save the address of the offending instruction, and then branch to a prearranged
                  address. The operating system contract is to look at the cause of the exception and
                  act appropriately. For an undefined instruction or hardware failure, the operating
                  system normally kills the program and returns an indicator of the reason. For an
                  I/O device request or an operating system service call, the operating system saves
                  the state of the program, performs the desired task, and, at some point in the future,
                  restores the program to continue execution. In the case of I/O device requests, we
                  may often choose to run another task before resuming the task that requested the
                  I/O, since that task may often not be able to proceed until the I/O is complete.
                  Exceptions are why the ability to save and restore the state of any task is critical.
                  One of the most important and frequent uses of exceptions is handling page faults
                  and TLB exceptions; Chapter 5 describes these exceptions and their handling in
                  more detail.
                                                                                                                                        4.9       Exceptions                                        341

                      LDUR X16, [X7,#100]                              SUB X15, X6, X7                                       ADD X1, X2, X1                         ORR X13, . . . AND X12, . . .
                                                                                                                                         EX.Flush
                   IF.Flush
                                                                                                 ID.Flush
                                                                        Hazard
                                                                       detection
                                                                          unit
                                                                                                             ID/EX
                                                                                                             0         10
                                                                                                                  WB                0                  EX/MEM
                                                                                                             0                                                 10
                                                                         Control                                  M 000                                   WB                  MEM/WB
                                                                                                                                Cause
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                    58        IF/ID                         +      0         0 EX      4C
                                                                                                                                  EPC    0                M                     WB
                                                                  50
                                                         54
                                                +                                  Shift                                                     X2
                                        4                                          left 2                    X6

                                                                                            Registers   =0
                                                                                       12
                  M            Instruction
                                                                                                             X7
       1C090000   u        PC
                  x 1C09000 54 memory                                                                                                        X1                      Data
                                                                                                                                                                    memory
                                                                                    Sign-
                                                                                   extend

                                                                                                                                                               13                    12
                                                                                                             15        X1

           Clock 6                                                                                                                           Forwarding
                                                                                                                                                unit

                     STUR X26, [X0,#1000]                              bubble (nop)                                                bubble                            bubble       OR X13, . . .
                                                                                                                                         EX.Flush
                   IF.Flush
                                                                                                 ID.Flush
                                                                        Hazard
                                                                       detection
                                                                         unit
                                                                                                              ID/EX                               00
                                                                                                             0              0
                                                                                                                  WB                0                  EX/MEM
                                                                                                             0
                                                                         Control                                  M         000                           WB 00               MEM/WB
                                                                                                                                Cause
                                                              IF/ID                         +      0         0 EX                                         M                     WB
                                                                                                                                  EPC    0
                                     1C090000
                                                                  54
                                                +                                  Shift
                                        4                                          left 2

                                                                                            Registers   =0
                                                                                       13                                                         ALU

       1C090000                 PC      Instruction
                     1C090004
                                          memory                                                                                                                     Data
                                                                                                                                                                    memory
                                                                                    Sign-
                                                                                   extend

                                                                                                                                                                                     13

           Clock 7                                                                                                                           Forwarding
                                                                                                                                                unit

FIGURE 4.65 The result of an exception due to hardware malfunction in the add instruction. The exception is detected
during the EX stage of clock 6, saving the address following the add in the ELR register (4C + 4 = 50hex). It causes all the Flush signals to be
set near the end of this clock cycle, deasserting control values (setting them to 0) for the ADD. Clock cycle 7 shows the instructions converted
to bubbles in the pipeline plus the fetching of the first instruction of the exception routine—STUR X25,[X0,#1000]—from instruction
location 0000 0000 1C09 0000hex. Note that the AND and ORR instructions, which are prior to the ADD, still complete.

imprecise                    Elaboration: The difficulty of always associating the proper exception with the
interrupt Also called        correct instruction in pipelined computers has led some computer designers to relax
imprecise exception.         this requirement in noncritical cases. Such processors are said to have imprecise
Interrupts or exceptions     interrupts or imprecise exceptions. In the example above, PC would normally have 58hex
in pipelined computers       at the start of the clock cycle after the exception is detected, even though the offending
that are not associated      instruction is at address 4Chex. A processor with imprecise exceptions might put 58hex
with the exact instruction
                             into ELR and leave it up to the operating system to determine which instruction caused
that was the cause of the
                             the problem. LEGv8 and the vast majority of computers today support precise interrupts
interrupt or exception.
                             or precise exceptions. One reason is designers of a deeper pipeline processor might
                             be tempted to record a different value in the ELR, which would create headaches for the
precise interrupt Also       OS. To prevent them, the deeper pipeline would likely be required to record the same PC
called precise exception.    that would have been recorded in the five-stage pipeline. It is simpler for everyone to just
An interrupt or exception
                             record the PC of the faulting instruction instead. (Another reason is to support virtual
that is always associated
                             memory, which we shall see in Chapter 5.)
with the correct
instruction in pipelined
computers.                   Elaboration: We       show that LEGv8 uses the exception entry address
                             0000 0000 1C09 0000hex, which is based on the ARMv8 Model Architecture. ARMv8
                             can have different exception entry addresses, depending on the platform.

                             Elaboration: The LEGv8 architecture has three levels of exception, each with their
                             own ELR and ESR registers, as we’ll see in Chapter 5.

               Check Which exception should be recognized first in this sequence?
             Yourself 1. XXX X1, X2, X1  // undefined instruction
                                2. SUB X1, X2, X1   // hardware error

                              4.10           Parallelism via Instructions

                             Be forewarned: this section is a brief overview of fascinating but complex topics.
                             If you want to learn more details, you should consult our more advanced book,
                             Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, fifth edition, where the material
                             covered in these 13 pages is expanded to almost 200 pages (including appendices)!
                                Pipelining exploits the potential parallelism among instructions. This
                             parallelism is called, naturally enough, instruction-level parallelism (ILP). There
                             are two primary methods for increasing the potential amount of instruction-
                             level parallelism. The first is increasing the depth of the pipeline to overlap more
                             instructions. Using our laundry analogy and assuming that the washer cycle was
                             longer than the others were, we could divide our washer into three machines that
                             perform the wash, rinse, and spin steps of a traditional washer. We would then

move from a four-stage to a six-stage pipeline. To get the full speed-up, we need          instruction-level
to rebalance the remaining steps so they are the same length, in processors or in          parallelism The
laundry. The amount of parallelism being exploited is higher, since there are more         parallelism among
                                                                                           instructions.
operations being overlapped. Performance is potentially greater since the clock
cycle can be shorter.
   Another approach is to replicate the internal components of the computer so
that it can launch multiple instructions in every pipeline stage. The general name
for this technique is multiple issue. A multiple-issue laundry would replace our           multiple issue A
household washer and dryer with, say, three washers and three dryers. You would            scheme whereby multiple
also have to recruit more assistants to fold and put away three times as much              instructions are launched
                                                                                           in one clock cycle.
laundry in the same amount of time. The downside is the extra work to keep all the
machines busy and transferring the loads to the next pipeline stage.
   Launching multiple instructions per stage allows the instruction execution rate to
exceed the clock rate or, stated alternatively, the CPI to be less than 1. As mentioned
in Chapter 1, it is sometimes useful to flip the metric and use IPC, or instructions
per clock cycle. Hence, a 3-GHz four-way multiple-issue microprocessor can
execute a peak rate of 12 billion instructions per second and have a best-case CPI
of 0.33, or an IPC of 3. Assuming a five-stage pipeline, such a processor would have
15 instructions in execution at any given time. Today’s high-end microprocessors
attempt to issue from three to six instructions in every clock cycle. Even moderate
                                                                                           static multiple issue An
designs will aim at a peak IPC of 2. There are typically, however, many constraints        approach to implementing
on what types of instructions may be executed simultaneously, and what happens             a multiple-issue processor
when dependences arise.                                                                    where many decisions
   There are two main ways to implement a multiple-issue processor, with the               are made by the compiler
major difference being the division of work between the compiler and the hardware.         before execution.
Because the division of work dictates whether decisions are being made statically
                                                                                           dynamic multiple
(that is, at compile time) or dynamically (that is, during execution), the approaches      issue An approach to
are sometimes called static multiple issue and dynamic multiple issue. As we will          implementing a multiple-
see, both approaches have other, more commonly used names, which may be less               issue processor where
precise or more restrictive.                                                               many decisions are made
   Two primary and distinct responsibilities must be dealt with in a multiple-issue        during execution by the
pipeline:                                                                                  processor.

   1. Packaging instructions into issue slots: how does the processor determine            issue slots The positions
      how many instructions and which instructions can be issued in a given                from which instructions
      clock cycle? In most static issue processors, this process is at least partially     could issue in a given
                                                                                           clock cycle; by analogy,
      handled by the compiler; in dynamic issue designs, it is normally dealt with
                                                                                           these correspond to
      at runtime by the processor, although the compiler will often have already           positions at the starting
      tried to help improve the issue rate by placing the instructions in a beneficial     blocks for a sprint.
      order.
   2. Dealing with data and control hazards: in static issue processors, the compiler
      handles some or all the consequences of data and control hazards statically.
      In contrast, most dynamic issue processors attempt to alleviate at least some
      classes of hazards using hardware techniques operating at execution time.

                                 Although we describe these as distinct approaches, in reality, one approach
                              often borrows techniques from the other, and neither approach can claim to be
                              perfectly pure.

                              The Concept of Speculation
                                  One of the most important methods for finding and exploiting more ILP is
                              speculation. Based on the great idea of prediction, speculation is an approach
                              that allows the compiler or the processor to “guess” about the properties of an
                              instruction, to enable execution to begin for other instructions that may depend
                              on the speculated instruction. For example, we might speculate on the outcome of
                              a branch, so that instructions after the branch could be executed earlier. Another
                              example is that we might speculate that a store that precedes a load does not refer to
                              the same address, which would allow the load to be executed before the store. The
speculation An                difficulty with speculation is that it may be wrong. So, any speculation mechanism
approach whereby the          must include both a method to check if the guess was right and a method to unroll
compiler or processor
guesses the outcome of an     or back out the effects of the instructions that were executed speculatively. The
instruction to remove it as   implementation of this back-out capability adds complexity.
a dependence in executing         Speculation may be done in the compiler or by the hardware. For example, the
other instructions.           compiler can use speculation to reorder instructions, moving an instruction across
                              a branch or a load across a store. The processor hardware can perform the same
                              transformation at runtime using techniques we discuss later in this section.
                                  The recovery mechanisms used for incorrect speculation are rather different.
                              In the case of speculation in software, the compiler usually inserts additional
                              instructions that check the accuracy of the speculation and provide a fix-up
                              routine to use when the speculation is wrong. In hardware speculation, the
                              processor usually buffers the speculative results until it knows they are no longer
                              speculative. If the speculation is correct, the instructions are completed by
                              allowing the contents of the buffers to be written to the registers or memory. If
                              the speculation is incorrect, the hardware flushes the buffers and re-executes the
                              correct instruction sequence. Misspeculation typically requires the pipeline to be
                              flushed, or at least stalled, and thus further reduces performance.
                                  Speculation introduces one other possible problem: speculating on certain
                              instructions may introduce exceptions that were formerly not present. For example,
                              suppose a load instruction is moved in a speculative manner, but the address it uses
                              is not within bounds when the speculation is incorrect. The result would be that an
                              exception that should not have occurred would occur. The problem is complicated
                              by the fact that if the load instruction were not speculative, then the exception
                              must occur! In compiler-based speculation, such problems are avoided by adding
                              special speculation support that allows such exceptions to be ignored until it is
                              clear that they really should occur. In hardware-based speculation, exceptions
                              are simply buffered until it is clear that the instruction causing them is no longer
                              speculative and is ready to complete; at that point, the exception is raised, and
                              normal exception handling proceeds.

    Since speculation can improve performance when done properly and decrease
performance when done carelessly, significant effort goes into deciding when it
is appropriate to speculate. Later in this section, we will examine both static and
dynamic techniques for speculation.

Static Multiple Issue
   Static multiple-issue processors all use the compiler to assist with packaging
instructions and handling hazards. In a static issue processor, you can think of the
set of instructions issued in a given clock cycle, which is called an issue packet, as       issue packet The set
one large instruction with multiple operations. This view is more than an analogy.           of instructions that
Since a static multiple-issue processor usually restricts what mix of instructions can       issues together in one
                                                                                             clock cycle; the packet
be initiated in a given clock cycle, it is useful to think of the issue packet as a single
                                                                                             may be determined
instruction allowing several operations in certain predefined fields. This view led to       statically by the compiler
the original name for this approach: Very Long Instruction Word (VLIW).                      or dynamically by the
   Most static issue processors also rely on the compiler to take on some                    processor.
responsibility for handling data and control hazards. The compiler’s responsibilities
                                                                                             Very Long Instruction
may include static branch prediction and code scheduling to reduce or prevent all            Word (VLIW) A
hazards. Let’s look at a simple static issue version of an LEGv8 processor, before we        style of instruction set
describe the use of these techniques in more aggressive processors.                          architecture that launches
                                                                                             many operations that are
An Example: Static Multiple Issue with the LEGv8 ISA                                         defined to be independent
                                                                                             in a single-wide
To give a flavor of static multiple issue, we consider a simple two-issue LEGv8
                                                                                             instruction, typically with
processor, where one of the instructions can be an integer ALU operation or                  many separate opcode
branch and the other can be a load or store. Such a design is like that used in              fields.
some embedded processors. Issuing two instructions per cycle will require fetching
and decoding 64 bits of instructions. In many static multiple-issue processors, and
essentially all VLIW processors, the layout of simultaneously issuing instructions
is restricted to simplify the decoding and instruction issue. Hence, we will require
that the instructions be paired and aligned on a 64-bit boundary, with the ALU
or branch portion appearing first. Furthermore, if one instruction of the pair
cannot be used, we require that it be replaced with a nop. Thus, the instructions
always issue in pairs, possibly with a nop in one slot. Figure 4.66 shows how the
instructions look as they go into the pipeline in pairs.
    Static multiple-issue processors vary in how they deal with potential data and
control hazards. In some designs, the compiler takes full responsibility for removing
all hazards, scheduling the code, and inserting no-ops so that the code executes
without any need for hazard detection or hardware-generated stalls. In others, the
hardware detects data hazards and generates stalls between two issue packets, while
requiring that the compiler avoid all dependences within an instruction packet.
Even so, a hazard generally forces the entire issue packet containing the dependent
instruction to stall. Whether the software must handle all hazards or only try to
reduce the fraction of hazards between separate issue packets, the appearance of
having a large single instruction with multiple operations is reinforced. We will
assume the second approach for this example.

                                   Instruction type                                            Pipe stages
                            ALU or branch instruction             IF     ID      EX     MEM          WB
                            Load or store instruction             IF     ID      EX     MEM          WB
                            ALU or branch instruction                    IF      ID       EX        MEM       WB
                            Load or store instruction                    IF      ID       EX        MEM       WB
                            ALU or branch instruction                            IF       ID         EX      MEM         WB
                            Load or store instruction                            IF       ID         EX      MEM         WB
                            ALU or branch instruction                                     IF         ID        EX       MEM       WB
                            Load or store instruction                                     IF         ID        EX       MEM       WB

                            FIGURE 4.66 Static two-issue pipeline in operation. The ALU and data transfer instructions
                            are issued at the same time. Here we have assumed the same five-stage structure as used for the single-issue
                            pipeline. Although this is not strictly necessary, it does have some advantages. In particular, keeping the
                            register writes at the end of the pipeline simplifies the handling of exceptions and the maintenance of a
                            precise exception model, which become more difficult in multiple-issue processors.

                               To issue an ALU and a data transfer operation in parallel, the first need for
                            additional hardware—beyond the usual hazard detection and stall logic—is extra
                            ports in the register file (see Figure 4.67). In one clock cycle, we may need to read
                            two registers for the ALU operation and two more for a store, and also one write
                            port for an ALU operation and one write port for a load. Since the ALU is tied
                            up for the ALU operation, we also need a separate adder to calculate the effective
                            address for data transfers. Without these extra resources, our two-issue pipeline
                            would be hindered by structural hazards.
                               Clearly, this two-issue processor can improve performance by up to a factor of
                            two! Doing so, however, requires that twice as many instructions be overlapped
                            in execution, and this additional overlap increases the relative performance loss
                            from data and control hazards. For example, in our simple five-stage pipeline,
use latency Number          loads have a use latency of one clock cycle, which prevents one instruction from
of clock cycles between     using the result without stalling. In the two-issue, five-stage pipeline the result of
a load instruction and      a load instruction cannot be used on the next clock cycle. This means that the next
an instruction that can
                            two instructions cannot use the load result without stalling. Furthermore, ALU
use the result of the
load without stalling the   instructions that had no use latency in the simple five-stage pipeline now have a
pipeline.                   one-instruction use latency, since the results cannot be used in the paired load or
                            store. To effectively exploit the parallelism available in a multiple-issue processor,
                            more ambitious compiler or hardware scheduling techniques are needed, and static
                            multiple issue requires that the compiler take on this role.

                                                                  

                                   

                          4
                                                                                                ALU

                                                             Registers
      1C090000       PC       Instruction
                                memory
                                                                                                        Write
                                                                                                        data
                                                                                                         Data
                                                     Sign-                                      ALU
                                                    extend                                              memory
                                                               Sign-
                                                              extend
                                                                                                        Address

FIGURE 4.67 A static two-issue datapath. The additions needed for double issue are highlighted: another 32 bits from instruction
memory, two more read ports and one more write port on the register file, and another ALU. Assume the bottom ALU handles address
calculations for data transfers and the top ALU handles everything else.

     Simple Multiple-Issue Code Scheduling
                                                                                                         EXAMPLE
     How would this loop be scheduled on a static two-issue pipeline for LEGv8?
        Loop: LDUR X0, [X20,#0]                 // X0=array element
            ADD X0,X0,X21                       // add scalar in X21
            STUR X0, [X20,#0]                   // store result
            SUBI X20,X20,#8                      // decrement pointer
            CMP X20,X22                         // compare to loop limit
            BGT Loop                            // branch if X20 > X22
        Reorder the instructions to avoid as many pipeline stalls as possible. Assume
     branches are predicted, so that control hazards are handled by the hardware.
     The first three instructions have data dependences, as do the next two. Figure
     4.68 shows the best schedule for these instructions. Notice that just one pair                       ANSWER
     of instructions has both issue slots used. It takes five clocks per loop iteration;
     at five clocks to execute six instructions, we get the disappointing CPI of 0.83
     versus the best case of 0.5, or an IPC of 1.2 versus 2.0. Notice that in computing
     CPI or IPC, we do not count any nops executed as useful instructions. Doing
     so would improve CPI, but not performance!

                                           ALU or branch instruction    Data transfer instruction    Clock cycle
                               Loop:                                      LDUR     X0,[X20,#0]            1
                                           SUBI     X20, X20, #8                                          2
                                           ADD      X0, X0, X21                                           3
                                           CMP      X20, X22                                              4
                                           BGT      Loop                  STUR     X0,[X20,#8]            5

                             FIGURE 4.68 The scheduled code as it would look on a two-issue LEGv8 pipeline. The
                             empty slots are no-ops.

loop unrolling A
technique to get more           An important compiler technique to get more performance from loops is loop
performance from loops       unrolling, where multiple copies of the loop body are made. After unrolling, there
that access arrays, in       is more ILP available by overlapping instructions from different iterations.
which multiple copies of
the loop body are made
and instructions from
different iterations are
scheduled together.

                                 Loop Unrolling for Multiple-Issue Pipelines
    EXAMPLE
                                 See how well loop unrolling and scheduling work in the example above. For
                                 simplicity, assume that the loop index is a multiple of four.

                                 To schedule the loop without any delays, it turns out that we need to make
      ANSWER                     four copies of the loop body. After unrolling and eliminating the unnecessary
                                 loop overhead instructions, the loop will contain four copies each of LDUR,
                                 ADD, and STUR, plus one SUBI, one CMP, and one CBZ. Figure 4.69 shows the
                                 unrolled and scheduled code.
                                    During the unrolling process, the compiler introduced additional registers
register renaming The            (X1, X2, X3). The goal of this process, called register renaming, is to eliminate
renaming of registers            dependences that are not true data dependences, but could either lead to
by the compiler or               potential hazards or prevent the compiler from flexibly scheduling the code.
hardware to remove
                                 Consider how the unrolled code would look using only X0. There would be
antidependences.
                                 repeated instances of LDUR X0, [X20,#0], ADD X0, X0, X21 followed by STUR
                                 X0, [X20,#8], but these sequences, despite using X0, are actually completely
                                 independent—no data values flow between one set of these instructions and the
antidependence                   next set. This case is what is called an antidependence or name dependence,
Also called name                 which is an ordering forced purely by the reuse of a name, rather than a real
dependence An                    data dependence that is also called a true dependence.
ordering forced by the
                                    Renaming the registers during the unrolling process allows the compiler to
reuse of a name, typically
a register, rather than by       move these independent instructions subsequently to better schedule the code.
a true dependence that           The renaming process eliminates the name dependences, while preserving the
carries a value between          true dependences.
two instructions.

                   ALU or branch instruction           Data transfer instruction        Clock cycle
    Loop:         SUBI       X20, X20,#32               LDUR       X0, [X20,#0]               1
                                                        LDUR       X1, [X20,#24]              2
                  ADD        X0, X0, X21                LDUR       X2, [X20,#16]              3
                  ADD        X1, X1, X21                LDUR       X3, [X20,#8]               4
                  ADD        X2, X2, X21                STUR       X0, [X20,#32]              5
                  ADD        X3, X3, X21                STUR       X1, [X20,#24]              6
                  CMP        X20, X22                   STUR       X2, [X20,#16]              7
                  BGT        Loop                       STUR       X3, [X20,#8]               8

FIGURE 4.69 The unrolled and scheduled code of Figure 4.68 as it would look on a static
two-issue LEGv8 pipeline. The empty slots are no-ops. Since the first instruction in the loop decrements
X20 by 32, the addresses loaded are the original value of X20, then that address minus 8, minus 16, and
minus 24.

        Notice now that 14 of the 15 instructions in the loop execute as pairs. It takes
     eight clocks for four loop iterations, which yields an IPC of 15/8 = 1.88. Loop
     unrolling and scheduling more than doubled performance—8 versus 20 clock
     cycles for 4 iterations—partly from reducing the loop control instructions and
     partly from dual issue execution. The cost of this performance improvement is
     using four temporary registers rather than one, as well as more than doubling
     the code size.

Dynamic Multiple-Issue Processors
    Dynamic multiple-issue processors are also known as superscalar processors,                            superscalar An
or simply superscalars. In the simplest superscalar processors, instructions issue in                      advanced pipelining
order, and the processor decides whether zero, one, or more instructions can issue                         technique that enables the
in a given clock cycle. Obviously, achieving good performance on such a processor                          processor to execute more
                                                                                                           than one instruction per
still requires the compiler to try to schedule instructions to move dependences                            clock cycle by selecting
apart and thereby improve the instruction issue rate. Even with such compiler                              them during execution.
scheduling, there is an important difference between this simple superscalar
and a VLIW processor: the code, whether scheduled or not, is guaranteed by
the hardware to execute correctly. Furthermore, compiled code will always run
correctly independent of the issue rate or pipeline structure of the processor. In
some VLIW designs, this has not been the case, and recompilation was required
when moving across different processor models; in other static issue processors,
code would run correctly across different implementations, but often so poorly as                          dynamic pipeline
to make compilation effectively required.                                                                  scheduling Hardware
                                                                                                           support for reordering
   Many superscalars extend the basic framework of dynamic issue decisions to                              the order of instruction
include dynamic pipeline scheduling. Dynamic pipeline scheduling chooses                                   execution to avoid stalls.
which instructions to execute in a given clock cycle while trying to avoid hazards

                               and stalls. Let’s start with a simple example of avoiding a data hazard. Consider
                               the following code sequence:

                                     LDUR    X0, [X21,#20]
                                     ADD     X1, X0, X2
                                     SUB     X23, X23, X3
                                     ANDI    X5, X23, 20

                                  Even though the SUB instruction is ready to execute, it must wait for the LDUR
                               and ADD to complete first, which might take many clock cycles if memory is slow.
                               (Chapter 5 explains cache misses, the reason that memory accesses are sometimes
                               very slow.) Dynamic pipeline scheduling allows such hazards to be avoided either
                               fully or partially.

                               Dynamic Pipeline Scheduling
                                   Dynamic pipeline scheduling chooses which instructions to execute next,
                               possibly reordering them to avoid stalls. In such processors, the pipeline is divided
                               into three major units: an instruction fetch and issue unit, multiple functional units
commit unit The unit in        (a dozen or more in high-end designs in 2015), and a commit unit. Figure 4.70
a dynamic or out-of-order      shows the model. The first unit fetches instructions, decodes them, and sends
execution pipeline that        each instruction to a corresponding functional unit for execution. Each functional
decides when it is safe to     unit has buffers, called reservation stations, which hold the operands and the
release the result of an
operation to programmer-
                               operation. (In the next section, we will discuss an alternative to reservation stations
visible registers and          used by many recent processors.) As soon as the buffer contains all its operands
memory.                        and the functional unit is ready to execute, the result is calculated. When the result
                               is completed, it is sent to any reservation stations waiting for this particular result
reservation station A          as well as to the commit unit, which buffers the result until it is safe to put the
buffer within a functional     result into the register file or, for a store, into memory. The buffer in the commit
unit that holds the            unit, often called the reorder buffer, is also used to supply operands, in much the
operands and the               same way as forwarding logic does in a statically scheduled pipeline. Once a result
operation.
                               is committed to the register file, it can be fetched directly from there, just as in a
reorder buffer The             normal pipeline.
buffer that holds results in       The combination of buffering operands in the reservation stations and results
a dynamically scheduled        in the reorder buffer provides a form of register renaming, just like that used by
processor until it is safe     the compiler in our earlier loop-unrolling example on page 348. To see how this
to store the results to        conceptually works, consider the following steps:
memory or a register.
                                  1. When an instruction issues, it is copied to a reservation station for the
                                     appropriate functional unit. Any operands that are available in the register
                                     file or reorder buffer are also immediately copied into the reservation station.
                                     The instruction is buffered in the reservation station until all the operands
                                     and the functional unit are available. For the issuing instruction, the register
                                     copy of the operand is no longer required, and if a write to that register
                                     occurred, the value could be overwritten.

                                       Instruction fetch
                                                                                 In-order issue
                                       and decode unit

             Reservation   Reservation               Reservation     Reservation
                                             ...
               station       station                   station         station

Functional                                             Floating          Load-   Out-of-order execute
               Integer       Integer         ...
  units                                                 point            store

                                           Commit                                In-order commit
                                            unit

FIGURE 4.70 The three primary units of a dynamically scheduled pipeline. The final step of
updating the state is also called retirement or graduation.

   2. If an operand is not in the register file or reorder buffer, it must be waiting to
      be produced by a functional unit. The name of the functional unit that will
      produce the result is tracked. When that unit eventually produces the result,
      it is copied directly into the waiting reservation station from the functional
      unit bypassing the registers.                                                                     out-of-order
   These steps effectively use the reorder buffer and the reservation stations to                       execution A situation in
                                                                                                        pipelined execution when
implement register renaming.                                                                            an instruction blocked
   Conceptually, you can think of a dynamically scheduled pipeline as analyzing                         from executing does
the data flow structure of a program. The processor then executes the instructions                      not cause the following
in some order that preserves the data flow order of the program. This style of                          instructions to wait.
execution is called an out-of-order execution, since the instructions can be
executed in a different order than they were fetched.                                                   in-order commit A
   To make programs behave as if they were running on a simple in-order pipeline,                       commit in which the
                                                                                                        results of pipelined
the instruction fetch and decode unit is required to issue instructions in order,                       execution are written to
which allows dependences to be tracked, and the commit unit is required to write                        the programmer visible
results to registers and memory in program fetch order. This conservative mode is                       state in the same order
called in-order commit. Hence, if an exception occurs, the computer can point to                        that instructions are
the last instruction executed, and the only registers updated will be those written                     fetched.

                by instructions before the instruction causing the exception. Although the front
                end (fetch and issue) and the back end (commit) of the pipeline run in order, the
                functional units are free to initiate execution whenever the data they need are
                available. Today, all dynamically scheduled pipelines use in-order commit.
                   Dynamic scheduling is often extended by including hardware-based
                speculation, especially for branch outcomes. By predicting the direction of a
                branch, a dynamically scheduled processor can continue to fetch and execute
                instructions along the predicted path. Because the instructions are committed
                in order, we know whether the branch was correctly predicted before any
                instructions from the predicted path are committed. A speculative, dynamically
                scheduled pipeline can also support speculation on load addresses, allowing load-
                store reordering, and using the commit unit to avoid incorrect speculation. In the
                next section, we will look at the use of dynamic scheduling with speculation in
                the Intel Core i7 design.

Understanding   Given that compilers can also schedule code around data dependences, you might
                ask why a superscalar processor would use dynamic scheduling. There are three
     Program    major reasons. First, not all stalls are predictable. In particular, cache misses
 Performance    (see Chapter 5) in the memory hierarchy cause unpredictable stalls. Dynamic
                scheduling allows the processor to hide some of those stalls by continuing to
                execute instructions while waiting for the stall to end.
                   Second, if the processor speculates on branch outcomes using dynamic branch
                prediction, it cannot know the exact order of instructions at compile time, since
                it depends on the predicted and actual behavior of branches. Incorporating
                dynamic speculation to exploit more instruction-level parallelism (ILP) without
                incorporating dynamic scheduling would significantly restrict the benefits of
                speculation.
                   Third, as the pipeline latency and issue width change from one implementation
                to another, the best way to compile a code sequence also changes. For example, how
                to schedule a sequence of dependent instructions is affected by both issue width
                and latency. The pipeline structure affects both the number of times a loop must be
                unrolled to avoid stalls as well as the process of compiler-based register renaming.
                Dynamic scheduling allows the hardware to hide most of these details. Thus, users
                and software distributors do not need to worry about having multiple versions of
                a program for different implementations of the same instruction set. Similarly, old
                legacy code will get much of the benefit of a new implementation without the need
                for recompilation.

    Both pipelining and multiple-issue execution increase peak instruction
                                                                                            TheBIG
    throughput and attempt to exploit instruction-level parallelism (ILP).                  Picture
    Data and control dependences in programs, however, offer an upper limit
    on sustained performance because the processor must sometimes wait for
    a dependence to be resolved. Software-centric approaches to exploiting
    ILP rely on the ability of the compiler to find and reduce the effects of such
    dependences, while hardware-centric approaches rely on extensions to the
    pipeline and issue mechanisms. Speculation, performed by the compiler
    or the hardware, can increase the amount of ILP that can be exploited via
    prediction, although care must be taken since speculating incorrectly is
    likely to reduce performance.

Modern, high-performance microprocessors are capable of issuing several                     Hardware/
instructions per clock; unfortunately, sustaining that issue rate is very difficult. For    Software
example, despite the existence of processors with four to six issues per clock, very
few applications can sustain more than two instructions per clock. There are two
                                                                                            Interface
primary reasons for this.
   First, within the pipeline, the major performance bottlenecks arise from
dependences that cannot be alleviated, thus reducing the parallelism among
instructions and the sustained issue rate. Although little can be done about true
data dependences, often the compiler or hardware does not know precisely whether
a dependence exists or not, and so must conservatively assume the dependence
exists. For example, code that makes use of pointers, particularly in ways that
may lead to aliasing, will lead to more implied potential dependences. In contrast,
the greater regularity of array accesses often allows a compiler to deduce that no

                              dependences exist. Similarly, branches that cannot be accurately predicted whether
                              at runtime or compile time will limit the ability to exploit ILP. Often, additional
                              ILP is available, but the ability of the compiler or the hardware to find ILP that may
                              be widely separated (sometimes by the execution of thousands of instructions) is
                              limited.
                                 Second, losses in the memory hierarchy (the topic of Chapter 5) also limit the
                              ability to keep the pipeline full. Some memory system stalls can be hidden, but
                              limited amounts of ILP also limit the extent to which such stalls can be hidden.

                              Energy Efficiency and Advanced Pipelining
                              The downside to the increasing exploitation of instruction-level parallelism via
                              dynamic multiple issue and speculation is potential energy inefficiency. Each
                              innovation was able to turn more transistors into performance, but they often did
                              so very inefficiently. Now that we have collided with the power wall, we are seeing
                              designs with multiple processors per chip where the processors are not as deeply
                              pipelined or as aggressively speculative as its predecessors.
                                 The belief is that while the simpler processors are not as fast as their sophisticated
                              brethren, they deliver better performance per Joule, so that they can deliver more
                              performance per chip when designs are constrained more by energy than they are
                              by the number of transistors.
                                 Figure 4.71 shows the number of pipeline stages, the issue width, speculation
                              level, clock rate, cores per chip, and power of several past and recent Intel
                              microprocessors. Note the drop in pipeline stages and power as companies switch
                              to multicore designs.

                                                          Pipeline   Issue    Out-of-Order/    Cores/
         Microprocessor           Year    Clock Rate      Stages     Width     Speculation      Chip         Power

 Intel 486                        1989      25 MHz           5         1           No             1          5     W
 Intel Pentium                    1993      66 MHz           5         2           No             1         10     W
 Intel Pentium Pro                1997     200 MHz          10         3           Yes            1         29     W
 Intel Pentium 4 Willamette       2001     2000 MHz         22         3           Yes            1         75     W
 Intel Pentium 4 Prescott         2004     3600 MHz         31         3           Yes            1        103     W
 Intel Core                       2006     2930 MHz         14         4           Yes            2         75     W
 Intel Core i5 Nehalem            2010     3300 MHz         14         4           Yes           2–4        87     W
 Intel Core i5 Ivy Bridge         2012     3400 MHz         14         4           Yes            8         77     W

FIGURE 4.71 Record of Intel Microprocessors in terms of pipeline complexity, number of cores, and power. The Pentium
4 pipeline stages do not include the commit stages. If we included them, the Pentium 4 pipelines would be even deeper.

Elaboration: A commit unit controls updates to the register file and memory. Some
dynamically scheduled processors update the register file immediately during execution,
using extra registers to implement the renaming function and preserving the older copy
of a register until the instruction updating the register is no longer speculative. Other
processors buffer the result, which, as mentioned above, is typically in a structure called
a reorder buffer, and the actual update to the register file occurs later as part of the
commit. Stores to memory must be buffered until commit time either in a store buffer
(see Chapter 5) or in the reorder buffer. The commit unit allows the store to write to
memory from the buffer when the buffer has a valid address and valid data, and when
the store is no longer dependent on predicted branches.

Elaboration: Memory accesses benefit from nonblocking caches, which continue
servicing cache accesses during a cache miss (see Chapter 5). Out-of-order execution
processors need the cache to allow instructions to execute during a miss.

State whether the following techniques or components are associated primarily                 Check
with a software- or hardware-based approach to exploiting ILP. In some cases, the             Yourself
answer may be both.
   1. Branch prediction
   2. Multiple issue
   3. VLIW
   4. Superscalar
   5. Dynamic scheduling
   6. Out-of-order execution
   7. Speculation
   8. Reorder buffer
   9. Register renaming

                Real Stuff: The ARM Cortex-A53 and Intel
 4.11
                Core i7 Pipelines
Figure 4.72 describes the two microprocessors we examine in this section, whose
targets are the two endpoints of the post-PC era.

The ARM Cortex-A53
The ARM Corxtex-A53 runs at 1.5 GHz with an eight-stage pipeline and executes
the ARMv8 instruction set. It uses dynamic multiple issue, with two instructions
per clock cycle. It is a static in-order pipeline, in that instructions issue, execute,
and commit in order. The pipeline consists of three sections for instruction fetch,
instruction decode, and execute. Figure 4.73 shows the overall pipeline.

                                                    Processor                        ARM A53                                     Intel Core i7 920

                                      Market                                  Personal Mobile Device                                Server, Cloud
                                      Thermal design power                        100 milliWatts                                      130 Watts
                                                                                 (1 core @ 1 GHz)

                                      Clock rate                                      1.5 GHz                                          2.66 GHz
                                      Cores/Chip                                  4 (configurable)                                         4
                                      Floating point?                                      Yes                                            Yes
                                      Multiple Issue?                                 Dynamic                                          Dynamic
                                      Peak instructions/clock cycle                        2                                               4
                                      Pipeline Stages                                      8                                              14
                                      Pipeline schedule                            Static In-order                    Dynamic Out-of-order with Speculation
                                      Branch prediction                                  Hybrid                                         2-level
                                      1st level caches/core                   16-64 KiB I, 16-64 KiB D                            32 KiB I, 32 KiB D
                                      2nd level cache/core                    128–2048 KiB (shared)                               256 KiB (per core)
                                      3rd level cache (shared)                 (platform dependent)                                    2–8 MiB

                                     FIGURE 4.72 Specification of the ARM Cortex-A53 and the Intel Core i7 920.

       F1           F2              F3            F4                               Iss                 Ex1             Ex2           Wr

                                                                                                 Integer execute and load-store
              Instruction fetch & predict

                                                                                                         ALU pipe 0
                                                                                Integer
    AGU                                                                         Register
     +                                                                            file                   ALU pipe 1
    TLB                         Hybrid
                               Predictor
             Instruction
                                                                                                         MAC pipe
               Cache                                                                                                               Writeback
                                       Indirect
                                      Predictor
                                                                                                         Divide pipe

                                                                                 Issue
                                                                                                         Load pipe

                                                                                                         Store pipe

                                                       Instruction Decode                                                   Floating Point execute

                                                                                                          NEON                    MUL/DIV/SQRT pipe
                                                   13-Entry
                                 Early                                Main       Late                    Register
                                                  Instruction
                                Decode                               Decode     Decode                     file                        ALU pipe
                                                    Queue

                                   D1                                 D2           D3                    F1            F2            F3              F4   F5

FIGURE 4.73 The Cortex-A53 pipeline. The first three stages fetch instructions into a 13-entry instruction queue. The Address
Generation Unit (AGU) uses a Hybrid Predictor, Indirect Predictor, and a Return Stack to predict branches to try to keep the instruction queue
full. Instruction decode is three stages and instruction execution is three stages. With two additional stages for floating point and SIMD
operations.

   The first three stages fetch two instructions at a time and try to keep a 13-entry
instruction queue full. It uses a 6k-bit hybrid conditional branch predictor, a
256-entry indirect branch predictor, and an 8-entry return address stack to predict
future function returns. The prediction of indirect branches takes an additional
pipeline stage. This design choice will incur extra latency if the instruction queue
cannot decouple the decode and execute stages from the fetch stage, primarily in
the case of a branch misprediction or an instruction cache miss. When the branch
prediction is wrong, it empties the pipeline, resulting in an eight-clock cycle
misprediction penalty.
   The decode stages of the pipeline determine if there are dependences between a
pair of instructions, which would force sequential execution, and in which pipeline
of the execution stages to send the instructions.
   The instruction execution section primarily occupies three pipeline stages and
provides one pipeline for load instructions, one pipeline for store instructions, two
pipelines for integer arithmetic operations, and separate pipelines for integer multiply
and divide operations. Either instruction from the pair can be issued to the load or
store pipelines. The execution stages have full forwarding between the pipelines.
   Floating-point and SIMD operations add a two more pipeline stages to the
instruction execution section and feature one pipeline for multiply/divide/square
root operations and one pipeline for other arithmetic operations.
   Figure 4.74 shows the CPI of the Cortex-A53 using the SPEC2006 benchmarks.
While the ideal CPI is 0.5, the best case achieved is 1.0, the median case is 1.3, and

       10.00
                       Memory hierarchy stalls
        9.00           Pipeline stalls                                                                              8.56
                       Ideal CPI
        8.00

        7.00

        6.00

        5.00

        4.00
                                                                                                           3.37
        3.00
                                                                                                  2.14
                                                                                 1.75      1.76
        2.00
                                                               1.33    1.39
                                  1.07      1.17       1.22
               0.97     1.04
        1.00

        0.00
               hmmer    h264ref libquantum perlbench   sjeng   bzip2   gobmk   xalancbmk   gcc    astar   omnetpp   mcf

FIGURE 4.74 CPI on ARM Cortex-A53 for the SPEC2006 integer benchmarks.

                              the worst case is 8.6. For the median case, 60% of the stalls are due to the pipelining
                              hazards and 40% are stalls due to the memory hierarchy. Pipeline stalls are caused
                              by branch mispredictions, structural hazards, and data dependencies between pairs
                              of instructions. Given the static pipeline of the Cortex-A53, it is up to the compiler
                              to try to avoid structural hazards and data dependences.

                              Elaboration: The Cortex-A53 is a configurable core that supports the ARMv8
                              instruction set architecture. It is delivered as an IP (Intellectual Property) core. IP cores
                              are the dominant form of technology delivery in the embedded, personal mobile device,
                              and related markets; billions of ARM and MIPS processors have been created from
                              these IP cores.
                                 Note that IP cores are different than the cores in the Intel i7 multicore computers.
                              An IP core (which may itself be a multicore) is designed to be incorporated with other
                              logic (hence it is the “core” of a chip), including application-specific processors (such
                              as an encoder or decoder for video), I/O interfaces, and memory interfaces, and then
                              fabricated to yield a processor optimized for a particular application. Although the
                              processor core is almost identical logically, the resultant chips have many differences.
                              One parameter is the size of the L2 cache, which can vary by a factor of 16.

                              The Intel Core i7 920
                              x86 microprocessors employ sophisticated pipelining approaches, using both
                              dynamic multiple issue and dynamic pipeline scheduling with out-of-order
                              execution and speculation for their pipelines. These processors, however, are
                              still faced with the challenge of implementing the complex x86 instruction set,
                              described in Chapter 2. Intel fetches x86 instructions and translates them into
                              internal ARMv8-like instructions, which Intel calls micro-operations. The micro-
                              operations are then executed by a sophisticated, dynamically scheduled, speculative
                              pipeline capable of sustaining an execution rate of up to six micro-operations per
                              clock cycle. This section focuses on that micro-operation pipeline.
                                  When we consider the design of such processors, the design of the functional
microarchitecture The         units, the cache and register file, instruction issue, and overall pipeline control
organization of the           become intermingled, making it difficult to separate the datapath from the
processor, including the      pipeline. Because of this, many engineers and researchers have adopted the term
major functional units,       microarchitecture to refer to the detailed internal architecture of a processor.
their interconnection, and
                                  The Intel Core i7 uses a scheme for resolving antidependences and incorrect
control.
                              speculation that uses a reorder buffer together with register renaming. Register
architectural                 renaming explicitly renames the architectural registers in a processor (16 in the
registers The instruction     case of the 64-bit version of the x86 architecture) to a larger set of physical registers.
set of visible registers of   The Core i7 uses register renaming to remove antidependences. Register renaming
a processor; for example,     requires the processor to maintain a map between the architectural registers and
in LEGv8, these are the 32
integer and 32 floating-
                              the physical registers, indicating which physical register is the most current copy
point registers.              of an architectural register. By keeping track of the renamings that have occurred,
                              register renaming offers another approach to recovery in the event of incorrect
                              speculation: simply undo the mappings that have occurred since the first incorrectly

speculated instruction. This undo will cause the state of the processor to return to
the last correctly executed instruction, keeping the correct mapping between the
architectural and physical registers.
   Figure 4.75 shows the overall organization and pipeline of the Core i7. Below are
the eight steps an x86 instruction goes through for execution.
   1. Instruction fetch—The processor uses a multilevel branch target buffer to
      achieve a balance between speed and prediction accuracy. There is also a
      return address stack to speed up function return. Mispredictions cause a
      penalty of about 15 cycles. Using the predicted address, the instruction fetch
      unit fetches 16 bytes from the instruction cache.
   2. The 16 bytes are placed in the predecode instruction buffer—The predecode
      stage transforms the 16 bytes into individual x86 instructions. This predecode
      is nontrivial since the length of an x86 instruction can be from 1 to 15 bytes

                    128-Entry                  32 KB Inst. cache (four-way associative)
                     inst. TLB
                    (four-way)                       16-Byte pre-decode + macro-op
                                                           fusion, fetch buffer
                    Instruction
                                                        18-Entry instruction queue
                       fetch
                     hardware

                                          Complex         Simple         Simple          Simple
                                          macro-op       macro-op       macro-op        macro-op
                       Micro
                                          decoder        decoder        decoder         decoder
                       -code
                                              28-Entry micro-op loop stream detect buffer

                                                     Register alias table and allocator
                       Retirement
                       register file                      128-Entry reorder buffer

                                                        36-Entry reservation station

                                  ALU           ALU           Load        Store        Store        ALU
                                  shift         shift        address     address       data         shift

                                 SSE            SSE                                                 SSE
                                shuffle        shuffle              Memory order buffer            shuffle
                                 ALU            ALU                                                 ALU
                                128-bit        128-bit                                         128-bit
                                FMUL           FMUL                         Store              FMUL
                                 FDIV           FDIV                        & load              FDIV

            512-Entry unified           64-Entry data TLB       32-KB dual-ported data              256 KB unified L2
             L2 TLB (4-way)            (4-way associative)     cache (8-way associative)            cache (eight-way)

                        8 MB all core shared and inclusive L3                Uncore arbiter (handles scheduling and
                            cache (16-way associative)                           clock/power state differences)

FIGURE 4.75 The Core i7 pipeline with memory components. The total pipeline depth is 14
stages, with branch mispredictions costing 17 clock cycles. This design can buffer 48 loads and 32 stores. The
six independent units can begin execution of a ready micro-operation each clock cycle.

             and the predecoder must look through a number of bytes before it knows the
             instruction length. Individual x86 instructions are placed into the 18-entry
             instruction queue.
         3. Micro-op decode—Individual x86 instructions are translated into micro-
            operations (micro-ops). Three of the decoders handle x86 instructions that
            translate directly into one micro-op. For x86 instructions that have more
            complex semantics, there is a microcode engine that is used to produce the
            micro-op sequence; it can produce up to four micro-ops every cycle and
            continues until the necessary micro-op sequence has been generated. The
            micro-ops are placed according to the order of the x86 instructions in the
            28-entry micro-op buffer.
         4. The micro-op buffer performs loop stream detection—If there is a small
            sequence of instructions (less than 28 instructions or 256 bytes in length)
            that comprises a loop, the loop stream detector will find the loop and directly
            issue the micro-ops from the buffer, eliminating the need for the instruction
            fetch and instruction decode stages to be activated.
         5. Perform the basic instruction issue—Looking up the register location in the
            register tables, renaming the registers, allocating a reorder buffer entry, and
            fetching any results from the registers or reorder buffer before sending the
            micro-ops to the reservation stations.
         6. The i7 uses a 36-entry centralized reservation station shared by six functional
            units. Up to six micro-ops may be dispatched to the functional units every
            clock cycle.
         7. The individual function units execute micro-ops and then results are sent
            back to any waiting reservation station as well as to the register retirement
            unit, where they will update the register state, once it is known that the
            instruction is no longer speculative. The entry corresponding to the
            instruction in the reorder buffer is marked as complete.
         8. When one or more instructions at the head of the reorder buffer have been
            marked as complete, the pending writes in the register retirement unit are
            executed, and the instructions are removed from the reorder buffer.

      Elaboration: Hardware in the second and fourth steps can combine or fuse operations
      together to reduce the number of operations that must be performed. Macro-op fusion
      in the second step takes x86 instruction combinations, such as compare followed by a
      branch, and fuses them into a single operation. Microfusion in the fourth step combines
      micro-operation pairs such as load/ALU operation and ALU operation/store and issues
      them to a single reservation station (where they can still issue independently), thus
      increasing the usage of the buffer. In a study of the Intel Core architecture, which also
      incorporated microfusion and macrofusion, Bird et al. [2007] discovered that microfusion
      had little impact on performance, while macrofusion appears to have a modest positive
      impact on integer performance and little impact on floating-point performance.

Performance of the Intel Core i7 920
Figure 4.76 shows the CPI of the Intel Core i7 for each of the SPEC2006 benchmarks.
While the ideal CPI is 0.25, the best case achieved is 0.44, the median case is 0.79,
and the worst case is 2.67.
   Although it is difficult to differentiate between pipeline stalls and memory stalls
in a dynamic out-of-order execution pipeline, we can show the effectiveness of
branch prediction and speculation. Figure 4.77 shows the percentage of branches
mispredicted and the percentage of the work (measured by the numbers of micro-
ops dispatched into the pipeline) that does not retire (that is, their results are
annulled) relative to all micro-op dispatches. The min, median, and max of branch
mispredictions are 0%, 2%, and 10%. For wasted work, they are 1%, 18%, and 39%.
   The wasted work in some cases closely matches the branch misprediction rates,
such as for gobmk and astar. In several instances, such as mcf, the wasted work
seems relatively larger than the misprediction rate. This divergence is likely due
to the memory behavior. With very high data cache miss rates, mcf will dispatch
many instructions during an incorrect speculation as long as sufficient reservation
stations are available for the stalled memory references. When a branch among the
many speculated instructions is finally mispredicted, the micro-ops corresponding
to all these instructions will be flushed.

                        3
                                     Stalls, misspeculation
                                                                                                     2.67
                                     Ideal CPI
                    2.5

                                                                                              2.12

                        2
            CPI

                    1.5
                                                                                       1.23

                                                                           1.02 1.06
                        1
                                                                    0.82
                                                      0.74   0.77
                                               0.65
                                   0.59 0.61
                            0.44
                    0.5

                        0
                       h2 m

                        hm f

                       rlb r
                                ch

                      la p2

                                 k

                        go g
                                 k

                                 r
                     om c

                                 p

                                                                                                     cf
                               re

                    pe me

                               ta
                           bm

                           bm

                             gc
                             en

                              tp

                                                                                                 m
                             tu

                          en

                              i
                          64

                          as
                          bz

                         ne
                         an

                          sj
                        nc
                     qu

                   xa
                  lib

FIGURE 4.76 CPI of Intel Core i7 920 running SPEC2006 integer benchmarks.

                                                       Branch misprediction %                      Wasted work %

                40%                                                                                                                                 39%
                                                                                                                    38%

                35%
                                                                                                             32%

                30%
                                                                                                 25%
                25%                                                        24%
                                                                                                                                          22%

                20%
                                                                                                                               15%
                15%
                                                                11%
                                                                                                       10%
                10%                                                                                                9%

                                                                                       7%                                                       6%
                                                      6%               5%                    5%
                                            5%
                 5%
                                       2%        2%         2%                                                             2%        2%
                                1%
                           0%                                                     1%
                 0%
                       m

                                       f

                                                 er

                                                            ch

                                                                      2

                                                                                  k

                                                                                             g

                                                                                                        k

                                                                                                                   r

                                                                                                                          c

                                                                                                                                     p

                                                                                                                                                cf
                                      re

                                                                                                                   ta
                                                                                 bm

                                                                                                       bm

                                                                                                                          gc
                                                                      ip

                                                                                            en

                                                                                                                                     tp

                                                                                                                                                m
                       tu

                                                 m

                                                           en
                                 64

                                                                                                               as
                                                                  bz

                                                                                                                                 ne
                      an

                                                                                        sj
                                            hm

                                                                            nc

                                                                                                  go
                                                      rlb
                                h2

                                                                                                                                om
                  qu

                                                                            la
                                                     pe

                                                                       xa
                lib

                FIGURE 4.77 Percentage of branch mispredictions and wasted work due to unfruitful
                speculation of Intel Core i7 920 running SPEC2006 integer benchmarks.

Understanding   The Intel Core i7 combines a 14-stage pipeline and aggressive multiple issue to
                achieve high performance. By keeping the latencies for back-to-back operations
     Program    low, the impact of data dependences is reduced. What are the most serious potential
 Performance    performance bottlenecks for programs running on this processor? The following
                list includes some possible performance problems, the last three of which can apply
                in some form to any high-performance pipelined processor.
                  ■    The use of x86 instructions that do not map to a few simple micro-operations
                  ■    Branches that are difficult to predict, causing misprediction stalls and restarts
                       when speculation fails
                  ■    Long dependences—typically caused by long-running instructions or the
                       memory hierarchy—that lead to stalls
                  ■    Performance delays arising in accessing memory (see Chapter 5) that cause
                       the processor to stall
                        4.12 Going Faster: Instruction-Level Parallelism and Matrix Multiply                                          363

                  Going Faster: Instruction-Level
 4.12
                  Parallelism and Matrix Multiply
Returning to the DGEMM example from Chapter 3, we can see the impact of
instruction-level parallelism by unrolling the loop so that the multiple-issue, out-
of-order execution processor has more instructions to work with. Figure 4.78 shows
the unrolled version of Figure 3.23, which contains the C intrinsics to produce the
AVX instructions.
   Like the unrolling example in Figure 4.69 above, we are going to unroll the loop
four times. Rather than manually unrolling the loop in C by making four copies of
each of the intrinsics in Figure 3.23, we can rely on the gcc compiler to do the unrolling
at −O3 optimization. (We use the constant UNROLL in the C code to control the
amount of unrolling in case we want to try other values.) We surround each intrinsic
with a simple for loop with four iterations (lines 9, 15, and 20) and replace the scalar
C0 in Figure 3.23 with a four-element array c[] (lines 8, 10, 16, and 21).

           1 //include <x86intrin.h>
           2 //define UNROLL (4)
           3
           4 void dgemm (int n, double* A, double* B, double* C)
           5 {
           6      for ( int i = 0; i < n; i+=UNROLL*4 )
           7          for ( int j = 0; j < n; j++ ) {
           8             __m256d c[4];
           9             for ( int x = 0; x < UNROLL; x++ )
           10               c[x] = _mm256_load_pd(C+i+x*4+j*n);
           11
           12            for( int k = 0; k < n; k++ )
           13            {
           14               __m256d b = _mm256_broadcast_sd(B+k+j*n);
           15               for (int x = 0; x < UNROLL; x++)
           16               c[x] = _mm256_add_pd(c[x],
           17                   _mm256_mul_pd(_mm256_load_pd(A+n*k+x*4+i), b));
           18            }
           19
           20            for ( int x = 0; x < UNROLL; x++ )
           21               _mm256_store_pd(C+i+x*4+j*n, c[x]);
           22            }
           23     }

FIGURE 4.78 Optimized C version of DGEMM using C intrinsics to generate the AVX subword-parallel instructions
for the x86 (Figure 3.23) and loop unrolling to create more opportunities for instruction-level parallelism. Figure 4.79
shows the assembly language produced by the compiler for the inner loop, which unrolls the three for-loop bodies to expose instruction-level
parallelism.

                              Figure 4.79 shows the assembly language output of the unrolled code. As
                           expected, in Figure 4.79 there are four versions of each of the AVX instructions
                           in Figure 3.24, with one exception. We only need one copy of the vbroadcastsd
                           instruction, since we can use the four copies of the B element in register %ymm0
                           repeatedly throughout the loop. Thus, the five AVX instructions in Figure 3.24
                           become 17 in Figure 4.79, and the seven integer instructions appear in both,
                           although the constants and addressing changes to account for the unrolling. Hence,
                           despite unrolling four times, the number of instructions in the body of the loop
                           only doubles: from 12 to 24.

         1    vmovapd (%r11),%ymm4                       // Load 4 elements of C into %ymm4
         2    mov       %rbx,%rax                        // register %rax = %rbx
         3    xor       %ecx,%ecx                        // register %ecx = 0
         4    vmovapd 0x20(%r11),%ymm3                   // Load 4 elements of C into %ymm3
         5    vmovapd 0x40(%r11),%ymm2                   // Load 4 elements of C into %ymm2
         6    vmovapd 0x60(%r11),%ymm1                   // Load 4 elements of C into %ymm1
         7    vbroadcastsd (%rcx,%r9,1),%ymm0                   // Make 4 copies of B element
         8    add       $0x8,%rcx                        // register %rcx = %rcx + 8
         9    vmulpd (%rax),%ymm0,%ymm5                  // Parallel mul %ymm1,4 A
        10    vaddpd %ymm5,%ymm4,%ymm4                   // Parallel add %ymm5, %y mm4
        11    vmulpd 0x20(%rax),%ymm0,%ymm5 // Parallel mul %ymm1,4 A
        12    vaddpd %ymm5,%ymm3,%ymm3                   // Parallel add %ymm5, %ymm3
        13    vmulpd 0x40(%rax),%ymm0,%ymm5 // Parallel mul %ymm1,4 A
        14    vmulpd 0x60(%rax),%ymm0,%ymm0 // Parallel mul %ymm1,4 A
        15    add       %r8,%rax                         // register %rax = %rax + %r8
        16    cmp       %r10,%rcx                        // compare %r8 to %rax
        17    vaddpd %ymm5,%ymm2,%ymm2                   // Parallel add %ymm5, %ymm2
        18    vaddpd %ymm0,%ymm1,%ymm1                   // Parallel add %ymm0, %ymm1
        19    jne       68 <dgemm+0x68>                  // branch if %r8 !=           %rax
        20    add       $0x1,%esi                        // register % esi = % esi + 1
        21    vmovapd %ymm4,(%r11)                       // Store %ymm4 into 4 C elements
        22    vmovapd %ymm3,0x20(%r11)                   // Store %ymm3 into 4 C elements
        23    vmovapd %ymm2,0x40(%r11)                   // Store %ymm2 into 4 C elements
        24    vmovapd %ymm1,0x60(%r11)                   // Store %ymm1 into 4 C elements

FIGURE 4.79 The x86 assembly language for the body of the nested loops generated by compiling the unrolled C code
in Figure 4.78.
                        4.12 Going Faster: Instruction-Level Parallelism and Matrix Multiply                                365

                16.0
                                                                                      14.6

                12.0
       GFLOPS

                 8.0
                                                          6.4

                 4.0

                              1.7

                  –
                        unoptimized                      AVX                      AVX+unroll

FIGURE 4.80 Performance of three versions of DGEMM for 32 × 32 matrices. Subword
parallelism and instruction-level parallelism have led to speedup of almost a factor of 9 over the unoptimized
code in Figure 3.21.

   Figure 4.80 shows the performance increase DGEMM for 32 × 32 matrices
in going from unoptimized to AVX and then to AVX with unrolling. Unrolling
more than doubles performance, going from 6.4 GFLOPS to 14.6 GFLOPS.
Optimizations for subword parallelism and instruction-level parallelism result
in an overall speedup of 8.59 versus the unoptimized DGEMM in Figure 3.21.

Elaboration: As mentioned in the Elaboration in Section 3.8, these results are with
Turbo mode turned off. If we turn it on, like in Chapter 3, we improve all the results by the
temporary increase in the clock rate of 3.3/2.6 = 1.27 to 2.1 GFLOPS for unoptimized
DGEMM, 8.1 GFLOPS with AVX, and 18.6 GFLOPS with unrolling and AVX. As mentioned
in Section 3.8, Turbo mode works particularly well in this case because it is using only
a single core of an eight-core chip.

Elaboration: There are no pipeline stalls despite the reuse of register %ymm5 in lines
9 to 17 of Figure 4.79 because the Intel Core i7 pipeline renames the registers.

Are the following statements true or false?                                                                      Check
                                                                                                                 Yourself
   1. The Intel Core i7 uses a multiple-issue pipeline to directly execute x86
      instructions.
   2. Both the A8 and the Core i7 use dynamic multiple issue.
   3. The Core i7 microarchitecture has many more registers than x86 requires.
   4. The Intel Core i7 uses less than half the pipeline stages of the earlier Intel
      Pentium 4 Prescott (see Figure 4.71).

              ?Advanced Topic: An Introduction to Digital
        4.13 Design Using a Hardware Design Language
               to Describe and Model a Pipeline and
               More Pipelining Illustrations
      Modern digital design is done using hardware description languages and modern
      computer-aided synthesis tools that can create detailed hardware designs from the
      descriptions using both libraries and logic synthesis. Entire books are written on
      such languages and their use in digital design. This section, which appears online,
      gives a brief introduction and shows how a hardware design language, Verilog
      in this case, can be used to describe the processor control both behaviorally and
      in a form suitable for hardware synthesis. It then provides a series of behavioral
      models in Verilog of the five-stage pipeline. The initial model ignores hazards, and
      additions to the model highlight the changes for forwarding, data hazards, and
      branch hazards.
         We then provide about a dozen illustrations using the single-cycle graphical
      pipeline representation for readers who want to see more detail on how pipelines
      work for a few sequences of LEGv8 instructions.

       4.14          Fallacies and Pitfalls

         Fallacy: Pipelining is easy.
         Our books testify to the subtlety of correct pipeline execution. Our advanced
      book had a pipeline bug in its first edition, despite its being reviewed by more than
      100 people and being class-tested at 18 universities. The bug was uncovered only
      when someone tried to build the computer in that book. The fact that the Verilog
      to describe a pipeline like that in the Intel Core i7 will be hundreds of thousands of
      lines is an indication of the complexity. Beware!
         Fallacy: Pipelining ideas can be implemented independent of technology.
         When the number of transistors on-chip and the speed of transistors made a
      five-stage pipeline the best solution, then the delayed branch (see the Elaboration
      on page 295) was a simple solution to control hazards. With longer pipelines,
      superscalar execution, and dynamic branch prediction, it is now redundant. In
      the early 1990s, dynamic pipeline scheduling took too many resources and was
      not required for high performance, but as transistor budgets continued to double
      due to Moore’s Law and logic became much faster than memory, then multiple
      functional units and dynamic pipelining made more sense. Today, concerns about
      power are leading to less aggressive and more efficient designs.
         Pitfall: Failure to consider instruction set design can adversely impact pipelining.
             4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language   366.e1

               An Introduction to Digital Design Using a
  4.13         Hardware Design Language to Describe
               and Model a Pipeline and More Pipelining
               Illustrations

This online section covers hardware description languages and then gives a dozen
examples of pipeline diagrams, starting on page 366.e18.
    As mentioned in Appendix B, Verilog can describe processors for simulation
or with the intention that the Verilog specification be synthesized. To achieve
acceptable synthesis results in size and speed, and a behavioral specification
intended for synthesis must carefully delineate the highly combinational portions
of the design, such as a datapath, from the control. The datapath can then be
synthesized using available libraries. A Verilog specification intended for synthesis
is usually longer and more complex.
    We start with a behavioral model of the five-stage pipeline. To illustrate the
dichotomy between behavioral and synthesizable designs, we then give two Verilog
descriptions of a multiple-cycle-per-instruction MIPS processor: one intended
solely for simulations and one suitable for synthesis. This MIPS architecture is
satisfactory to demonstrate Verilog, but if any reader builds one for LEGv8 and
wants to share it with others, please contact the publisher.

Using Verilog for Behavioral Specification with Simulation
for the Five-Stage Pipeline
Figure e4.13.1 shows a Verilog behavioral description of the pipeline that handles
ALU instructions as well as loads and stores. It does not accommodate branches
(even incorrectly!), which we postpone including until later in the chapter.
   Because Verilog lacks the ability to define registers with named fields such as
structures in C, we use several independent registers for each pipeline register. We
name these registers with a prefix using the same convention; hence, IFIDIR is the
IR portion of the IFID pipeline register.
   This version is a behavioral description not intended for synthesis. Instructions
take the same number of clock cycles as our hardware design, but the control
is done in a simpler fashion by repeatedly decoding fields of the instruction in
each pipe stage. Because of this difference, the instruction register (IR) is needed
throughout the pipeline, and the entire IR is passed from pipe stage to pipe stage.
As you read the Verilog descriptions in this chapter, remember that the actions
in the always block all occur in parallel on every clock cycle. Since there are no
blocking assignments, the order of the events within the always block is arbitrary.
366.e2                          4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

module CPU (clock);
  // Instruction opcodes
   parameter LW = 6’b100011, SW = 6’b101011, BEQ = 6’b000100, no-op = 32’b00000_100000, ALUop = 6’b0;
    input clock;
    reg[31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories
                IFIDIR, IDEXA, IDEXB, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, EXMEMB, // pipeline registers
                EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers
    wire [4:0] IDEXrs, IDEXrt, EXMEMrd, MEMWBrd, MEMWBrt; // Access register fields
    wire [5:0] EXMEMop, MEMWBop, IDEXop; // Access opcodes
wire [31:0] Ain, Bin; // the ALU inputs
// These assignments define fields from the pipeline registers
   assign IDEXrs = IDEXIR[25:21];     // rs field
   assign IDEXrt = IDEXIR[20:16];     // rt field
   assign EXMEMrd = EXMEMIR[15:11]; // rd field
   assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[15:11]; //rd field
   assign MEMWBrt = MEMWBIR[20:16]; //rt field--used for loads
   assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[31:26]; // the opcode
   assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[31:26]; // the opcode
   assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[31:26];     // the opcode
    // Inputs to the ALU come directly from the ID/EX pipeline registers
    assign Ain = IDEXA;
    assign Bin = IDEXB;
    reg [5:0] i; //used to initialize registers
    initial begin
           PC = 0;
        IFIDIR = no-op; IDEXIR = no-op; EXMEMIR = no-op; MEMWBIR = no-op; // put no-ops in pipeline registers
           for (i=0;i<=31;i=i+1) Regs[i] = i; //initialize registers--just so they aren’t cares
    end
    always @ (posedge clock) begin
    // Remember that ALL these actions happen every pipe stage and with the use of <= they happen in parallel!
    // first instruction        in the pipeline is being fetched
              IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC>>2];
              PC <= PC + 4;
          end // Fetch & increment PC
          // second instruction in pipeline is fetching registers
             IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDIR[25:21]]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDIR[20:16]]; // get two registers
            IDEXIR <= IFIDIR;        //pass along IR--can happen anywhere, since this affects next stage only!
          // third instruction is doing address calculation or ALU operation
          if ((IDEXop==LW) |(IDEXop==SW))            // address calculation
               EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA +{{16{IDEXIR[15]}}, IDEXIR[15:0]};
             else if (IDEXop==ALUop) case (IDEXIR[5:0]) //case for the various R-type instructions
                   32: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin;             //add operation
                   default: ; //other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc.
             endcase

FIGURE e4.13.1 A Verilog behavioral model for the MIPS five-stage pipeline, ignoring branch and data hazards. As
in the design earlier in Chapter 4, we use separate instruction and data memories, which would be implemented using separate caches as we
describe in Chapter 5.
             4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language               366.e3

      EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; //pass along the IR & B register
     //Mem stage of pipeline
     if (EXMEMop==ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; //pass along ALU result
         else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2];
         else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2] <=EXMEMB; //store
         MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; //pass along IR
     // the WB stage
     if ((MEMWBop==ALUop) & (MEMWBrd != 0)) // update registers if ALU operation and destination not 0
         Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; // ALU operation
         else if ((EXMEMop == LW)& (MEMWBrt != 0)) // Update registers if load and destination not 0
            Regs[MEMWBrt] <= MEMWBValue;
   end
endmodule

FIGURE e4.13.1 A Verilog behavioral model for the MIPS five-stage pipeline, ignoring branch and data hazards.
(Continued).

Implementing Forwarding in Verilog
To extend the Verilog model further, Figure e4.13.2 shows the addition of forwarding
logic for the case when the source and destination are ALU instructions. Neither
load stalls nor branches are handled; we will add these shortly. The changes from
the earlier Verilog description are highlighted.

Someone has proposed moving the write for a result from an ALU instruction               Check
from the WB to the MEM stage, pointing out that this would reduce the maximum            Yourself
length of forwards from an ALU instruction by one cycle. Which of the following
is accurate reasons not to consider such a change?
  1. It would not actually change the forwarding logic, so it has no advantage.
  2. It is impossible to implement this change under any circumstance since the
     write for the ALU result must stay in the same pipe stage as the write for a
     load result.
  3. Moving the write for ALU instructions would create the possibility of writes
     occurring from two different instructions during the same clock cycle. Either
     an extra write port would be required on the register file or a structural
     hazard would be created.
  4. The result of an ALU instruction is not available in time to do the write
     during MEM.
366.e4                           4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

module CPU (clock);
parameter LW = 6’b100011, SW = 6’b101011, BEQ = 6’b000100, no-op = 32’b00000_100000, ALUop = 6’b0;
input clock;
   reg[31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories
             IFIDIR, IDEXA, IDEXB, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, EXMEMB, // pipeline registers
             EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers
   wire [4:0] IDEXrs, IDEXrt, EXMEMrd, MEMWBrd, MEMWBrt; //hold register fields
   wire [5:0] EXMEMop, MEMWBop, IDEXop; Hold opcodes
   wire [31:0] Ain, Bin;
// declare the bypass signals
   wire bypassAfromMEM, bypassAfromALUinWB,bypassBfromMEM, bypassBfromALUinWB,
        bypassAfromLWinWB, bypassBfromLWinWB;
    assign IDEXrs = IDEXIR[25:21];   assign IDEXrt = IDEXIR[15:11];   assign EXMEMrd = EXMEMIR[15:11];
    assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[20:16]; assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[31:26];
    assign MEMWBrt = MEMWBIR[25:20];
    assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[31:26]; assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[31:26];
    // The bypass to input A from the MEM stage for an ALU operation
    assign bypassAfromMEM = (IDEXrs == EXMEMrd) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (EXMEMop==ALUop); // yes, bypass
    // The bypass to input B from the MEM stage for an ALU operation
    assign bypassBfromMEM = (IDEXrt == EXMEMrd)&(IDEXrt!=0) & (EXMEMop==ALUop); // yes, bypass
    // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an ALU operation
    assign bypassAfromALUinWB =( IDEXrs == MEMWBrd) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (MEMWBop==ALUop);
    // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an ALU operation
    assign bypassBfromALUinWB = (IDEXrt == MEMWBrd) & (IDEXrt!=0) & (MEMWBop==ALUop); /
    // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an LW operation
    assign bypassAfromLWinWB =( IDEXrs == MEMWBIR[20:16]) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (MEMWBop==LW);
    // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an LW operation
    assign bypassBfromLWinWB = (IDEXrt == MEMWBIR[20:16]) & (IDEXrt!=0) & (MEMWBop==LW);
    // The A input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there,
    // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register
    assign Ain = bypassAfromMEM? EXMEMALUOut :
                 (bypassAfromALUinWB | bypassAfromLWinWB)? MEMWBValue : IDEXA;
    // The B input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there,
    // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register
    assign Bin = bypassBfromMEM? EXMEMALUOut :
                 (bypassBfromALUinWB | bypassBfromLWinWB)? MEMWBValue: IDEXB;
    reg [5:0] i; //used to initialize registers
    initial begin
        PC = 0;
       IFIDIR = no-op; IDEXIR = no-op; EXMEMIR = no-op; MEMWBIR = no-op; // put no-ops in pipeline registers
        for (i = 0;i<=31;i = i+1) Regs[i] = i; //initialize registers--just so they aren’t cares
    end
    always @ (posedge clock) begin
        // first instruction in the pipeline is being fetched
            IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC>>2];
            PC <= PC + 4;
        end // Fetch & increment PC

FIGURE e4.13.2 A behavioral definition of the five-stage MIPS pipeline with bypassing to ALU operations and address
calculations. The code added to Figure e4.13.1 to handle bypassing is highlighted. Because these bypasses only require changing where the ALU
inputs come from, the only changes required are in the combinational logic responsible for selecting the ALU inputs. (continues on next page)
              4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                    366.e5

      // second instruction is in register fetch
          IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDIR[25:21]]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDIR[20:16]]; // get two registers
          IDEXIR <= IFIDIR;     //pass along IR--can happen anywhere, since this affects next stage only!
      // third instruction is doing address calculation or ALU operation
      if ((IDEXop==LW) |(IDEXop==SW))       // address calculation & copy B
EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA +{{16{IDEXIR[15]}}, IDEXIR[15:0]};
else if (IDEXop==ALUop) case (IDEXIR[5:0]) //case for the various R-type instructions
           32: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin; //add operation
           default: ; //other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc.
          endcase
      EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; //pass along the IR & B register
      //Mem stage of pipeline
       if (EXMEMop==ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; //pass along ALU result
          else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2];
          else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2] <=EXMEMB; //store
       MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; //pass along IR
      // the WB stage
      if ((MEMWBop==ALUop) & (MEMWBrd != 0)) Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; // ALU operation
      else if ((EXMEMop == LW)& (MEMWBrt != 0)) Regs[MEMWBrt] <= MEMWBValue;
   end
endmodule

FIGURE e4.13.2 A behavioral definition of the five-stage MIPS pipeline with bypassing to ALU operations and address
calculations. (Continued)

The Behavioral Verilog with Stall Detection
   If we ignore branches, stalls for data hazards in the MIPS pipeline are confined
to one simple case: loads whose results are currently in the WB clock stage. Thus,
extending the Verilog to handle a load with a destination that is either an ALU
instruction or an effective address calculation is reasonably straightforward, and
Figure e4.13.3 shows the few additions needed.

Someone has asked about the possibility of data hazards occurring through                 Check
memory, contrary to through a register. Which of the following statements about           Yourself
such hazards is true?
   1. Since memory accesses only occur in the MEM stage, all memory operations
      are done in the same order as instruction execution, making such hazards
      impossible in this pipeline.
   2. Such hazards are possible in this pipeline; we just have not discussed them yet.
   3. No pipeline can ever have a hazard involving memory, since it is the
      programmer’s job to keep the order of memory references accurate.
   4. Memory hazards may be possible in some pipelines, but they cannot occur
      in this particular pipeline.
   5. Although the pipeline control would be obligated to maintain ordering
      among memory references to avoid hazards, it is impossible to design a
      pipeline where the references could be out of order.
366.e6                      4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

module CPU (clock);
parameter LW = 6’b100011, SW = 6’b101011, BEQ = 6’b000100, no-op = 32’b00000_100000, ALUop = 6’b0;
input clock;
   reg[31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories
             IFIDIR, IDEXA, IDEXB, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, EXMEMB, // pipeline registers
             EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers
   wire [4:0] IDEXrs, IDEXrt, EXMEMrd, MEMWBrd, MEMWBrt; //hold register fields
   wire [5:0] EXMEMop, MEMWBop, IDEXop; Hold opcodes
   wire [31:0] Ain, Bin;
// declare the bypass signals
   wire stall, bypassAfromMEM, bypassAfromALUinWB,bypassBfromMEM, bypassBfromALUinWB,
        bypassAfromLWinWB, bypassBfromLWinWB;
   assign IDEXrs = IDEXIR[25:21];   assign IDEXrt = IDEXIR[15:11];   assign EXMEMrd = EXMEMIR[15:11];
   assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[20:16]; assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[31:26];
      assign MEMWBrt = MEMWBIR[25:20];
   assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[31:26]; assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[31:26];
   // The bypass to input A from the MEM stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassAfromMEM = (IDEXrs == EXMEMrd) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (EXMEMop==ALUop); // yes, bypass
   // The bypass to input B from the MEM stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassBfromMEM = (IDEXrt== EXMEMrd)&(IDEXrt!=0) & (EXMEMop==ALUop); // yes, bypass
   // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassAfromALUinWB =( IDEXrs == MEMWBrd) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (MEMWBop==ALUop);
   // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassBfromALUinWB = (IDEXrt==MEMWBrd) & (IDEXrt!=0) & (MEMWBop==ALUop); /
   // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an LW operation
   assign bypassAfromLWinWB =( IDEXrs ==MEMWBIR[20:16]) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (MEMWBop==LW);
   // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an LW operation
   assign bypassBfromLWinWB = (IDEXrt==MEMWBIR[20:16]) & (IDEXrt!=0) & (MEMWBop==LW);
   // The A input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there,
   // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register
   assign Ain = bypassAfromMEM? EXMEMALUOut :
                (bypassAfromALUinWB | bypassAfromLWinWB)? MEMWBValue : IDEXA;
   // The B input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there,
   // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register
   assign Bin = bypassBfromMEM? EXMEMALUOut :
                (bypassBfromALUinWB | bypassBfromLWinWB)? MEMWBValue: IDEXB;
   // The signal for detecting a stall based on the use of a result from LW
   assign stall = (MEMWBIR[31:26]==LW) && // source instruction is a load
        ((((IDEXop==LW)|(IDEXop==SW)) && (IDEXrs==MEMWBrd)) | // stall for address calc
   ((IDEXop==ALUop) && ((IDEXrs==MEMWBrd)|(IDEXrt==MEMWBrd)))); // ALU use
   reg [5:0] i; //used to initialize registers
   initial begin
     PC = 0;
    IFIDIR = no-op; IDEXIR = no-op; EXMEMIR = no-op; MEMWBIR = no-op; // put no-ops in pipeline registers
     for (i = 0;i<=31;i = i+1) Regs[i] = i; //initialize registers--just so they aren’t cares
   end
   always @ (posedge clock) begin
      if (~stall) begin // the first three pipeline stages stall if there is a load hazard

FIGURE e4.13.3 A behavioral definition of the five-stage MIPS pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an
ALU instruction or effective address calculation. The changes from Figure e4.13.2 are highlighted. (continues on next page)
              4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                      366.e7

       // first instruction in the pipeline is being fetched
            IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC>>2];
            PC <= PC + 4;
           IDEXIR <= IFIDIR;     //pass along IR--can happen anywhere, since this affects next stage only!
       // second instruction is in register fetch
        IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDIR[25:21]]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDIR[20:16]]; // get two registers
       // third instruction is doing address calculation or ALU operation
           if ((IDEXop==LW) |(IDEXop==SW)) // address calculation & copy B
                  EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA +{{16{IDEXIR[15]}}, IDEXIR[15:0]};
          else if (IDEXop==ALUop) case (IDEXIR[5:0]) //case for the various R-type instructions
               32: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin; //add operation
               default: ; //other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc.
             endcase
        EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; //pass along the IR & B register
      end
    else EXMEMIR <= no-op; /Freeze first three stages of pipeline; inject a nop into the EX output
       //Mem stage of pipeline
        if (EXMEMop==ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; //pass along ALU result
           else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2];
             else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2] <=EXMEMB; //store
        MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; //pass along IR
       // the WB stage
       if ((MEMWBop==ALUop) & (MEMWBrd != 0)) Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; // ALU operation
       else if ((EXMEMop == LW)& (MEMWBrt != 0)) Regs[MEMWBrt] <= MEMWBValue;
   end
endmodule

FIGURE e4.13.3 A behavioral definition of the five-stage MIPS pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an
ALU instruction or effective address calculation. (Continued)

Implementing the Branch Hazard Logic in Verilog
We can extend our Verilog behavioral model to implement the control for branches.
We add the code to model branch equal using a “predict not taken” strategy.
The Verilog code is shown in Figure e4.13.4. It implements the branch hazard by
detecting a taken branch in ID and using that signal to squash the instruction in
IF (by setting the IR to 0, which is an effective no-op in MIPS-32); in addition, the
PC is assigned to the branch target. Note that to prevent an unexpected latch, it is
important that the PC is clearly assigned on every path through the always block;
hence, we assign the PC in a single if statement. Lastly, note that although Figure
e4.13.4 incorporates the basic logic for branches and control hazards, supporting
branches requires additional bypassing and data hazard detection, which we have
not included.
366.e8                       4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

module CPU (clock);
parameter LW = 6’b100011, SW = 6’b101011, BEQ = 6’b000100, no-op = 32’b0000000_0000000_0000000_0000000, ALUop = 6’b0;
input clock;
   reg[31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], IMemory[0:1023], DMemory[0:1023], // separate memories
              IFIDIR, IDEXA, IDEXB, IDEXIR, EXMEMIR, EXMEMB, // pipeline registers
              EXMEMALUOut, MEMWBValue, MEMWBIR; // pipeline registers
   wire [4:0] IDEXrs, IDEXrt, EXMEMrd, MEMWBrd; //hold register fields
   wire [5:0] EXMEMop, MEMWBop, IDEXop; Hold opcodes
   wire [31:0] Ain, Bin;
   // declare the bypass signals
   wire takebranch, stall, bypassAfromMEM, bypassAfromALUinWB,bypassBfromMEM, bypassBfromALUinWB,
       bypassAfromLWinWB, bypassBfromLWinWB;
   assign IDEXrs = IDEXIR[25:21]; assign IDEXrt = IDEXIR[15:11]; assign EXMEMrd = EXMEMIR[15:11];
   assign MEMWBrd = MEMWBIR[20:16]; assign EXMEMop = EXMEMIR[31:26];
   assign MEMWBop = MEMWBIR[31:26]; assign IDEXop = IDEXIR[31:26];
   // The bypass to input A from the MEM stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassAfromMEM = (IDEXrs == EXMEMrd) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (EXMEMop==ALUop); // yes, bypass
   // The bypass to input B from the MEM stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassBfromMEM = (IDEXrt == EXMEMrd)&(IDEXrt!=0) & (EXMEMop==ALUop); // yes, bypass
   // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassAfromALUinWB =( IDEXrs == MEMWBrd) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (MEMWBop==ALUop);
   // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an ALU operation
   assign bypassBfromALUinWB = (IDEXrt == MEMWBrd) & (IDEXrt!=0) & (MEMWBop==ALUop); /
   // The bypass to input A from the WB stage for an LW operation
   assign bypassAfromLWinWB =( IDEXrs == MEMWBIR[20:16]) & (IDEXrs!=0) & (MEMWBop==LW);
   // The bypass to input B from the WB stage for an LW operation
   assign bypassBfromLWinWB = (IDEXrt == MEMWBIR[20:16]) & (IDEXrt!=0) & (MEMWBop==LW);
   // The A input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there,
   // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register
   assign Ain = bypassAfromMEM? EXMEMALUOut :
                 (bypassAfromALUinWB | bypassAfromLWinWB)? MEMWBValue : IDEXA;
   // The B input to the ALU is bypassed from MEM if there is a bypass there,
   // Otherwise from WB if there is a bypass there, and otherwise comes from the IDEX register
   assign Bin = bypassBfromMEM? EXMEMALUOut :
                 (bypassBfromALUinWB | bypassBfromLWinWB)? MEMWBValue: IDEXB;
   // The signal for detecting a stall based on the use of a result from LW
   assign stall = (MEMWBIR[31:26]==LW) && // source instruction is a load
          ((((IDEXop==LW)|(IDEXop==SW)) && (IDEXrs==MEMWBrd)) | // stall for address calc
((IDEXop==ALUop) && ((IDEXrs==MEMWBrd)|(IDEXrt==MEMWBrd)))); // ALU use

FIGURE e4.13.4 A behavioral definition of the five-stage MIPS pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is an
ALU instruction or effective address calculation. The changes from Figure e4.13.2 are highlighted. (continues on next page)
             4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                     366.e9

// Signal for a taken branch: instruction is BEQ and registers are equal
assign takebranch = (IFIDIR[31:26]==BEQ) && (Regs[IFIDIR[25:21]]== Regs[IFIDIR[20:16]]);
   reg [5:0] i; //used to initialize registers
   initial begin
       PC = 0;
     IFIDIR = no-op; IDEXIR = no-op; EXMEMIR = no-op; MEMWBIR = no-op; // put no-ops in pipeline registers
      for (i = 0;i<=31;i = i+1) Regs[i] = i; //initialize registers--just so they aren’t don’t cares
   end
   always @ (posedge clock) begin
   if (~stall) begin // the first three pipeline stages stall if there is a load hazard
      if (~takebranch) begin      // first instruction in the pipeline is being fetched normally
          IFIDIR <= IMemory[PC>>2];
          PC <= PC + 4;
      end else begin // a taken branch is in ID; instruction in IF is wrong; insert a no-op and reset the PC
          IFDIR <= no-op;
          PC <= PC + 4 + ({{16{IFIDIR[15]}}, IFIDIR[15:0]}<<2);
          end
      // second instruction is in register fetch
       IDEXA <= Regs[IFIDIR[25:21]]; IDEXB <= Regs[IFIDIR[20:16]]; // get two registers
      // third instruction is doing address calculation or ALU operation
         IDEXIR <= IFIDIR; //pass along IR
if ((IDEXop==LW) |(IDEXop==SW)) // address calculation & copy B
           EXMEMALUOut <= IDEXA +{{16{IDEXIR[15]}}, IDEXIR[15:0]};
       else if (IDEXop==ALUop) case (IDEXIR[5:0]) //case for the various R-type instructions
             32: EXMEMALUOut <= Ain + Bin; //add operation
             default: ; //other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc.
            endcase
       EXMEMIR <= IDEXIR; EXMEMB <= IDEXB; //pass along the IR & B register
     end
   else EXMEMIR <= no-op; /Freeze first three stages of pipeline; inject a nop into the EX output
      //Mem stage of pipeline
       if (EXMEMop==ALUop) MEMWBValue <= EXMEMALUOut; //pass along ALU result
          else if (EXMEMop == LW) MEMWBValue <= DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2];
            else if (EXMEMop == SW) DMemory[EXMEMALUOut>>2] <=EXMEMB; //store
      // the WB stage
MEMWBIR <= EXMEMIR; //pass along IR
      if ((MEMWBop==ALUop) & (MEMWBrd != 0)) Regs[MEMWBrd] <= MEMWBValue; // ALU operation
      else if ((EXMEMop == LW)& (MEMWBIR[20:16] != 0)) Regs[MEMWBIR[20:16]] <= MEMWBValue;
   end
endmodule

FIGURE e4.13.4 A behavioral definition of the five-stage MIPS pipeline with stalls for loads when the destination is
an ALU instruction or effective address calculation. (Continued)
366.e10   4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

          Using Verilog for Behavioral Specification with Synthesis
          To demonstrate the contrasting types of Verilog, we show two descriptions of a
          different, nonpipelined implementation style of MIPS that uses multiple clock
          cycles per instruction. (Since some instructors make a synthesizable description of
          the MIPS pipeline project for a class, we chose not to include it here. It would also
          be long.)
              Figure e4.13.5 gives a behavioral specification of a multicycle implementation
          of the MIPS processor. Because of the use of behavioral operations, it would be
          difficult to synthesize a separate datapath and control unit with any reasonable
          efficiency. This version demonstrates another approach to the control by using a
          Mealy finite-state machine (see discussion in Section A.10 of Appendix A). The
          use of a Mealy machine, which allows the output to depend both on inputs and the
          current state, allows us to decrease the total number of states.
              Since a version of the MIPS design intended for synthesis is considerably more
          complex, we have relied on a number of Verilog modules that were specified in
          Appendix A, including the following:
             ■   The 4-to-1 multiplexor shown in Figure A.4.2, and the 3-to-1 multiplexor
                 that can be trivially derived based on the 4-to-1 multiplexor.
             ■   The MIPS ALU shown in Figure A.5.15.
             ■   The MIPS ALU control defined in Figure A.5.16.
             ■   The MIPS register file defined in Figure A.8.11.
             Now, let’s look at a Verilog version of the MIPS processor intended for synthesis.
          Figure e4.13.6 shows the structural version of the MIPS datapath. Figure e4.13.7
          uses the datapath module to specify the MIPS CPU. This version also demonstrates
          another approach to implementing the control unit, as well as some optimizations
          that rely on relationships between various control signals. Observe that the state
          machine specification only provides the sequencing actions.
             The setting of the control lines is done with a series of assign statements that
          depend on the state as well as the opcode field of the instruction register. If one
          were to fold the setting of the control into the state specification, this would look
          like a Mealy-style finite-state control unit. Because the setting of the control lines
          is specified using assign statements outside of the always block, most logic
          synthesis systems will generate a small implementation of a finite-state machine
          that determines the setting of the state register and then uses external logic to
          derive the control inputs to the datapath.
             In writing this version of the control, we have also taken advantage of a number
          of insights about the relationship between various control signals as well as
          situations where we don’t care about the control signal value; some examples of
          these are given in the following elaboration.
               4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                               366.e11

module CPU (clock);
parameter LW = 6’b100011, SW = 6’b101011, BEQ=6’b000100, J=6’d2;
input clock; //the clock is an external input
// The architecturally visible registers and scratch registers for implementation
reg [31:0] PC, Regs[0:31], Memory [0:1023], IR, ALUOut, MDR, A, B;
reg [2:0] state; // processor state
wire [5:0] opcode; //use to get opcode easily
wire [31:0] SignExtend,PCOffset; //used to get sign-extended offset field
assign opcode = IR[31:26]; //opcode is upper 6 bits
assign SignExtend = {{16{IR[15]}},IR[15:0]}; //sign extension of lower 16 bits of instruction
assign PCOffset = SignExtend << 2; //PC offset is shifted
// set the PC to 0 and start the control in state 0
initial begin PC = 0; state = 1; end

//The state machine--triggered on a rising clock
always @(posedge clock) begin
     Regs[0] = 0; //make R0 0 //shortcut way to make sure R0 is always 0
     case (state) //action depends on the state
       1: begin // first step: fetch the instruction, increment PC, go to next state
           IR <= Memory[PC>>2];
           PC <= PC + 4;
           state = 2; //next state
       end

       2: begin // second step: Instruction decode, register fetch, also compute branch address
           A <= Regs[IR[25:21]];
           B <= Regs[IR[20:16]];
           state = 3;
           ALUOut <= PC + PCOffset; // compute PC-relative branch target
       end

       3: begin // third step: Load-store execution, ALU execution, Branch completion
              state = 4; // default next state
              if ((opcode==LW) |(opcode==SW)) ALUOut <= A + SignExtend; //compute effective address
              else if (opcode==6’b0) case (IR[5:0]) //case for the various R-type instructions
                32: ALUOut = A + B; //add operation
                default: ALUOut = A; //other R-type operations: subtract, SLT, etc.
              endcase

FIGURE e4.13.5 A behavioral specification of the multicycle MIPS design. This has the same cycle behavior as the
multicycle design, but is purely for simulation and specification. It cannot be used for synthesis. (continues on next page)
366.e12                  4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

                 else if (opcode == BEQ) begin
                            if (A==B) PC <= ALUOut; // branch taken--update PC
                            state = 1;
                  end
                  else if (opocde=J) begin
                       PC = {PC[31:28], IR[25:0],2’b00}; // the branch target PC
                       state = 1;
                  end //Jumps
                          else ; // other opcodes or exception for undefined instruction would go here
          end

          4: begin
              if (opcode==6’b0) begin //ALU Operation
                    Regs[IR[15:11]] <= ALUOut; // write the result
                    state = 1;
              end //R-type finishes
                 else if (opcode == LW) begin // load instruction
                      MDR <= Memory[ALUOut>>2]; // read the memory
                      state = 5; // next state
                  end
                         else if (opcode == LW) begin
                             Memory[ALUOut>>2] <= B; // write the memory
                             state = 1; // return to state 1
                         end //store finishes
                               else ; // other instructions go here
                end

          5: begin // LW is the only instruction still in execution
                Regs[IR[20:16]] = MDR; // write the MDR to the register
                state = 1;
             end //complete an LW instruction
          endcase
     end
     endmodule

     FIGURE e4.13.5 A behavioral specification of the multicycle MIPS design. (Continued)
                  4.13    An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                                              366.e13

   module Datapath (ALUOp, RegDst, MemtoReg, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite, IRWrite,
   PCWrite,   PCWriteCond, ALUSrcA, ALUSrcB, PCSource, opcode, clock); // the control inputs + clock
   input [1:0] ALUOp, ALUSrcB, PCSource; // 2-bit control signals
   input RegDst, MemtoReg, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite, IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond,
   ALUSrcA,    clock; // 1-bit control signals
   output [5:0] opcode ;// opcode is needed as an output by control
   reg [31:0] PC, Memory [0:1023], MDR,IR, ALUOut; // CPU state + some temporaries
   wire [31:0] A,B,SignExtendOffset, PCOffset, ALUResultOut, PCValue, JumpAddr, Writedata, ALUAin,
       ALUBin,MemOut; / these are signals derived from registers
   wire [3:0] ALUCtl; //. the ALU control lines
   wire Zero; the Zero out signal from the ALU
   wire[4:0] Writereg;// the signal used to communicate the destination register
    initial PC = 0; //start the PC at 0

   //Combinational signals used in the datapath

   // Read using word address with either ALUOut or PC as the address source
   assign MemOut = MemRead ? Memory[(IorD ? ALUOut : PC)>>2]:0;
   assign opcode = IR[31:26];// opcode shortcut
   // Get the write register address from one of two fields depending on RegDst
   assign Writereg = RegDst ? IR[15:11]: IR[20:16];
   // Get the write register data either from the ALUOut or from the MDR
   assign Writedata = MemtoReg ? MDR : ALUOut;
   // Sign-extend the lower half of the IR from load/store/branch offsets
   assign SignExtendOffset = {{16{IR[15]}},IR[15:0]}; //sign-extend lower 16 bits;
   // The branch offset is also shifted to make it a word offset
   assign PCOffset = SignExtendOffset << 2;
   // The A input to the ALU is either the rs register or the PC
   assign ALUAin = ALUSrcA ? A : PC; //ALU input is PC or A
   // Compose the Jump address
   assign JumpAddr = {PC[31:28], IR[25:0],2’b00}; //The jump address

FIGURE e4.13.6 A Verilog version of the multicycle MIPS datapath that is appropriate for synthesis. This datapath relies
on several units from Appendix A. Initial statements do not synthesize, and a version used for synthesis would have to incorporate a reset signal
that had this effect. Also note that resetting R0 to 0 on every clock is not the best way to ensure that R0 stays at 0; instead, modifying the register
file module to produce 0 whenever R0 is read and to ignore writes to R0 would be a more efficient solution. (continues on next page)
366.e14                    4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

  // Creates an instance of the ALU control unit (see the module defined in Figure B.5.16

      // Input ALUOp is control-unit set and used to describe the instruction class as in Chapter 4
      // Input IR[5:0] is the function code field for an ALU instruction
      // Output ALUCtl are the actual ALU control bits as in Chapter 4
  ALUControl alucontroller (ALUOp,IR[5:0],ALUCtl); //ALU control unit

  // Creates a 3-to-1 multiplexor used to select the source of the next PC

      // Inputs are ALUResultOut (the incremented PC) , ALUOut (the branch address), the jump target address
      // PCSource is the selector input and PCValue is the multiplexor output
  Mult3to1 PCdatasrc (ALUResultOut,ALUOut,JumpAddr, PCSource , PCValue);
   // Creates a 4-to-1 multiplexor used to select the B input of the ALU

      // Inputs are register B,constant 4, sign-extended lower half of IR, sign-extended lower half of IR << 2
      // ALUSrcB is the selector input
      // ALUBin is the multiplexor output
  Mult4to1 ALUBinput (B,32’d4,SignExtendOffset,PCOffset,ALUSrcB,ALUBin);

   // Creates a MIPS ALU

      // Inputs are ALUCtl (the ALU control), ALU value inputs (ALUAin, ALUBin)
      // Outputs are ALUResultOut (the 32-bit output) and Zero (zero detection output)
  MIPSALU ALU (ALUCtl, ALUAin, ALUBin, ALUResultOut,Zero); //the ALU

  // Creates a MIPS register file

      // Inputs are
      // the rs and rt fields of the IR used to specify which registers to read,
      // Writereg (the write register number), Writedata (the data to be written), RegWrite (indicates a
      write), the clock
      // Outputs are A and B, the registers read
      registerfile regs (IR[25:21],IR[20:16],Writereg,Writedata,RegWrite,A,B,clock); //Register file

  // The clock-triggered actions of the datapath

  always @(posedge clock) begin      if (MemWrite) Memory[ALUOut>>2] <= B; // Write memory--must be a store
      ALUOut <= ALUResultOut; //Save the ALU result for use on a later clock cycle
      if (IRWrite) IR <= MemOut; // Write the IR if an instruction fetch
      MDR <= MemOut; // Always save the memory read value
      // The PC is written both conditionally (controlled by PCWrite) and unconditionally
         if (PCWrite || (PCWriteCond & Zero)) PC <=PCValue;
  end
  endmodule

FIGURE e4.13.6 A Verilog version of the multicycle MIPS datapath that is appropriate for synthesis.
             4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language             366.e15

  module CPU (clock);
      parameter LW = 6’b100011, SW = 6’b101011, BEQ = 6’b000100, J = 6’d2; //constants
      input clock; reg [2:0] state;
      wire [1:0] ALUOp, ALUSrcB, PCSource; wire [5:0] opcode;
      wire RegDst, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite, IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond,
           ALUSrcA, MemoryOp, IRWwrite, Mem2Reg;

  // Create an instance of the MIPS datapath, the inputs are the control signals; opcode is only output

  Datapath MIPSDP (ALUOp,RegDst,Mem2Reg, MemRead, MemWrite, IorD, RegWrite,
     IRWrite, PCWrite, PCWriteCond, ALUSrcA, ALUSrcB, PCSource, opcode, clock);
    initial begin state = 1; end // start the state machine in state 1
  // These are the definitions of the control signals

  assign IRWrite = (state==1);
  assign Mem2Reg = ~ RegDst;
  assign MemoryOp = (opcode==LW)|(opcode==SW); // a memory operation
  assign ALUOp = ((state==1)|(state==2)|((state==3)&MemoryOp)) ? 2’b00 : // add
          ((state==3)&(opcode==BEQ)) ? 2’b01 : 2’b10; // subtract or use function code
      assign RegDst = ((state==4)&(opcode==0)) ? 1 : 0;
      assign MemRead = (state==1) | ((state==4)&(opcode==LW));
      assign MemWrite = (state==4)&(opcode==SW);
      assign IorD = (state==1) ? 0 : (state==4) ? 1 : X;
      assign RegWrite = (state==5) | ((state==4) &(opcode==0));
      assign PCWrite = (state==1) | ((state==3)&(opcode==J));
      assign PCWriteCond = (state==3)&(opcode==BEQ);
      assign ALUSrcA = ((state==1)|(state==2)) ? 0 :1;
      assign ALUSrcB = ((state==1) | ((state==3)&(opcode==BEQ))) ? 2’b01 : (state==2) ? 2’b11 :
             ((state==3)&MemoryOp) ? 2’b10 : 2’b00; // memory operation or other
      assign PCSource = (state==1) ? 2’b00 : ((opcode==BEQ) ? 2’b01 : 2’b10);
  // Here is the state machine, which only has to sequence states

      always @(posedge clock) begin // all state updates on a positive clock edge
         case (state)
         1: state = 2;   //unconditional next state
         2: state = 3;   //unconditional next state
         3: // third step: jumps and branches complete
            state = ((opcode==BEQ) | (opcode==J)) ? 1 : 4;// branch or jump go back else next state
         4: state = (opcode==LW) ? 5 : 1; //R-type and SW finish
         5: state = 1; // go back
          endcase
  end
     endmodule

FIGURE e4.13.7 The MIPS CPU using the datapath from Figure e4.13.6.
366.e16   4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

          Elaboration When specifying control, designers often take advantage of knowledge
          of the control so as to simplify or shorten the control specification. Here are a few
          examples from the specification in Figures e4.13.6 and e4.13.7.

             1. MemtoReg is set only in two cases, and then it is always the inverse of
                Reg2Loc, so we just use the inverse of Reg2Loc.
             2. IRWrite is set only in state 1.
             3. The ALU does not operate in every state and, when unused, can safely do
                anything.
             4. Reg2Loc is 1 in only one case and can elsewhere be set to 0. In practice, it
                might be better to set it explicitly when needed and otherwise set it to X,
                as we do for IorD. First, it allows further logic optimization possibilities
                through the exploitation of don’t-care terms (see Appendix A for further
                discussion and examples). Second, it is a more precise specification, and
                this allows the simulation to more closely model the hardware, possibly
                uncovering additional errors in the specification.

          More Illustrations of Instruction Execution on the
          Hardware
          To reduce the cost of this book, starting with the third edition, we moved sections
          and figures that were used by a minority of instructors online. This subsection
          recaptures those figures for readers who would like more supplemental material
          to understand pipelining better. These are all single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams,
          which take many figures to illustrate the execution of a sequence of instructions.
             The three examples are respectively for code with no hazards, an example of
          forwarding on the pipelined implementation, and an example of bypassing on the
          pipelined implementation.

          No Hazard Illustrations
          On page 308, we gave the example code sequence

                LDUR     X10, [X1,#40]
                SUB      X11, X2, X3
                ADD      X12, X3, X4
                LDUR     X13, [X1,#48]
                ADD      X14, X5, X6

             Figures e4.42 and e4.43 showed the multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams for
          this two-instruction sequence executing across six clock cycles. Figures e4.13.8
          through e4.13.10 show the corresponding single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams for
          these two instructions. Note that the order of the instructions differs between these
          two types of diagrams: the newest instruction is at the bottom and to the right of the
          multiple-clock-cycle pipeline diagram, and it is on the left in the single-clock-cycle
          pipeline diagram.
                  4.13      An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                                                                 366.e17

              LDUR X10, [X1, 40]
                  Instruction fetch

                              0
                              M
                              u
                              x
                              1

                                       IF/ID                                           ID/EX                           EX/MEM                     MEM/WB

                            Add
                                                                                                                Add
                   4                                                                                    Add
                                                                                                              result
                                                                                           Shift
                                                                                           left 2
                                                            Read
                                           Instruction

             PC     Address                                 register 1       Read
                                                            Read            data 1
                                                                                                             Zero
                        Instruction                         register 2
                                                                             Read                   0    ALU ALU
                          memory                            Write                                                               Address   Read             1
                                                                            data 2                  M       result
                                                            register                                u                                      data            M
                                                                                                                                      Data                 u
                                                            Write                                   x                                memory                x
                                                                         Registers
                                                            data                                    1                                                      0
                                                                                                                                Write
                                                                                                                                data
                                                             32                   64
                                                                        Sign-
                                                                       extend

                       Clock 1

                  SUB X11, X2, X3                        LDUR X10, [X1, 40]
                  Instruction fetch                      Instruction decode

                              0
                              M
                              u
                              x
                              1

                                       IF/ID                                           ID/EX                           EX/MEM                     MEM/WB

                              Add
                                                                                                                Add
                    4                                                                                   Add
                                                                                                              result
                                                                                           Shift
                                                                                           left 2
                                                          Read
                                           Instruction

                                                          register 1
             PC     Address                                                   Read
                                                          Read               data 1
                                                          register 2                                         Zero
                         Instruction                                                                     ALU ALU
                                                                              Read                  0
                           memory                         Write                                                                 Address   Read             1
                                                                             data 2                 M       result
                                                          register                                                                         data            M
                                                                                                    u                                 Data                 u
                                                                                                    x                                memory                x
                                                          Write                                     1
                                                          data           Registers                                              Write                      0
                                                                                                                                data
                                                                  32              64
                                                                          Sign-
                                                                         extend

                       Clock 2

FIGURE e4.13.8 Single-cycle pipeline diagrams for clock cycles 1 (top diagram) and 2 (bottom diagram). This style of
pipeline representation is a snapshot of every instruction executing during one clock cycle. Our example has but two instructions, so at most
two stages are identified in each clock cycle; normally, all five stages are occupied. The highlighted portions of the datapath are active in that
clock cycle. The load is fetched in clock cycle 1 and decoded in clock cycle 2, with the subtract fetched in the second clock cycle. To make the
figures easier to understand, the other pipeline stages are empty, but normally there is an instruction in every pipeline stage.
366.e18                              4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

                                                        SUB X11, X2, X3                   LDUR X10, [X1, 40]
                                                        Instruction decode                          Execution
                             0
                             M
                             u
                             x
                             1

                                      IF/ID                                            ID/EX                           EX/MEM                     MEM/WB

                           Add
                                                                                                                Add
                  4                                                                                     Add
                                                                                                              result
                                                                                           Shift
                                                                                           left 2
                                                            Read
                                          Instruction

             PC    Address                                  register 1       Read
                                                            Read            data 1
                                                                                                             Zero
                       Instruction                          register 2
                                                                             Read                   0    ALU ALU
                         memory                             Write                                                               Address   Read             1
                                                                            data 2                  M       result
                                                            register                                u                                      data            M
                                                                                                                                      Data                 u
                                                            Write                                   x                                memory                x
                                                                         Registers
                                                            data                                    1                                                      0
                                                                                                                                Write
                                                                                                                                data
                                                              32                  64
                                                                        Sign-
                                                                       extend

                      Clock 3

                                                                                               SUB X11, X2, X3            LDUR X10, [X1, 40]
                                                                                                    Execution                     Memory
                             0
                             M
                             u
                             x
                             1

                                      IF/ID                                            ID/EX                           EX/MEM                     MEM/WB

                             Add
                                                                                                                Add
                                                                                                        Add
                   4                                                                                          result
                                                                                           Shift
                                                                                           left 2
                                                          Read
                                          Instruction

                                                          register 1          Read
             PC    Address
                                                          Read               data 1
                                                          register 2                                         Zero
                       Instruction                                                                       ALU ALU
                         memory                                               Read                  0                                     Read
                                                          Write                                             result              Address                    1
                                                                             data 2                 M                                      data            M
                                                          register                                  u                                 Data
                                                                                                    x                                                      u
                                                          Write                                                                      memory                x
                                                                         Registers                  1                                                      0
                                                          data                                                                  Write
                                                                                                                                data
                                                                  32              64
                                                                          Sign-
                                                                         extend

                      Clock 4

FIGURE e4.13.9 Single-cycle pipeline diagrams for clock cycles 3 (top diagram) and 4 (bottom diagram). In the third clock
cycle in the top diagram, LDUR enters the EX stage. At the same time, SUB enters ID. In the fourth clock cycle (bottom datapath), LDUR moves
into MEM stage, reading memory using the address found in EX/MEM at the beginning of clock cycle 4. At the same time, the ALU subtracts
and then places the difference into EX/MEM at the end of the clock cycle.
                  4.13       An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                                                             366.e19

                                                                                                                SUB X11, X2, X3         LDUR X10, [X1, 40]
                                                                                                                      Memory                   Write back
                        0
                        M
                        u
                        x
                        1

                                 IF/ID                                       ID/EX                          EX/MEM                  MEM/WB
                       Add
                                                                                                   Add
              4                                                                               Add
                                                                                                 result
                                                                                 Shift
                                                                                 left 2
                                    Instruction

                                                    Read
         PC    Address                              register 1       Read
                                                    Read            data 1                          Zero
                   Instruction                      register 2                                  ALU ALU
                                                                     Read                 0                                     Read
                     memory                         Write                                                            Address               1
                                                                    data 2                M        result                                  M
                                                    register                              u                                      data
                                                                                                                           Data            u
                                                    Write                                 x                                                x
                                                               Registers                                                 memory
                                                    data                                  1                                                0
                                                                                                                     Write
                                                                                                                     data
                                                      32                  64
                                                                Sign-
                                                               extend

                  Clock 5

                                                                                                                                         SUB X11, X2, X3
                                                                                                                                               Write back
                        0
                        M
                        u
                        x
                        1

                                 IF/ID                                       ID/EX                          EX/MEM                  MEM/WB
                         Add
                                                                                                   Add
                                                                                              Add
               4                                                                                 result
                                                                                 Shift
                                                                                 left 2
                                                  Read
                                    Instruction

                                                  register 1         Read
         PC    Address
                                                  Read              data 1
                                                                                                    Zero
                   Instruction                    register 2
                                                                     Read                 0     ALU ALU
                     memory                       Write                                                              Address    Read       0
                                                                    data 2                M        result
                                                  register                                u                                      data      M
                                                                                                                           Data            u
                                                                                          x                              memory            x
                                                  Write                                   1
                                                  data           Registers                                           Write                 1
                                                                                                                     data
                                                          32              64
                                                                  Sign-
                                                                 extend

                  Clock 6

FIGURE e4.13.10 Single-cycle pipeline diagrams for clock cycles 5 (top diagram) and 6 (bottom diagram). In clock cycle
5, LDUR completes by writing the data in MEM/WB into register 10, and SUB sends the difference in EX/MEM to MEM/WB. In the next clock
cycle, SUB writes the value in MEM/WB to register 11.
366.e20                               4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

                                             ID:                                                                    EX:                                    MEM:                               WB:
                       IF:LDUR X10, [X1, 40] before<1>                                                              before<2>                              before<3>                          before<4>

                                      0         IF/ID                                                          ID/EX                                 EX/MEM                            MEM/WB
                                      M                                                           00                 00
                                      u                                                                         WB
                                      x
                                      1                                                              000             000                                    00
                                                                                           Control              M                                      WB
                                                                                                                                                            0                                   0
                                                                                                     000           00                                       0
                                                                                                                EX                                     M                                     WB 0
                                                                                                                   0                                        0

                                     Add

                                                                           RegWrite
                                                                                                                                              Add
                                                                                                                                    Add
                             4                                                                                                              result
                                                                                                                     Shift                                       Branch

                                                                                                                                                                          MemWrite
                                                                                                                     left 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                     MemtoReg
                                                    Instruction
                                                                         Read                                                        ALUSrc
                                                                         register 1            Read
                        PC       Address
                                                                         Read                 data 1
                                                                         register 2                                                     Zero
                                  Instruction                                                  Read                                 ALU ALU
                                                                         Write                                                0                                                      Read
                                    memory                                                    data 2                                   result                      Address                                 1
                                                                         register                                             M                                                       data                 M
                                                                                                                              u                                          Data                              u
                                                                         Write             Registers                          x
                                                                         data                                                                                           memory                             x
                                                                                                                              1                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                   Write
                                                                                                                                                                   data
                                                                      Instruction
                                                                      [31–0]                Sign-                                  ALU                                          MemRead
                                                                                           extend                                 control
                                                                      Instruction
                                                                      [31–21]
                                                                                                                                      ALUOp
                                                                      Instruction
                                                                      [4–0]
                                 Clock 1

                      IF:                         ID:                                                               EX:                                 MEM:                                  WB:
                      SUB X11, X2, X3             LDUR X10, [X1, 40]                                                before<1>                           before<2>                             before<3>

                                      0         IF/ID                                                          ID/EX                                 EX/MEM                             MEM/WB
                                      M                                                                11            00
                                      u                                                                         WB
                                      x
                                      1                           LDUR                                 010           000                                    00
                                                                                             Control            M                                      WB
                                                                                                                                                            0                                   0
                                                                                                       001         00                                       0
                                                                                                                EX                                     M                                     WB 0
                                                                                                                   0                                        0

                                     Add
                                                                                                                                              Add
                                                                                RegWrite

                                                                                                                                    Add
                             4                                                                                                              result
                                                                                                                     Shift                                       Branch
                                                                                                                                                                          MemWrite

                                                                                                                     left 2                                                                         MemtoReg
                                                                                                                                      ALUSrc
                                                    Instruction

                                                                  1      Read
                        PC       Address                                 register 1            Read
                                                                                                           X1
                                                                  X      Read                 data 1                                      Zero
                                  Instruction                            register 2                        X                           ALU ALU
                                    memory                                                     Read                           0                                                      Read                  1
                                                                         Write                                                            result                   Address
                                                                         register             data 2                          M                                                       data                 M
                                                                                                                              u                                          Data                              u
                                                                         Write                                                x                                         memory                             x
                                                                                           Registers
                                                                         data                                                 1                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                   Write
                                                                                                                                                                   data
                                                                      Instruction
                                                                      [31–0]       Sign- 40                                        ALU                                           MemRead
                                                                      Instruction extend                                          control
                                                                      [31–21]           1986
                                                                                                                                        ALUOp
                                                                      Instruction
                                                                      [4–0]                            10
                                 Clock 2

FIGURE e4.13.11 Clock cycles 1 and 2. The phrase “before < i> ” means the ith instruction before LDUR. The LDUR instruction in the
top datapath is in the IF stage. At the end of the clock cycle, the LDUR instruction is in the IF/ID pipeline registers. In the second clock cycle,
seen in the bottom datapath, the LDUR moves to the ID stage, and SUB enters in the IF stage. Note that the values of the instruction fields
and the selected source registers are shown in the ID stage. Hence, register X1 and the constant 40, the operands of LDUR, are written into the
ID/EX pipeline register. The number 10, representing the destination register number of LDUR, is also placed in ID/EX. The top of the ID/EX
pipeline register shows the control values for LDUR to be used in the remaining stages. These control values can be read from the LDUR row
of the table in Figure e4.18.
                 4.13    An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                                                                                                             366.e21

                  IF:                         ID:                                                           EX:                                 MEM:                                  WB:
                  AND X12, X4, X5             SUB X11, X2, X3                                               LDUR X10                            before<1>                             before<2>

                                  0         IF/ID                                                       ID/EX                                EX/MEM                            MEM/WB
                                  M                                                          10                 11
                                  u                                                                        WB
                                  x
                                  1                           SUB                               000             010                                 00
                                                                                      Control              M                                   WB
                                                                                                                                                    0                                   0
                                                                                                100           00                                    0
                                                                                                           EX                                  M                                     WB 0
                                                                                                              1                                     0

                                 Add

                                                                      RegWrite
                                                                                                                                     Add
                         4                                                                                                   Add
                                                                                                                                   result
                                                                                                                                                         Branch

                                                                                                                                                                  MemWrite
                                                                                                                Shift
                                                                                                                left 2

                                                                                                                                                                                             MemtoReg
                                                Instruction   2
                                                                    Read
                                                                    register 1
                                                                                                                              ALUSrc
                    PC       Address                                              Read X2                       X1
                                                                    Read         data 1
                                                              3     register 2                                                    Zero
                              Instruction                                         Read X3                                     ALU ALU
                                                                    Write                                                0                                                   Read
                                memory                              register     data 2                                          result                    Address                                 1
                                                                                                                         M                                                    data                 M
                                                                    Write                                                u                                       Data                              u
                                                                              Registers                                  x                                                                         x
                                                                    data                                                                                        memory
                                                                                                                         1                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–0]      Sign- X                           40            ALU                                       MemRead
                                                                                      extend                                 control
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–21]                   1624                1986
                                                                                                                                   ALUOp
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [4–0]                           11            10
                             Clock 3

                  IF: ORR X13, X6, X7         ID: AND X12, X4, X5                                           EX: SUB X11,...                     MEM: LDUR X10,...                     WB: before<1>

                                  0         IF/ID                                                       ID/EX                                EX/MEM                             MEM/WB
                                  M                                                               10            10
                                  u                                                                        WB
                                  x
                                  1                           AND                                 000           000                                 11
                                                                                        Control            M                                   WB
                                                                                                                                                    0                                   0
                                                                                                  100         10                                    1
                                                                                                           EX                                  M                                     WB 0
                                                                                                              0                                     0

                                 Add
                                                                           RegWrite

                                                                                                                                      Add
                         4                                                                                                    Add
                                                                                                                                    result
                                                                                                                                                         Branch
                                                                                                                                                                  MemWrite

                                                                                                                Shift
                                                                                                                left 2
                                                                                                                                                                                            MemtoReg
                                                                                                                               ALUSrc
                                                Instruction

                                                              4     Read
                    PC       Address                                register 1                        X4        X2
                                                                                          Read
                                                              5     Read                 data 1                                    Zero
                              Instruction                           register 2                        X5        X3              ALU ALU
                                memory                                                    Read                           0                                                   Read                  1
                                                                    Write                                                          result                  Address
                                                                    register             data 2                          M                                                    data                 M
                                                                                                                         u                                       Data                              u
                                                                    Write                                                x                                      memory                             x
                                                                                      Registers
                                                                    data                                                 1                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–0]      Sign- X                                     ALU                                            MemRead
                                                                                      extend                             control
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–21]                   1104               1624
                                                                                                                                   ALUOp
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [4–0]                         12              11                                  10
                             Clock 4

FIGURE e4.13.12 Clock cycles 3 and 4. In the top diagram, LDUR enters the EX stage in the third clock cycle, adding X1 and 40 to
form the address in the EX/MEM pipeline register. (The LDUR instruction is written LDUR X10, … upon reaching EX, because the identity
of instruction operands is not needed by EX or the subsequent stages. In this version of the pipeline, the actions of EX, MEM, and WB depend
only on the instruction and its destination register or its target address.) At the same time, SUB enters ID, reading registers X2 and X3, and
the and instruction starts IF. In the fourth clock cycle (bottom datapath), LDUR moves into MEM stage, reading memory using the value in
EX/MEM as the address. In the same clock cycle, the ALU subtracts X3 from X2 and places the difference into EX/MEM, reads registers X4
and X5 during ID, and the or instruction enters IF. The two diagrams show the control signals being created in the ID stage and peeled off as
they are used in subsequent pipe stages.
366.e22                               4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

                 IF:                         ID:                                                            EX:                                 MEM:                                  WB:
                 ADD X14, X8, X9             ORR X13, X6, X7                                                AND X12,...                         SUB X11,...                           LDUR X10,..

                                 0         IF/ID                                                        ID/EX                                EX/MEM                            MEM/WB
                                 M                                                           10                 10
                                 u                                                                         WB
                                 x
                                 1                           ORR                      Control
                                                                                                000
                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                000
                                                                                                                                               WB
                                                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                                    0                                   1
                                                                                                100             10                                  0
                                                                                                           EX                                  M                                     WB 1
                                                                                                                0                                   0

                                Add

                                                                      RegWrite
                                                                                                                                     Add
                        4                                                                                                    Add
                                                                                                                                   result
                                                                                                                                                         Branch

                                                                                                                                                                  MemWrite
                                                                                                                Shift
                                                                                                                left 2

                                                                                                                                                                                             MemtoReg
                                               Instruction

                                                                    Read                                                      ALUSrc
                                                             6      register 1
                   PC       Address                                                Read X6                      X4
                                                                    Read          data 1
                                                             7      register 2                                                     Zero
                             Instruction                                           Read X7                      X5             ALU ALU
                                                             10     Write                                                0                                                   Read
                               memory                               register      data 2                                          result                   Address                                 1
                                                                                                                         M                                                    data                 M
                                                                    Write                                                u                                       Data                              u
                                                                               Registers                                 x                                                                         x
                                                                    data                                                                                        memory
                                                                                                                         1                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–0]      Sign- X                                         ALU                                       MemRead
                                                                                      extend                                 control
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–21]                   1360                1104
                                                                                                                                   ALUOp
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [5–0]                           13            12                                  11                                  10
                            Clock 5

                 IF:                         ID:                                                            EX:                                 MEM:                                  WB:
                 after<1>                    ADD X14, X8, X9                                                ORR X13,...                         AND X12,...                           SUB X11,.

                                 0         IF/ID                                                        ID/EX                                EX/MEM                             MEM/WB
                                 M                                                                10            10
                                 u                                                                         WB
                                 x
                                 1                           ADD                                  000           000                                 10
                                                                                        Control            M                                   WB
                                                                                                                                                    0                                   1
                                                                                                  100           10                                  0
                                                                                                           EX                                  M                                     WB 0
                                                                                                                0                                   0

                                Add
                                                                           RegWrite

                                                                                                                                      Add
                        4                                                                                                     Add
                                                                                                                                    result
                                                                                                                                                         Branch
                                                                                                                                                                  MemWrite

                                                                                                                Shift
                                                                                                                left 2
                                                                                                                                                                                            MemtoReg

                                                                                                                               ALUSrc
                                               Instruction

                                                             8      Read
                   PC       Address                                 register 1                        X8        X6
                                                                                          Read
                                                             9      Read                 data 1                                    Zero
                             Instruction                            register 2                        X9        X7              ALU ALU
                               memory                        11     Write
                                                                                          Read                           0                                 Address           Read                  1
                                                                                         data 2                          M         result
                                                                    register                                                                                                  data                 M
                                                                                                                         u                                       Data                              u
                                                                    Write                                                x                                      memory                             x
                                                                                      Registers
                                                                    data                                                 1                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                           Write
                                                                                                                                                           data
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–0]      Sign- X                                     ALU                                            MemRead
                                                                                      extend                             control
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [31–21]                   1112                1360
                                                                                                                                   ALUOp
                                                                  Instruction
                                                                  [5–0]                          14             13                                  12                                  11
                            Clock 6

FIGURE e4.13.13 Clock cycles 5 and 6. With ADD, the final instruction in this example, entering IF in the top datapath, all instructions
are engaged. By writing the data in MEM/WB into register 10, LDUR completes; both the data and the register number are in MEM/WB. In the
same clock cycle, SUB sends the difference in EX/MEM to MEM/WB, and the rest of the instructions move forward. In the next clock cycle,
SUB selects the value in MEM/WB to write to register number 11, again found in MEM/WB. The remaining instructions play follow-the-
leader: the ALU calculates the OR of X6 and X7 for the ORR instruction in the EX stage, and registers X8 and X9 are read in the ID stage for
the ADD instruction. The instructions after ADD are shown as inactive just to emphasize what occurs for the five instructions in the example.
The phrase “after < i> ” means the ith instruction after ADD.
                      4.13    An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                                                                                     366.e23

 IF:                         ID:                                                         EX:                                 MEM:                                  WB:
 after<2>                    after<1>                                                    ADD X14,...                         ORR X13,...                           AND X12,.

                 0         IF/ID                                                       ID/EX                              EX/MEM                            MEM/WB
                 M                                                          00               10
                 u                                                                      WB
                 x
                 1                                                              000          000                                 10
                                                                      Control           M                                   WB
                                                                                                                                 0                                   1
                                                                                000          10                                  0
                                                                                        EX                                  M                                     WB 0
                                                                                             0                                   0

                Add
                                                      RegWrite                                                    Add
        4                                                                                                 Add
                                                                                                                result
                                                                                                                                      Branch

                                                                                                                                               MemWrite
                                                                                             Shift
                                                                                             left 2

                                                                                                                                                                          MemtoReg
                               Instruction

                                                    Read                                                    ALUSrc
                                                    register 1            Read
   PC       Address                                                                          X8
                                                    Read                 data 1
                                                    register 2                                                    Zero
             Instruction                                                  Read               X9               ALU ALU
                                             12     Write                                             0                                                   Read
               memory                                                    data 2                                  result                 Address                                 1
                                                    register                                          M                                                    data                 M
                                                                                                      u                                       Data                              u
                                                    Write             Registers                       x                                                                         x
                                                    data                                                                                     memory
                                                                                                      1                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                        Write
                                                                                                                                        data
                                                  Instruction
                                                  [31–0]      Sign-                                        ALU                                       MemRead
                                                                      extend                              control
                                                  Instruction
                                                  [31–21]                                    1112
                                                                                                              ALUOp
                                                  Instruction
                                                  [4–0]                                      14                                  13                                 12
            Clock 7

 IF:                         ID:                                                         EX:                                 MEM:                                  WB:
 after<3>                    after<2>                                                    after<1>                            ADD X14,...                           ORR X13,..

                 0         IF/ID                                                       ID/EX                              EX/MEM                             MEM/WB
                 M                                                                00         00
                 u                                                                      WB
                 x
                 1                                                               000         000                                 10
                                                                       Control          M                                   WB
                                                                                                                                 0                                   1
                                                                                 000         00                                  0
                                                                                        EX                                  M                                     WB 0
                                                                                             0                                   0

                Add
                                                           RegWrite

                                                                                                                   Add
        4                                                                                                  Add
                                                                                                                 result
                                                                                                                                      Branch
                                                                                                                                               MemWrite

                                                                                             Shift
                                                                                             left 2
                                                                                                                                                                         MemtoReg

                                                                                                              ALUSrc
                               Instruction

                                                    Read
   PC       Address                                 register 1            Read
                                                    Read                 data 1                                  Zero
             Instruction                            register 2                                                ALU ALU
               memory                        13                           Read                        0                                                   Read                  1
                                                    Write                                                        result                 Address
                                                    register             data 2                       M                                                    data                 M
                                                                                                      u                                       Data                              u
                                                    Write                                             x                                      memory                             x
                                                                      Registers
                                                    data                                              1                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                        Write
                                                                                                                                        data
                                                  Instruction
                                                  [31–0]      Sign-                                    ALU                                            MemRead
                                                                      extend                          control
                                                  Instruction
                                                  [31–21]
                                                                                                                ALUOp
                                                  Instruction
                                                  [4–0]                                                                          14                                  13
            Clock 8

FIGURE e4.13.14 Clock cycles 7 and 8. In the top datapath, the ADD instruction brings up the rear,
adding the values corresponding to registers X8 and X9 during the EX stage. The result of the or instruction
is passed from EX/MEM to MEM/WB in the MEM stage, and the WB stage writes the result of the and
instruction in MEM/WB to register X12. Note that the control signals are deasserted (set to 0) in the ID
stage, since no instruction is being executed. In the following clock cycle (lower drawing), the WB stage
writes the result to register X13, thereby completing ORR, and the MEM stage passes the sum from the ADD
in EX/MEM to MEM/WB. The instructions after ADD are shown as inactive for pedagogical reasons.
366.e24                          4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

     IF:                         ID:                                                      EX:                                MEM:                                  WB:
     after<4>                    after<3>                                                 after<2>                           after<1>                              ADD X14,.

                     0         IF/ID                                                    ID/EX                             EX/MEM                             MEM/WB
                     M                                                            00          00
                     u                                                                   WB
                     x
                     1                                                            000         000                                00
                                                                        Control          M                                  WB
                                                                                                                                 0                                   1
                                                                                  000         00                                 0
                                                                                         EX                                 M                                     WB 0
                                                                                              0                                  0

                    Add

                                                            RegWrite
                                                                                                                   Add
            4                                                                                              Add
                                                                                                                 result
                                                                                                                                      Branch

                                                                                                                                               MemWrite
                                                                                              Shift
                                                                                              left 2

                                                                                                                                                                         MemtoReg
                                                                                                            ALUSrc
                                   Instruction

                                                        Read
       PC       Address                                 register 1         Read
                                                        Read              data 1                               Zero
                 Instruction                            register 2                                          ALU ALU
                   memory                        14                        Read                        0                                                  Read                  1
                                                        Write                                                  result                   Address
                                                        register          data 2                       M                                                   data                 M
                                                                                                       u                                      Data                              u
                                                        Write                                          x                                     memory                             x
                                                                       Registers
                                                        data                                           1                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                        Write
                                                                                                                                        data
                                                      Instruction
                                                      [31–0]      Sign-                                 ALU                                          MemRead
                                                                       extend                          control
                                                      Instruction
                                                      [31–21]
                                                                                                             ALUOp
                                                      Instruction
                                                      [4–0]                                                                                                          14
                Clock 9

FIGURE e4.13.15 Clock cycle 9. The WB stage writes the sum in MEM/WB into register X14, completing ADD and the five-instruction
sequence. The instructions after ADD are shown as inactive for pedagogical reasons.

                                 More Examples
                                 To understand how pipeline control works, let’s consider these five instructions
                                 going through the pipeline:

                                                  LDUR                 X10, [X1,#40]
                                                  SUB                  X11, X2, X3
                                                  AND                  X12, X4, X5
                                                  ORR                  X13, X6, X7
                                                  ADD                  X14, X8, X9

                                    Figures e4.13.11 through e4.13.15 show these instructions proceeding through
                                 the nine clock cycles it takes them to complete execution, highlighting what is
                                 active in a stage and identifying the instruction associated with each stage during a
                                 clock cycle. If you examine them carefully, you may notice:
                                           ■      In Figure e4.13.13 you can see the sequence of the destination register numbers
                                                  from left to right at the bottom of the pipeline registers. The numbers advance
             4.13   An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language   366.e25

      to the right during each clock cycle, with the MEM/WB pipeline register
      supplying the number of the register written during the WB stage.
  ■   When a stage is inactive, the values of control lines that are deasserted are
      shown as 0 or X (for don’t care).
  ■   Sequencing of control is embedded in the pipeline structure itself. First, all
      instructions take the same number of clock cycles, so there is no special
      control for instruction duration. Second, all control information is computed
      during instruction decode and then passed along by the pipeline registers.

Forwarding Illustrations
We can use the single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams to show how forwarding
operates, as well as how the control activates the forwarding paths. Consider the
following code sequence in which the dependences have been highlighted:

      SUB X2, X1, X3
      AND X4, X2, X5
      ORR X4, X4, X2
      ADD X9, X4, X2

   Figures e4.13.16 and e4.13.17 show the events in clock cycles 3–6 in the execution
of these instructions.
   Thus, in clock cycle 5, the forwarding unit selects the EX/MEM pipeline register
for the upper input to the ALU and the MEM/WB pipeline register for the lower
input to the ALU. The following ADD instruction reads both register X4, the target of
the AND instruction, and register X2, which the SUB instruction has already written.
Notice that the prior two instructions both write register X4, so the forwarding unit
must pick the immediately preceding one (MEM stage).
   In clock cycle 6, the forwarding unit thus selects the EX/MEM pipeline register,
containing the result of the or instruction, for the upper ALU input but uses the
non-forwarding register value for the lower input to the ALU.

Illustrating Pipelines with Stalls and Forwarding
We can use the single-clock-cycle pipeline diagrams to show how the control for
stalls works. Figures e4.13.18 through e4.13.20 show the single-cycle diagram for
clocks 2 through 7 for the following code sequence (dependences highlighted):
      LDUR    X2,[X1,#40]
      AND     X4, X2,X5
      ORR     X4, X4,X2
      ADD     X9, X4,X2
366.e26                                           4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

    ORR X4, X4, X2              AND X4, X2, X5                                         SUB X2, X1, X3                  before<1>              before<2>

                                                                                 ID/EX
                                                                            10         10
                                                                                  WB
                                                                                                                 EX/MEM

                                                            Control               M                               WB
                                                                                                                                        MEM/WB

                                                                                  EX                               M                     WB
                            IF/ID

                                                   2                        X2         X1
                                    Instruction

                                                                                                M
                                                   5                                            u
                                                                                                x
                                                                Registers
              Instruction                                                                                                       Data
        PC                                                                                              ALU
                memory                                                                                                         memory                M
                                                                            X5         X3
                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                M                                                    x
                                                                                                u
                                                                                                x

                                                                            2          1
                                                                            5          3
                                                                            4          2

                                                                                                    Forwarding
                                                                                                       unit

    Clock 3

    ADD X9, X4, X2              ORR X4, X4, X2                                         AND X4, X2, X5                  SUB X2,...             before<1>

                                                                                 ID/EX
                                                                            10         10
                                                                                  WB                             EX/MEM
                                                                                                                       10
                                                            Control               M                               WB
                                                                                                                                        MEM/WB

                                                                                  EX                               M                     WB
                            IF/ID

                                                   4                        X4         X2
                                    Instruction

                                                                                                M
                                                   2                                            u
                                                                                                x
                                                                Registers
              Instruction                                                                                                       Data
        PC                                                                                              ALU
                memory                                                                                                         memory                M
                                                                            X2         X5
                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                M                                                    x
                                                                                                u
                                                                                                x

                                                                            4          2
                                                                            2          5
                                                                            4          4                                2

                                                                                                    Forwarding
                                                                                                       unit

    Clock 4

FIGURE e4.13.16 Clock cycles 3 and 4 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26. The bold lines are those active in a
clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard. The forwarding unit is highlighted by shading it when it is forwarding
data to the ALU. The instructions before SUB are shown as inactive just to emphasize what occurs for the four instructions in the example.
Operand names are used in EX for control of forwarding; thus they are included in the instruction label for EX. Operand names are not needed
in MEM or WB, so … is used. Compare this with Figures e4.13.12 through e4.13.15, which show the datapath without forwarding where ID is
the last stage to need operand information.
                   4.13      An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                                             366.e27

   after<1>                     ADD X9, X4, X2                                     ORR X4, X4, X2                 AND X4,...        SUB X2,..

                                                                             ID/EX
                                                                        10           10
                                                                              WB
                                                                                                            EX/MEM
                                                                                                                  10
                                                          Control             M                              WB
                                                                                                                                 MEM/WB
                                                                                                                                        1
                            IF/ID                                             EX                              M                    WB

                                                  4                     X4         X4
                                                                                           M
                                    Instruction

                                                  2                                        u
                                                                                           x
                                                            Registers
              Instruction                             2                                                                  Data
       PC                                                                                           ALU
               memory                                                   X2         X2                                   memory               M
                                                                                                                                             u
                                                                                           M                                                 x
                                                                                           u
                                                                                           x

                                                                         4         4
                                                                         2         2
                                                                         9         4                              4                     2

                                                                                               Forwarding
                                                                                                  unit

   Clock 5

   after<2>                     after<1>                                           ADD X9, X4, X2                 ORR X4,...        AND X4,..

                                                                             ID/EX
                                                                                     10
                                                                              WB
                                                                                                            EX/MEM
                                                                                                                  10
                                                          Control             M                              WB
                                                                                                                                 MEM/WB
                                                                                                                                        1
                            IF/ID                                             EX                              M                    WB

                                                                                   X4
                                    Instruction

                                                                                           M
                                                                                           u
                                                                                           x
                                                            Registers
              Instruction                             4                                                                  Data
       PC                                                                                           ALU
               memory                                                              X2                                   memory               M
                                                                                                                                             u
                                                                                           M                                                 x
                                                                                           u
                                                                                           x

                                                                                   4
                                                                                   2
                                                                                   9                              4                     4

                                                                                               Forwarding
                                                                                                  unit

   Clock 6

FIGURE e4.13.17 Clock cycles 5 and 6 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26. The forwarding unit is highlighted when
it is forwarding data to the ALU. The two instructions after ADD are shown as inactive just to emphasize what occurs for the four instructions
in the example. The bold lines are those active in a clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard.
366.e28                                                       4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

       AND X4, X2, X5                          LDUR X2, [X1, 20]                                                     before<1>                           before<2>              before<3>
                                                                        Hazard
                                                                                             ID/EX.MemRead
                                                                       detection
                                                       1
                                                                         unit                                  ID/EX
                                                       X
                                                                                                          11
                                  IF/IDWrite                                                                    WB
                                                                                                                                                  EX/MEM
                                                                                                   M
                                                                                   Control         u            M                                   WB
                                                                                                   x                                                                     MEM/WB
                                                                                             0
                                      IF/ID                                                                     EX                                  M                      WB

                                                                   1                                 X1
          PCWrite

                                                                                                                                 M
                                                Instruction

                                                                   X                                                             u
                                                                                                                                 x
                                                                                       Registers
                    Instruction                                                                                                                                  Data
               PC                                                                                                                       ALU
                      memory                                                                                                                                    memory                 M
                                                                                                     XX
                                                                                                                                                                                       u
                                                                                                                                 M                                                     x
                                                                                                                                 u
                                                                                                                                 x

                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          X
                                                                                                          2

                                                                                       ID/EX.RegisterRd                              Forwarding
                                                                                                                                        unit

       Clock 2

       ORR X4, X4, X2                            and X4, X2, X5                                                      LDUR X2, [X1, 20]                   before<1>              before<2>
                                                                        Hazard
                                                                       detection             ID/EX.MemRead
                                                       2
                                                                         unit                                  ID/EX
                                                       5
                                                                                                          00           11
                                                                                                               WB
                                  IF/IDWrite

                                                                                                                                                  EX/MEM
                                                                                                   M
                                                                                   Control         u            M                                  WB
                                                                                                   x                                                                     MEM/WB
                                                                                             0
                                      IF/ID                                                                     EX                                  M                     WB

                                                               2                                       X2              X1
          PCWrite

                                                                                                                                 M
                                               Instruction

                                                                   5                                                             u
                                                                                                                                 x
                                                                                       Registers
                    Instruction                                                                                                                                  Data
               PC                                                                                                                       ALU
                      memory                                                                                                                                    memory                M
                                                                                                       X5              XX
                                                                                                                                                                                      u
                                                                                                                                 M                                                    x
                                                                                                                                 u
                                                                                                                                 x

                                                                                                          2            1
                                                                                                          5            X
                                                                                                          4            2

                                                                                       ID/EX.RegisterRd                              Forwarding
                                                                                                                                        unit

       Clock 3

FIGURE e4.13.18 Clock cycles 2 and 3 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26 with a load replacing SUB. The
bold lines are those active in a clock cycle, the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard, and the … in the place of operands means
that their identity is information not needed by that stage. The values of the significant control lines, registers, and register numbers are labeled
in the figures. The AND instruction wants to read the value created by the LDUR instruction in clock cycle 3, so the hazard detection unit stalls
the AND and ORR instructions. Hence, the hazard detection unit is highlighted.
                     4.13            An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language                                                                                  366.e29

    ORR X4, X4, X2                          AND X4, X2, X5                                                           Bubble                           LDUR X2,...              before<1>
                                                                    Hazard
                                                                                             ID/EX.MemRead
                                                                   detection
                                                     2
                                                                     unit                                      ID/EX
                                                     5
                                                                                                          10           00

                               IF/IDWrite
                                                                                                                WB
                                                                                                                                               EX/MEM
                                                                                                   M                                                  11
                                                                                   Control         u            M                                WB
                                                                                                   x                                                                    MEM/WB
                                                                                             0
                               IF/ID                                                                            EX                               M                        WB

                                                               2                                       X2            X2
       PCWrite

                                                                                                                              M
                                             Instruction

                                                               5                                                              u
                                                                                                                              x
                                                                                       Registers
                 Instruction                                                                                                                                    Data
            PC                                                                                                                        ALU
                   memory                                                                                                                                      memory                M
                                                                                                       X5              X5
                                                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                              M                                                      x
                                                                                                                              u
                                                                                                                              x

                                                                                                          2            2
                                                                                                          5            5
                                                                                                          4            4                                2

                                                                                       ID/EX.RegisterRd                           Forwarding
                                                                                                                                     unit

    Clock 4

    ADD X9, X4, X2                          ORR X4, X4, X2                                                           AND X4, X2, X5                   Bubble                   LDUR X2,...
                                                                    Hazard
                                                                   detection                 ID/EX.MemRead
                                                    2
                                                                     unit                                      ID/EX
                                                    5
                                                                                                          10           10
                                                                                                               WB
                               IF/IDWrite

                                                                                                                                               EX/MEM
                                                                                                   M                                                  0
                                                                                   Control         u            M                               WB
                                                                                                   x                                                                    MEM/WB
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                               11
                                  IF/ID                                                                         EX                               M                       WB

                                                           4                                           X4              X2
       PCWrite

                                                                                                                              M
                                            Instruction

                                                               2                                                              u
                                                                                                                              x
                                                                                       Registers
                                                                               2                                                                                Data
                 Instruction                                                                                                          ALU
            PC                                                                                                                                                 memory                M
                   memory                                                                              X2              X5
                                                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                              M                                                      x
                                                                                                                              u
                                                                                                                              x

                                                                                                          4            2
                                                                                                          2            5
                                                                                                          4            4                                                       2

                                                                                       ID/EX.RegisterRd                           Forwarding
                                                                                                                                     unit

    Clock 5

FIGURE e4.13.19 Clock cycles 4 and 5 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26 with a load replacing SUB. The
bubble is inserted in the pipeline in clock cycle 4, and then the and instruction is allowed to proceed in clock cycle 5. The forwarding unit is
highlighted in clock cycle 5 because it is forwarding data from LDUR to the ALU. Note that in clock cycle 4, the forwarding unit forwards the
address of the lw as if it were the contents of register X2; this is rendered harmless by the insertion of the bubble. The bold lines are those active
in a clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers in color indicate a hazard.
366.e30                                                     4.13 An Introduction to Digital Design Using a Hardware Design Language

 after<1>                               ADD X9, X4, X2                                                       ORR X4, X4, X2                  AND X4,...            Bubble
                                                            Hazard
                                                                                     ID/EX.MemRead
                                                           detection
                                                 4
                                                             unit                                      ID/EX
                                                 2
                                                                                                  10           10
                           IF/IDWrite

                                                                                                        WB
                                                                                                                                      EX/MEM
                                                                                           M                                                 10
                                                                           Control         u            M                               WB
                                                                                           x                                                                MEM/WB
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                               IF/ID                                                                    EX                              M                     WB

                                                       4                                       X4            X4
   PCWrite

                                                                                                                     M
                                         Instruction

                                                       2                                                             u
                                                                                                                     x
                                                                               Registers
             Instruction                                                                                                                            Data
        PC                                                                                                                    ALU
               memory                                                                                                                              memory                   M
                                                                                               X2              X2
                                                                                                                                                                            u
                                                                                                                     M                                                      x
                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                     x

                                                                                                  4            4
                                                                                                  2            2

                                                                                                  9            4                               4

                                                                               ID/EX.RegisterRd                          Forwarding
                                                                                                                            unit

 Clock 6

 after<2>                                  after<1>                                                          ADD X9, X4, X2             ORR X4,...                              AND X4,...
                                                            Hazard
                                                           detection                 ID/EX.MemRead
                                                             unit                                      ID/EX
                                                                                                  10           10
                                                                                                       WB
                           IF/IDWrite

                                                                                                                                      EX/MEM
                                                                                           M                                                 10
                                                                           Control         u            M                              WB
                                                                                           x                                                                MEM/WB
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                   1
                              IF/ID                                                                     EX                              M                    WB

                                                                                                               X4
   PCWrite

                                                                                                                    M
                                        Instruction

                                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                                    x
                                                                               Registers
                                                                       4                                                                            Data
             Instruction                                                                                                      ALU
        PC                                                                                                                                         memory               M
               memory                                                                                          X2
                                                                                                                                                                        u
                                                                                                                    M                                                   x
                                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                                    x

                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                               9                             4                     4

                                                                               ID/EX.RegisterRd                          Forwarding
                                                                                                                            unit

 Clock 7

FIGURE e4.13.20 Clock cycles 6 and 7 of the instruction sequence on page 366.e26 with a load replacing SUB. Note
that unlike in Figure e4.13.17, the stall allows the LDUR to complete, and so there is no forwarding from MEM/WB in clock cycle 6. Register
X4 for the ADD in the EX stage still depends on the result from or in EX/MEM, so the forwarding unit passes the result to the ALU. The bold
lines show ALU input lines active in a clock cycle, and the italicized register numbers indicate a hazard. The instructions after ADD are shown
as inactive for pedagogical reasons.
                                                           4.15   Concluding Remarks                          367

  Many of the difficulties of pipelining arise because of instruction set
complications. Here are some examples:
   ■   Widely variable instruction lengths and running times can lead to imbalance
       among pipeline stages and severely complicate hazard detection in a design
       pipelined at the instruction set level. This problem was overcome, initially
       in the DEC VAX 8500 in the late 1980s, using the micro-operations and
       micropipelined scheme that the Intel Core i7 employs today. Of course, the
       overhead of translation and maintaining correspondence between the micro-
       operations and the actual instructions remains.
   ■   Sophisticated-addressing modes can lead to different sorts of problems.
       Addressing modes that update registers complicate hazard detection. Other
       addressing modes that require multiple memory accesses substantially
       complicate pipeline control and make it difficult to keep the pipeline flowing
       smoothly.
   ■   Perhaps the best example is the DEC Alpha and the DEC NVAX. In
       comparable technology, the newer instruction set architecture of the Alpha
       allowed an implementation whose performance is more than twice as fast
       as NVAX. In another example, Bhandarkar and Clark [1991] compared the
       MIPS M/2000 and the DEC VAX 8700 by counting clock cycles of the SPEC
       benchmarks; they concluded that although the MIPS M/2000 executes more
       instructions, the VAX on average executes 2.7 times as many clock cycles, so
       the MIPS is faster.

                                                                                         Nine-tenths of wisdom
                                                                                         consists of being wise
 4.15           Concluding Remarks                                                       in time.
                                                                                         American proverb
As we have seen in this chapter, both the datapath and control for a processor can
be designed starting with the instruction set architecture and an understanding
of the basic characteristics of the technology. In Section 4.3, we saw how the
datapath for an LEGv8 processor could be constructed based on the architecture
and the decision to build a single-cycle implementation. Of course, the underlying
technology also affects many design decisions by dictating what components can
be used in the datapath, as well as whether a single-cycle implementation even
makes sense.
   Pipelining improves throughput but not the inherent execution time, or
instruction latency, of instructions; for some instructions, the latency is similar
in length to the single-cycle approach. Multiple instruction issue adds additional
datapath hardware to allow multiple instructions to begin every clock cycle, but at
an increase in effective latency. Pipelining was presented as reducing the clock cycle   instruction latency The
time of the simple single-cycle datapath. Multiple instruction issue, in comparison,     inherent execution time
clearly focuses on reducing clock cycles per instruction (CPI).                          for an instruction.

         Pipelining and multiple issue both attempt to exploit instruction-level
      parallelism. The presence of data and control dependences, which can become
      hazards, are the primary limitations on how much parallelism can be exploited.
      Scheduling and speculation via prediction, both in hardware and in software, are
      the primary techniques used to reduce the performance impact of dependences.
         We showed that unrolling the DGEMM loop four times exposed more
      instructions that could take advantage of the out-of-order execution engine of the
      Core i7 to more than double performance.
         The switch to longer pipelines, multiple instruction issue, and dynamic
      scheduling in the mid-1990s helped sustain the 60% per year processor performance
      increase that started in the early 1980s. As mentioned in Chapter 1, these
      microprocessors preserved the sequential programming model, but they eventually
      ran into the power wall. Thus, the industry was forced to switch to multiprocessors,
      which exploit parallelism at much coarser levels (the subject of Chapter 6). This
      trend has also caused designers to reassess the energy-performance implications
      of some of the inventions since the mid-1990s, resulting in a simplification of
      pipelines in the more recent versions of microarchitectures.
         To sustain the advances in processing performance via parallel processors,
      Amdahl’s law suggests that another part of the system will become the bottleneck.
      That bottleneck is the topic of the next chapter: the memory hierarchy.

        4.16         Historical Perspective and Further
                     Reading
      This section, which appears online, discusses the history of the first pipelined
      processors, the earliest superscalars, and the development of out-of-order and
      speculative techniques, as well as important developments in the accompanying
      compiler technology.

       4.17          Exercises

      4.1 Consider the following instruction:

      Instruction: AND Rd, Rn, Rm
      Interpretation: Reg[Rd] = Reg[Rn] AND Reg[Rm]

      4.1.1 [5] <§4.3> What are the values of control signals generated by the control
      in Figure 4.10 for this instruction?
                                      4.16 Historical Perspective and Further Reading                      368.e1

                                                                                          supercomputer: Any
                                                                                          machine still on the
  4.16         ? istorical Perspective and Further
               H                                                                          drawing board.
               Reading                                                                    Stan Kelly-Bootle, The
                                                                                          Devil’s DP Dictionary,
                                                                                          1981
This section discusses the history of the original pipelined processors, the earliest
superscalars, and the development of out-of-order and speculative techniques, as
well as important developments in the accompanying compiler technology.
   It is generally agreed that one of the first general-purpose pipelined computers
was Stretch, the IBM 7030 (Figure e4.16.1). Stretch followed the IBM 704 and had a
goal of being 100 times faster than the 704. The goals were a “stretch” of the state of
the art at that time—hence the nickname. The plan was to obtain a factor of 1.6 from
overlapping fetch, decode, and execute by using a four-stage pipeline. Apparently,
the rest was to come from much more hardware and faster logic. Stretch was also
a training ground for both the architects of the IBM 360, Gerrit Blaauw and Fred
Brooks, Jr., and the architect of the IBM RS/6000, John Cocke.

FIGURE e4.16.1 The Stretch computer, one of the first pipelined computers.
368.e2   4.16 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

            Control Data Corporation (CDC) delivered what is considered to be the first
         supercomputer, the CDC 6600, in 1964 (Figure e4.16.2). The core instructions of
         Cray’s subsequent computers have many similarities to those of the original CDC
         6600. The CDC 6600 was unique in many ways. The interaction between pipelining
         and instruction set design was understood, and the instruction set was kept
         simple to promote pipelining. The CDC 6600 also used an advanced packaging
         technology. James Thornton’s book [1970] provides an excellent description of
         the entire computer, from technology to architecture, and includes a foreword
         by Seymour Cray. (Unfortunately, this book is currently out of print.) Jim Smith,
         then working at CDC, developed the original 2-bit branch prediction scheme and
         explored several techniques for enhancing instruction issue for the CDC Cyber
         180/990. Cray, Thornton, and Smith have each won the ACM Eckert-Mauchly
         Award (in 1989, 1994, and 1999, respectively).
            The IBM 360/91 introduced many new concepts, including dynamic detection of
         memory hazards, generalized forwarding, and reservation stations (Figure e4.16.3).
         The approach is normally named Tomasulo’s algorithm, after an engineer who
         worked on the project. The team that created the 360/91 was led by Michael Flynn,
         who was given the 1992 ACM Eckert-Mauchly Award, in part for his contributions
         to the IBM 360/91; in 1997, the same award went to Robert Tomasulo for his
         pioneering work on out-of-order processing.
            The internal organization of the 360/91 shares many features with the Pentium
         III and Pentium 4, as well as with several other microprocessors. One major

         FIGURE e4.16.2 The CDC 6600, the first supercomputer.
                                      4.16 Historical Perspective and Further Reading      368.e3

FIGURE e4.16.3 The IBM 360/91 pushed the state of the art in pipelined execution when it
was unveiled in 1966.

difference was that there was no branch prediction in the 360/91 and hence no
speculation. Another major difference was that there was no commit unit, so
once the instructions finished execution, they updated the registers. Out-of-order
instruction commit led to imprecise interrupts, which proved to be unpopular and
led to the commit units in dynamically scheduled pipelined processors since that
time. Although the 360/91 was not a success, its key ideas were resurrected later
and exist in some form in the majority of microprocessors of the last decade.

Improving Pipelining Effectiveness and Adding Multiple
Issue
The RISC processors refined the notion of compiler-scheduled pipelines in the
early 1980s. The concepts of delayed branches and delayed loads—common in
microprogramming—were extended into the high-level architecture. In fact,
the Stanford processor that led to the commercial MIPS architecture was called
“Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipelined Stages” because it was up to the
assembler or compiler to avoid data hazards.
   In addition to its contribution to the development of the RISC concepts, IBM did
pioneering work on multiple issue. In the 1960s, a project called ACS was under-
way. It included multiple-instruction issue concepts and the notion of integrated
compiler and architecture design, but it never reached product stage. The earliest
proposal for a superscalar processor that dynamically makes issue decisions was
368.e4   4.16 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

         by John Cocke; he described the key ideas in several talks in the mid-1980s and,
         with Tilak Agarwala, coined the name superscalar. This original design was a two-
         issue machine named Cheetah, which was followed by a more widely discussed
         four-issue machine named America. The IBM Power-1 architecture, used in the
         RS/6000 line, is based on these ideas, and the PowerPC is a variation of the Power-1
         architecture. Cocke won the Turing Award, the highest award in computer science
         and engineering, for his architecture work.
            Static multiple issue, as exemplified by the long instruction word (LIW) or
         sometimes very long instruction word (VLIW) approaches, appeared in real designs
         before the superscalar approach. In fact, the earliest multiple-issue machines
         were special-purpose attached processors designed for scientific applications.
         Culler Scientific and Floating Point Systems were two of the most prominent
         manufacturers of such computers. Another inspiration for the use of multiple
         operations per instruction came from those working on microcode compilers.
         Such inspiration led to a research project at Yale led by Josh Fisher, who coined
         the term VLIW. Cydrome and Multiflow were two early companies involved in
         building mini-supercomputers using processors with multiple-issue capability.
         These processors, built with bit-slice and multiple-chip gate array implementations,
         arrived on the market at the same time as the initial RISC microprocessors. Despite
         some promising performance on high-end scientific codes, the much better cost/
         performance of the microprocessor-based computers doomed the first generation
         of VLIW computers. Bob Rau and Josh Fisher won the Eckert-Mauchly Award in
         2002 and 2003, respectively, for their contributions to the development of multiple
         processors and software techniques to exploit ILP.
            The very beginning of the 1990s saw the first superscalar processors using
         static scheduling and no speculation, including versions of the MIPS and
         PowerPC architectures. The early 1990s also saw important research at a number
         of universities, including Wisconsin, Stanford, Illinois, and Michigan, focused on
         techniques for exploiting additional ILP through multiple issue with and without
         speculation. These research insights were used to build dynamically scheduled,
         speculative processors, including the Motorola 88110, MIPS R10000, DEC Alpha
         21264, PowerPC 603, and the Intel Pentium Pro, Pentium III, and Pentium 4.
            In 2001, Intel introduced the IA-64 architecture and its first implementation,
         Itanium. Itanium represented a return to a more compiler-intensive approach that
         they called EPIC. EPIC represented a considerable enhancement over the early
         VLIW architectures, removing many of their drawbacks. It has had modest sales.
         In 2013, the IA-64 architecture is used only in low-volume, high-end servers and is
         outnumbered by x86 processors by more than 100:1.

         Compiler Technology for Exploiting ILP
         Successful development of processors to exploit ILP has depended on progress in
         compiler technology. The concept of loop unrolling was understood early, and a
         number of companies and researchers—including Floating Point Systems, Cray,
         and the Stanford MIPS project—developed compilers that made use of loop
                                                   4.16 Historical Perspective and Further Reading                      368.e5

unrolling and pipeline scheduling to improve instruction throughput. A special-
purpose processor called WARP, designed at Carnegie Mellon University, inspired
the development of software pipelining, an approach that symbolically unrolls
loops.
   To exploit higher levels of ILP, more aggressive compiler technology was needed.
The VLIW project at Yale developed the concept of trace scheduling that Multi-
flow implemented in their compilers. Trace scheduling relies on aggressive loop
unrolling and path prediction to compile favored execution traces efficiently. The
Cydrome designers created early versions of predication and support for software
pipelining. Hwu at Illinois worked on extended versions of loop unrolling, called
superblocks, and techniques for compiling with predication. The concepts from
Multiflow, Cydrome, and the research group at Illinois served as the architectural
and compiler basis for the IA-64 architecture.

Further Reading
Bhandarkar, D. and D.W. Clark [1991]. “Performance from architecture: Comparing a RISC and a CISC with
similar hardware organizations,” Proc. Fourth Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, IEEE/ACM (April), Palo Alto, CA, 310–19.

A quantitative comparison of RISC and CISC written by scholars who argued for CISCs as well as built them;
they conclude that MIPS is between 2 and 4 times faster than a VAX built with similar technology, with a mean
of 2.7.

Fisher, J.A. and B.R. Rau [1993]. Journal of Supercomputing (January), Kluwer.

This entire issue is devoted to the topic of exploiting ILP. It contains papers on both the architecture and software
and is a wonderful source for further references.

Hennessy, J. L. and D. A. Patterson [2001]. Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, fourth edition,
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco.

Chapter 2 and Appendix A go into considerably more detail about pipelined processors (almost 200 pages),
including superscalar processors and VLIW processors. Appendix G describes Itanium.

Jouppi, N.P. and D.W. Wall [1989]. “Available instruction-level parallelism for superscalar and superpipelined
processors,” Proc. Third Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
IEEE/ACM (April), Boston, 272–82.

A comparison of deeply pipelined (also called superpipelined) and superscalar systems.

Kogge, P. M. [1981]. The Architecture of Pipelined Computers, McGraw-Hill, New York.
A formal text on pipelined control, with emphasis on underlying principles.

Russell, R. M. [1978]. “The CRAY-1 computer system”, Comm. of the ACM 21:1 (January), 63–72.

A short summary of a classic computer that uses vectors of operations to remove pipeline stalls.

Smith, A. and J. Lee [1984]. “Branch prediction strategies and branch target buffer design”, Computer
17:1 (January), 6–22.

An early survey on branch prediction.
368.e6   4.16 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

         Smith, J. E. and A. R. Plezkun [1988]. “Implementing precise interrupts in pipelined processors”, IEEE Trans.
         on Computers 37:5 (May), 562–73.

         Covers the difficulties in interrupting pipelined computers.

         Thornton, J. E. [1970]. Design of a Computer. The Control Data 6600, Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.

         A classic book describing a classic computer, considered the first supercomputer.

4.1.2 [5] <§4.3> Which resources (blocks) perform a useful function for this
instruction?
4.1.3 [10] <§4.3> Which resources (blocks) produce no output for this
instruction? Which resources produce output that is not used?

4.2 [10] <§4.4> Explain each of the “don’t cares” in Figure 4.18.

4.3 Consider the following instruction mix:
  R-type    I-Type    LDUR      STUR     CBZ    B
   24%       28%       25%      10%      11%    2%

4.3.1 [5] <§4.4> What fraction of all instructions use data memory?
4.3.2 [5] <§4.4> What fraction of all instructions use instruction memory?
4.3.3 [5] <§4.4> What fraction of all instructions use the sign extend?
4.3.4 [5] <§4.4> What is the sign extend doing during cycles in which its output
is not needed?

4.4 When silicon chips are fabricated, defects in materials (e.g., silicon) and
manufacturing errors can result in defective circuits. A very common defect is for
one signal wire to get “broken” and always register a logical 0. This is often called a
“stuck-at-0” fault.
4.4.1 [5] <§4.4> Which instructions fail to operate correctly if the MemToReg
wire is stuck at 0?
4.4.2 [5] <§4.4> Which instructions fail to operate correctly if the ALUSrc wire
is stuck at 0?
4.4.3 [5] <§4.4> Which instructions fail to operate correctly if the Reg2Loc wire
is stuck at 0?

4.5 In this exercise, we examine in detail how an instruction is executed in a
single-cycle datapath. Problems in this exercise refer to a clock cycle in which the
processor fetches the following instruction word: 0xf8014062.
4.5.1 [5] <§4.4> What are the outputs of the sign-extend and the “shift left 2”
unit (near the top of Figure 4.23) for this instruction word?
4.5.2 [10] <§4.4> What are the values of the ALU control unit’s inputs for this
instruction?
4.5.3 [5] <§4.4> What is the new PC address after this instruction is executed?
Highlight the path through which this value is determined.

      4.5.4 [10] <§4.4> For each mux, show the values of its inputs and outputs during
      the execution of this instruction. List values that are register outputs at Reg [Xn].
      4.5.5 [10] <§4.4> What are the input values for the ALU and the two add units?
      4.5.6 [10] <§4.4> What are the values of all inputs for the registers unit?

      4.6 Section 4.4 does not discuss I-type instructions like ADDI or ANDI.
      4.6.1 [5] <§4.4> What additional logic blocks, if any, are needed to add I-type
      instructions to the CPU shown in Figure 4.23? Add any necessary logic blocks to
      Figure 4.23 and explain their purpose.
      4.6.2 [10] <§4.4> List the values of the signals generated by the control unit for
      ADDI. Explain the reasoning for any “don’t care” control signals.

      4.7 Problems in this exercise assume that the logic blocks used to implement a
      processor’s datapath have the following latencies:

      I-Mem / Register                               Single Register Register  Sign
       D-Mem    File       Mux      ALU     Adder     gate   Read     Setup   extend Control
       250 ps     150 ps   25 ps   200 ps   150 ps    5 ps   30 ps    20 ps    50 ps   50 ps

      “Register read” is the time needed after the rising clock edge for the new register
      value to appear on the output. This value applies to the PC only. “Register setup” is
      the amount of time a register’s data input must be stable before the rising edge of
      the clock. This value applies to both the PC and Register File.
      4.7.1 [20] <§4.4> Although the control unit as a whole requires 50 ps, it so
      happens that we can extract the correct value of the Reg2Loc control wire directly
      from the instruction. Thus, the value of this control wire is available at the same
      time as the instruction. Explain how we can extract this value directly from the
      instruction. Hints: Carefully examine the opcodes shown in Figure 2.20. Also,
      remember that LSR and LSL do not use the Rm field. Finally, ignore STXR.
      4.7.2 [5] <§4.4> What is the latency of an R-type instruction (i.e., how long must
      the clock period be to ensure that this instruction works correctly)?
      4.7.3 [10] <§4.4> What is the latency of LDUR? (Check your answer carefully.
      Many students place extra muxes on the critical path.)
      4.7.4 [10] <§4.4> What is the latency of STUR? (Check your answer carefully.
      Many students place extra muxes on the critical path.)
      4.7.5 [5] <§4.4> What is the latency of CBZ?
      4.7.6 [5] <§4.4> What is the latency of B?
      4.7.7 [5] <§4.4> What is the latency of an I-type instruction?

4.7.8 [5] <§4.4> What is the minimum clock period for this CPU?

4.8 [10] <§4.4> Suppose you could build a CPU where the clock cycle time was
different for each instruction. What would the speedup of this new CPU be over
the CPU presented in Figure 4.23 given the instruction mix below?
  R-type/I-Type       LDUR        STUR       CBZ          B
         52%           25%         10%       11%       2%

4.9 Consider the addition of a multiplier to the CPU shown in Figure 4.23. This
addition will add 300 ps to the latency of the ALU, but will reduce the number of
instructions by 5% (because there will no longer be a need to emulate the multiply
instruction).
4.9.1 [5] <§4.4> What is the clock cycle time with and without this improvement?
4.9.2 [10] <§4.4> What is the speedup achieved by adding this improvement?
4.9.3 [10] <§4.4> What is the slowest the new ALU can be and still result in
improved performance?

4.10 When processor designers consider a possible improvement to the processor
datapath, the decision usually depends on the cost/performance trade-off. In the
following three problems, assume that we are beginning with the datapath from
Figure 4.23, the latencies from Exercise 4.7, and the following costs:

          Register                                  Single     Sign    Single
 I-Mem      File     Mux   ALU   Adder   D-Mem     Register   extend    gate     Control
 1000          200   10    100    30     2000         5        100       1        500

Suppose doubling the number of general purpose registers from 32 to 64 would
reduce the number of LDUR and STUR instruction by 12%, but increase the latency
of the register file from 150 ps to 160 ps and double the cost from 200 to 400. (Use
the instruction mix from Exercise 4.8 and ignore the other effects on the ISA
discussed in Exercise 2.18.)
4.10.1 [5] <§4.4> What is the speedup achieved by adding this improvement?
4.10.2 [10] <§4.4> Compare the change in performance to the change in cost.
4.10.3 [10] <§4.4> Given the cost/performance ratios you just calculated,
describe a situation where it makes sense to add more registers and describe a
situation where it doesn’t make sense to add more registers.

4.11 Examine the difficulty of adding a proposed LWI Rd, Rm(Rn) (“Load With
Increment”) instruction to LEGv8.
Interpretation: Reg[Rd]=Mem[Reg[Rm]+Reg[Rn]]

      4.11.1 [5] <§4.4> Which new functional blocks (if any) do we need for this
      instruction?
      4.11.2 [5] <§4.4> Which existing functional blocks (if any) require modification?
      4.11.3 [5] <§4.4> Which new data paths (if any) do we need for this instruction?
      4.11.4 [5] <§4.4> What new signals do we need (if any) from the control unit to
      support this instruction?

      4.12 Examine the difficulty of adding a proposed swap Rd, Rn instruction to
      LEGv8.
      Interpretation: Reg[Rd]=Reg[Rn]; Reg[Rn]=Reg[Rd]
      4.12.1 [5] <§4.4> Which new functional blocks (if any) do we need for this
      instruction?
      4.12.2 [10] <§4.4> Which existing functional blocks (if any) require
      modification?
      4.12.3 [5] <§4.4> What new data paths do we need (if any) to support this
      instruction?
      4.12.4 [5] <§4.4> What new signals do we need (if any) from the control unit to
      support this instruction?
      4.12.5 [5] <§4.4> Modify Figure 4.23 to demonstrate an implementation of this
      new instruction.

      4.13 Examine the difficulty of adding a proposed ss Rd,Rm,Rn (Store Sum)
      instruction to LEGv8.
      Interpretation: Mem[Reg[Rd]]=Reg[Rn]+immediate
      4.13.1 [10] <§4.4> Which new functional blocks (if any) do we need for this
      instruction?
      4.13.2 [10] <§4.4> Which existing functional blocks (if any) require modification?
      4.13.3 [5] <§4.4> What new data paths do we need (if any) to support this
      instruction?
      4.13.4 [5] <§4.4> What new signals do we need (if any) from the control unit to
      support this instruction?
      4.13.5 [5] <§4.4> Modify Figure 4.23 to demonstrate an implementation of this
      new instruction.

      4.14 [5] <§4.4> For which instructions (if any) is the sign-extend block on the
      critical path?

4.15 LDUR is instruction with the longest latency on the CPU from Section 4.4.
If we modified LDUR and STUR so that there was no offset (i.e., the address to be
loaded from/stored to must be calculated and placed in Rd before calling LDUR/
STUR), then no instruction would use both the ALU and Data memory. This
would allow us to reduce the clock cycle time. However, it would also increase the
number of instructions, because many LDUR and STUR instructions would need to
be replaced with LDUR/ADD or STUR/ADD combinations.
4.15.1 [5] <§4.4> What would the new clock cycle time be?
4.15.2 [10] <§4.4> Would a program with the instruction mix presented in
Exercise 4.7 run faster or slower on this new CPU? By how much? (For simplicity,
assume every LDUR and STUR instruction is replaced with a sequence of two
instructions.)
4.15.3 [5] <§4.4> What is the primary factor that influences whether a program
will run faster or slower on the new CPU?
4.15.4 [5] <§4.4> Do you consider the original CPU (as shown in Figure 4.23)
a better overall design; or do you consider the new CPU a better overall design?
Why?

4.16 In this exercise, we examine how pipelining affects the clock cycle time of the
processor. Problems in this exercise assume that individual stages of the datapath
have the following latencies:

     IF           ID             EX      MEM       WB
    250 ps      350 ps          150 ps   300 ps    200 ps

   Also, assume that instructions executed by the processor are broken down as
follows:

   ALU/Logic           Jump/Branch       LDUR       STUR
      45%                 20%             20%       15%

4.16.1 [5] <§4.5> What is the clock cycle time in a pipelined and non-pipelined
processor?
4.16.2 [10] <§4.5> What is the total latency of an LDUR instruction in a pipelined
and non-pipelined processor?
4.16.3 [10] <§4.5> If we can split one stage of the pipelined datapath into two
new stages, each with half the latency of the original stage, which stage would you
split and what is the new clock cycle time of the processor?
4.16.4 [10] <§4.5> Assuming there are no stalls or hazards, what is the utilization
of the data memory?

      4.16.5 [10] <§4.5> Assuming there are no stalls or hazards, what is the utilization
      of the write-register port of the “Registers” unit?

      4.17 [10] <§4.5> What is the minimum number of cycles needed to completely
      execute n instructions on a CPU with a k stage pipeline? Justify your formula.

      4.18 [5] <§4.5> Assume that X1 is initialized to 11 and X2 is initialized to 22.
      Suppose you executed the code below on a version of the pipeline from Section
      4.5 that does not handle data hazards (i.e., the programmer is responsible for
      addressing data hazards by inserting NOP instructions where necessary). What
      would the final values of registers X3 and X4 be?

           ADDI X1, X2, #5
           ADD X3, X1, X2
           ADDI X4, X1, #15

      4.19 [10] <§4.5> Assume that X1 is initialized to 11 and X2 is initialized to 22.
      Suppose you executed the code below on a version of the pipeline from Section
      4.5 that does not handle data hazards (i.e., the programmer is responsible for
      addressing data hazards by inserting NOP instructions where necessary). What
      would the final values of register X5 be? Assume the register file is written at the
      beginning of the cycle and read at the end of a cycle. Therefore, an ID stage will
      return the results of a WB state occurring during the same cycle. See Section 4.7
      and Figure 4.51 for details.

           ADDI X1, X2, #5
           ADD X3, X1, X2
           ADDI X4, X1, #15
           ADD X5, X1, X1

      4.20 [5] <§4.5> Add NOP instructions to the code below so that it will run
      correctly on a pipeline that does not handle data hazards.

           ADDI X1, X2, #5
           ADD X3, X1, X2
           ADDI X4, X1, #15
           ADD X5, X3, X2

      4.21 Consider a version of the pipeline from Section 4.5 that does not handle
      data hazards (i.e., the programmer is responsible for addressing data hazards by
      inserting NOP instructions where necessary). Suppose that (after optimization) a
      typical n-instruction program requires an additional .4*n NOP instructions to
      correctly handle data hazards.

4.21.1 [5] <§4.5> Suppose that the cycle time of this pipeline without forwarding
is 250 ps. Suppose also that adding forwarding hardware will reduce the number
of NOPs from .4*n to .05*n, but increase the cycle time to 300 ps. What is the
speedup of this new pipeline compared to the one without forwarding?
4.21.2 [10] <§4.5> Different programs will require different amounts of NOPs.
How many NOPs (as a percentage of code instructions) can remain in the typical
program before that program runs slower on the pipeline with forwarding?
4.21.3 [10] <§4.5> Repeat 4.21.2; however, this time let x represent the number
of NOP instructions relative to n. (In 4.21.2, x was equal to .4.) Your answer will
be with respect to x.
4.21.4 [10] <§4.5> Can a program with only .075*n NOPs possibly run faster
on the pipeline with forwarding? Explain why or why not.
4.21.5 [10] <§4.5> At minimum, how many NOPs (as a percentage of code
instructions) must a program have before it can possibly run faster on the pipeline
with forwarding?

4.22 [5] <§4.5> Consider the fragment of LEGv8 assembly below:

     STUR X16, [X6, #12]
     LDUR X16, [X6, #8]
     SUB X7, X5, X4
     CBZ X7, Label
     ADD X5, X1, X4
     SUB X5, X15, X4

Suppose we modify the pipeline so that it has only one memory (that handles both
instructions and data). In this case, there will be a structural hazard every time
a program needs to fetch an instruction during the same cycle in which another
instruction accesses data.
4.22.1 [5] <§4.5> Draw a pipeline diagram to show were the code above will
stall.
4.22.2 [5] <§4.5> In general, is it possible to reduce the number of stalls/NOPs
resulting from this structural hazard by reordering code?
4.22.3 [5] <§4.5> Must this structural hazard be handled in hardware? We have
seen that data hazards can be eliminated by adding NOPs to the code. Can you do
the same with this structural hazard? If so, explain how. If not, explain why not.
4.22.4 [5] <§4.5> Approximately how many stalls would you expect this
structural hazard to generate in a typical program? (Use the instruction mix from
Exercise 4.8.)

      4.23 If we change load/store instructions to use a register (without an offset) as
      the address, these instructions no longer need to use the ALU. (See Exercise 4.15.)
      As a result, the MEM and EX stages can be overlapped and the pipeline has only
      four stages.
      4.23.1 [10] <§4.5> How will the reduction in pipeline depth affect the cycle
      time?
      4.23.2 [5] <§4.5> How might this change improve the performance of the
      pipeline?
      4.23.3 [5] <§4.5> How might this change degrade the performance of the
      pipeline?
      4.24 [10] <§4.7> Which of the two pipeline diagrams below better describes the
      operation of the pipeline’s hazard detection unit? Why?
      Choice 1:

            LDUR X1, [X2, #0]:   IF ID EX ME WB
            ADD X3, X1, X4:       IF ID EX..ME WB
            ORR X5, X6, X7:         IF ID..EX ME WB

      Choice 2:

            LDUR X1, [X2, #0]:   IF ID EX ME WB
            ADD X3, X1, X4:       IF ID..EX ME WB
            ORR X5, X6, X7:         IF..ID EX ME WB

      4.25 Consider the following loop.

            LOOP: LDUR X10, [X1, #0]
                  LDUR X11, [X1, #8]
                  ADD X12, X10, X11
                  SUBI X1, X1, #16
                CBNZ X12, LOOP

      Assume that perfect branch prediction is used (no stalls due to control hazards),
      that there are no delay slots, that the pipeline has full forwarding support, and that
      branches are resolved in the EX (as opposed to the ID) stage.
      4.25.1 [10] <§4.7> Show a pipeline execution diagram for the first two iterations
      of this loop.
      4.25.2 [10] <§4.7> Mark pipeline stages that do not perform useful work. How
      often while the pipeline is full do we have a cycle in which all five pipeline stages are
      doing useful work? (Begin with the cycle during which the SUBI is in the IF stage.
      End with the cycle during which the CBNZ is in the IF stage.)

4.26 This exercise is intended to help you understand the cost/complexity/
performance trade-offs of forwarding in a pipelined processor. Problems in this
exercise refer to pipelined datapaths from Figure 4.53. These problems assume
that, of all the instructions executed in a processor, the following fraction of these
instructions has a particular type of RAW data dependence. The type of RAW data
dependence is identified by the stage that produces the result (EX or MEM) and
the next instruction that consumes the result (1st instruction that follows the one
that produces the result, 2nd instruction that follows, or both). We assume that the
register write is done in the first half of the clock cycle and that register reads are
done in the second half of the cycle, so “EX to 3rd” and “MEM to 3rd” dependences
are not counted because they cannot result in data hazards. We also assume that
branches are resolved in the EX stage (as opposed to the ID stage), and that the CPI
of the processor is 1 if there are no data hazards.

     EX to              MEM to 1st        EX to 2nd           MEM to 2nd    EX to 1st and EX
    1st Only              Only              Only                Only             to 2nd
         5%                20%                  5%               10%               10%

   Assume the following latencies for individual pipeline stages. For the EX stage,
latencies are given separately for a processor without forwarding and for a processor
with different kinds of forwarding.

                                                  EX (FW          EX (FW
                          EX (no     EX (full    from EX/       from MEM/
    IF          ID         FW)        FW)        MEM only)       WB only)    MEM          WB
  120 ps       100 ps     110 ps     130 ps          120 ps        120 ps   120 ps       100 ps

4.26.1 [5] <§4.7> For each RAW dependency listed above, give a sequence of at
least three assembly statements that exhibits that dependency.
4.26.2 [5] <§4.7> For each RAW dependency above, how many NOPs would
need to be inserted to allow your code from 4.26.1 to run correctly on a pipeline
with no forwarding or hazard detection? Show where the NOPs could be inserted.
4.26.3 [10] <§4.7> Analyzing each instruction independently will over-count
the number of NOPs needed to run a program on a pipeline with no forwarding or
hazard detection. Write a sequence of three assembly instructions so that, when
you consider each instruction in the sequence independently, the sum of the stalls
is larger than the number of stalls the sequence actually needs to avoid data hazards.
4.26.4 [5] <§4.7> Assuming no other hazards, what is the CPI for the program
described by the table above when run on a pipeline with no forwarding? What
percent of cycles are stalls? (For simplicity, assume that all necessary cases are listed
above and can be treated independently.)
4.26.5 [5] <§4.7> What is the CPI if we use full forwarding (forward all results
that can be forwarded)? What percent of cycles are stalls?

      4.26.6 [10] <§4.7> Let us assume that we cannot afford to have three-input
      multiplexors that are needed for full forwarding. We have to decide if it is better to
      forward only from the EX/MEM pipeline register (next-cycle forwarding) or only
      from the MEM/WB pipeline register (two-cycle forwarding). What is the CPI for
      each option?
      4.26.7 [5] <§4.7> For the given hazard probabilities and pipeline stage latencies,
      what is the speedup achieved by each type of forwarding (EX/MEM, MEM/WB,
      for full) as compared to a pipeline that has no forwarding?
      4.26.8 [5] <§4.7> What would be the additional speedup (relative to the fastest
      processor from 4.26.7) be if we added “time-travel” forwarding that eliminates all
      data hazards? Assume that the yet-to-be-invented time-travel circuitry adds 100 ps
      to the latency of the full-forwarding EX stage.
      4.26.9 [5] <§4.7> The table of hazard types has separate entries for “EX to 1st” and
      “EX to 1st and EX to 2nd”. Why is there no entry for “MEM to 1st and MEM to 2nd”?

      4.27 Problems in this exercise refer to the following sequence of instructions, and
      assume that it is executed on a five-stage pipelined datapath:

            ADD     X5, X2, X1
            LDUR    X3, [X5, #4]
            LDUR    X2, [X2, #0]
            ORR     X3, X5, X3
            STUR    X3, [X5, #0]

      4.27.1 [5] <§4.7> If there is no forwarding or hazard detection, insert NOPs to
      ensure correct execution.
      4.27.2 [10] <§4.7> Now, change and/or rearrange the code to minimize the
      number of NOPs needed. You can assume register X7 can be used to hold temporary
      values in your modified code.
      4.27.3 [10] <§4.7> If the processor has forwarding, but we forgot to implement
      the hazard detection unit, what happens when the original code executes?
      4.27.4 [20] <§4.7> If there is forwarding, for the first seven cycles during the
      execution of this code, specify which signals are asserted in each cycle by hazard
      detection and forwarding units in Figure 4.59.
      4.27.5 [10] <§4.7> If there is no forwarding, what new input and output signals
      do we need for the hazard detection unit in Figure 4.59? Using this instruction
      sequence as an example, explain why each signal is needed.
      4.27.6 [20] <§4.7> For the new hazard detection unit from 4.26.5, specify which
      output signals it asserts in each of the first five cycles during the execution of this
      code.

4.28 The importance of having a good branch predictor depends on how often
conditional branches are executed. Together with branch predictor accuracy, this
will determine how much time is spent stalling due to mispredicted branches. In
this exercise, assume that the breakdown of dynamic instructions into various
instruction categories is as follows:

      R-Type             CBZ/CBNZ            B             LDUR           STUR
        40%                 25%              5%            25%             5%

  Also, assume the following branch predictor accuracies:

         Always-Taken                   Always-Not-Taken                  2-Bit
               45%                            55%                         85%

4.28.1 [10] <§4.8> Stall cycles due to mispredicted branches increase the CPI.
What is the extra CPI due to mispredicted branches with the always-taken predictor?
Assume that branch outcomes are determined in the ID stage and applied in the EX
stage that there are no data hazards, and that no delay slots are used.
4.28.2 [10] <§4.8> Repeat 4.28.1 for the “always-not-taken” predictor.
4.28.3 [10] <§4.8> Repeat 4.28.1 for the 2-bit predictor.
4.28.4 [10] <§4.8> With the 2-bit predictor, what speedup would be achieved if
we could convert half of the branch instructions to some ALU instruction? Assume
that correctly and incorrectly predicted instructions have the same chance of being
replaced.
4.28.5 [10] <§4.8> With the 2-bit predictor, what speedup would be achieved if
we could convert half of the branch instructions in a way that replaced each branch
instruction with two ALU instructions? Assume that correctly and incorrectly
predicted instructions have the same chance of being replaced.
4.28.6 [10] <§4.8> Some branch instructions are much more predictable than
others. If we know that 80% of all executed branch instructions are easy-to-predict
loop-back branches that are always predicted correctly, what is the accuracy of the
2-bit predictor on the remaining 20% of the branch instructions?

4.29 This exercise examines the accuracy of various branch predictors for the
following repeating pattern (e.g., in a loop) of branch outcomes: T, NT, T, T, NT.
4.29.1 [5] <§4.8> What is the accuracy of always-taken and always-not-taken
predictors for this sequence of branch outcomes?
4.29.2 [5] <§4.8> What is the accuracy of the 2-bit predictor for the first four
branches in this pattern, assuming that the predictor starts off in the bottom left
state from Figure 4.62 (predict not taken)?

      4.29.3 [10] <§4.8> What is the accuracy of the 2-bit predictor if this pattern is
      repeated forever?
      4.29.4 [30] <§4.8> Design a predictor that would achieve a perfect accuracy if
      this pattern is repeated forever. You predictor should be a sequential circuit with
      one output that provides a prediction (1 for taken, 0 for not taken) and no inputs
      other than the clock and the control signal that indicates that the instruction is a
      conditional branch.
      4.29.5 [10] <§4.8> What is the accuracy of your predictor from 4.29.4 if it is
      given a repeating pattern that is the exact opposite of this one?
      4.29.6 [20] <§4.8> Repeat 4.29.4, but now your predictor should be able to
      eventually (after a warm-up period during which it can make wrong predictions)
      start perfectly predicting both this pattern and its opposite. Your predictor should
      have an input that tells it what the real outcome was. Hint: this input lets your
      predictor determine which of the two repeating patterns it is given.

      4.30 This exercise explores how exception handling affects pipeline design. The
      first three problems in this exercise refer to the following two instructions:

            Instruction 1           Instruction 2
            CBZ X1, LABEL          LDUR X1, [X2,#0]

      4.30.1 [5] <§4.9> Which exceptions can each of these instructions trigger? For
      each of these exceptions, specify the pipeline stage in which it is detected.
      4.30.2 [10] <§4.9> If there is a separate handler address for each exception, show
      how the pipeline organization must be changed to be able to handle this exception.
      You can assume that the addresses of these handlers are known when the processor
      is designed.
      4.30.3 [10] <§4.9> If the second instruction is fetched immediately after the
      first instruction, describe what happens in the pipeline when the first instruction
      causes the first exception you listed in Exercise 4.30.1. Show the pipeline execution
      diagram from the time the first instruction is fetched until the time the first
      instruction of the exception handler is completed.
      4.30.4 [20] <§4.9> In vectored exception handling, the table of exception handler
      addresses is in data memory at a known (fixed) address. Change the pipeline to
      implement this exception handling mechanism. Repeat Exercise 4.30.3 using this
      modified pipeline and vectored exception handling.
      4.30.5 [15] <§4.9> We want to emulate vectored exception handling (described
      in Exercise 4.30.4) on a machine that has only one fixed handler address. Write
      the code that should be at that fixed address. Hint: this code should identify the
      exception, get the right address from the exception vector table, and transfer
      execution to that handler.

4.31 In this exercise we compare the performance of 1-issue and 2-issue
processors, taking into account program transformations that can be made to
optimize for 2-issue execution. Problems in this exercise refer to the following loop
(written in C):

     for(i=0;i!=j;i+=2)
       b[i]=a[i]–a[i+1];

   A compiler doing little or no optimization might produce the following LEGv8
assembly code:

          MOV         X5, XZR
          B           ENT
     TOP: LSL         X10, X5, #3
          ADD         X11, X1, X10
          LDUR        X12, [X11, #0]
          LDUR        X13, [X11, #8]
          SUB         X14, X12, X13
          ADD         X15, X2, X10
          STUR        X14, [X15, #0]
          ADDI        X5, X5, #2
     ENT: CMP         X5, X6
          B.NE        TOP

  The code above uses the following registers:

                                                     Temporary
      i           j           a            b           values
     X5          X6           X1          X2          X10–X15

   Assume the two-issue, statically scheduled processor for this exercise has the
following properties:
  1. ?One instruction must be a memory operation; the other must be an
      arithmetic/logic instruction or a branch.
  2. ?The processor has all possible forwarding paths between stages (including
      paths to the ID stage for branch resolution).
  3. The processor has perfect branch prediction.
  4. ?Two instruction may not issue together in a packet if one depends on the
      other. (See page 345.)
  5. ?If a stall is necessary, both instructions in the issue packet must stall. (See
      page 345.)
  As you complete these exercises, notice how much effort goes into generating
code that will produce a near-optimal speedup.
4.31.1 [30] <§4.10> Draw a pipeline diagram showing how LEGv8 code given
above executes on the two-issue processor. Assume that the loop exits after two
iterations.

      4.31.2 [10] <§4.10> What is the speedup of going from a one-issue to a two-
      issue processor? (Assume the loop runs thousands of iterations.)

      4.31.3 [10] <§4.10> Rearrange/rewrite the LEGv8 code given above to achieve
      better performance on the one-issue processor. Hint: Use the instruction “CBZ
      X6, XZR, DONE” to skip the loop entirely if j = 0.

      4.31.4 [20] <§4.10> Rearrange/rewrite the LEGv8 code given above to achieve
      better performance on the two-issue processor. (Do not unroll the loop, however.)

      4.31.5 [30] <§4.10> Repeat Exercise 4.31.1, but this time use your optimized
      code from Exercise 4.31.4.
      4.31.6 [10] <§4.10> What is the speedup of going from a one-issue processor to
      a two-issue processor when running the optimized code from Exercises 4.31.3 and
      4.31.4.
      4.31.7 [10] <§4.10> Unroll the LEGv8 code from Exercise 4.31.3 so that each
      iteration of the unrolled loop handles two iterations of the original loop. Then,
      rearrange/rewrite your unrolled code to achieve better performance on the one-
      issue processor. You may assume that j is a multiple of 4.

      4.31.8 [20] <§4.10> Unroll the LEGv8 code from Exercise 4.31.4 so that each
      iteration of the unrolled loop handles two iterations of the original loop. Then,
      rearrange/rewrite your unrolled code to achieve better performance on the two-
      issue processor. You may assume that j is a multiple of 4. (Hint: Re-organize the
      loop so that some calculations appear both outside the loop and at the end of the
      loop. You may assume that the values in temporary registers are not needed after
      the loop.)

      4.31.9 [10] <§4.10> What is the speedup of going from a one-issue processor to
      a two-issue processor when running the unrolled, optimized code from Exercises
      4.31.7 and 4.31.8?

      4.31.10 [30] <§4.10> Repeat Exercises 4.31.8 and 4.31.9, but this time assume
      the two-issue processor can run two arithmetic/logic instructions together. (In
      other words, the first instruction in a packet can be any type of instruction, but the
      second must be an arithmetic or logic instruction. Two memory operations cannot
      be scheduled at the same time.)

      4.32 This exercise explores energy efficiency and its relationship with performance.
      Problems in this exercise assume the following energy consumption for activity in
      Instruction memory, Registers, and Data memory. You can assume that the other
      components of the datapath consume a negligible amount of energy. (“Register
      Read” and “Register Write” refer to the register file only.)

   I-Mem      1 Register Read      Register Write     D-Mem Read        D-Mem Write
   140pJ            70pJ                60pJ              140pJ               120pJ

   Assume that components in the datapath have the following latencies. You can
assume that the other components of the datapath have negligible latencies.

   I-Mem       Control     Register Read or Write      ALU        D-Mem Read or Write
   200 ps      150 ps               90 ps              90 ps            250 ps

4.32.1 [5] <§§4.3, 4.6, 4.14> How much energy is spent to execute an ADD
instruction in a single-cycle design and in the five-stage pipelined design?
4.32.2 [10] <§§4.6, 4.14> What is the worst-case ARMv8 instruction in terms of
energy consumption? What is the energy spent to execute it?
4.32.3 [10] <§§4.6, 4.14> If energy reduction is paramount, how would you
change the pipelined design? What is the percentage reduction in the energy spent
by an LDUR instruction after this change?
4.32.4 [10] <§§4.6, 4.14> What other instructions can potentially benefit from
the change discussed in Exercise 4.32.2?
4.32.5 [10] <§§4.6, 4.14> How do your changes from Exercise 4.32.3 affect the
performance of a pipelined CPU?
4.32.6 [10] <§§4.6, 4.14> We can eliminate the MemRead control signal and have
the data memory be read in every cycle, i.e., we can permanently have MemRead=1.
Explain why the processor still functions correctly after this change. If 25% of
instructions are loads, what is the effect of this change on clock frequency and
energy consumption?

4.33 When silicon chips are fabricated, defects in materials (e.g., silicon) and
manufacturing errors can result in defective circuits. A very common defect is
for one wire to affect the signal in another. This is called a “cross-talk fault”. A
special class of cross-talk faults is when a signal is connected to a wire that has a
constant logical value (e.g., a power supply wire). These faults, where the affected
signal always has a logical value of either 0 or 1 are called “stuck-at-0” or “stuck-
at-1” faults. The following problems refer to bit 0 of the Write Register input on the
register file in Figure 4.23.
4.33.1 [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Let us assume that processor testing is done by (1)
filling the PC, registers, and data and instruction memories with some values (you
can choose which values), (2) letting a single instruction execute, then (3) reading
the PC, memories, and registers. These values are then examined to determine if
a particular fault is present. Can you design a test (values for PC, memories, and
registers) that would determine if there is a stuck-at-0 fault on this signal?
384                   Chapter 4   The ProcessorThe Processor

                      4.33.2 [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Repeat Exercise 4.33.1 for a stuck-at-1 fault. Can you
                      use a single test for both stuck-at-0 and stuck-at-1? If yes, explain how; if no,
                      explain why not.
                      4.33.3 [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> If we know that the processor has a stuck-at-1 fault on
                      this signal, is the processor still usable? To be usable, we must be able to convert any
                      program that executes on a normal LEGv8 processor into a program that works on
                      this processor. You can assume that there is enough free instruction memory and
                      data memory to let you make the program longer and store additional data.
                      4.33.4 [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Repeat Exercise 4.33.1; but now the fault to test for is
                      whether the MemRead control signal becomes 0 if the branch control signal is 0,
                      no fault otherwise.
                      4.33.5 [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Repeat Exercise 4.33.1; but now the fault to test for
                      is whether the MemRead control signal becomes 1 if RegRt control signal is 1,
                      no fault otherwise. Hint: This problem requires knowledge of operating systems.
                      Consider what causes segmentation faults.
                      4.33.6 [10] <§§4.3, 4.4> Repeat Exercise 4.33.1; but now the fault to test for is
                      whether the Branch control signal becomes 0 if Reg2Loc control signal is 0, no
                      fault otherwise.

    Answers to §4.1, page 260: 3 of 5: Control, Datapath, Memory. Input and Output are missing.
 Check Yourself §4.2, page 263: false. Edge-triggered state elements make simultaneous reading and
                      writing both possible and unambiguous.
                      §4.3, page 270: I. a. II. c.
                      §4.4, page 283: Yes, Branch and ALUOp0 are identical. In addition, you can use
                      the flexibility of the don’t care bits to combine other signals together. ALUSrc and
                      MemtoReg can be made the same by setting the two don’t care bits of MemtoReg
                      to 1 and 0. Reg2Loc and RegWrite can be made to be inverses of one another by
                      setting the don’t care bit of Reg2Loc to 0. You don’t need an inverter; simply use the
                      other signal and flip the order of the inputs to the Reg2Loc multiplexor!
                      §4.5, page 296: 1. Stall due to a load-use data hazard of the LDUR result. II. Avoid
                      stalling in the third instruction for the read-after-write data hazard on X1 by
                      forwarding the ADD result. 3. It need not stall, even without forwarding.
                      §4.6, page 309: Statements 2 and 4 are correct; the rest are incorrect.
                      §4.8, page 335: 1. Predict not taken. 2. Predict taken. 3. Dynamic prediction.
                      §4.9, page 342: The first instruction, since it is logically executed before the others.
                      §4.10, page 355: 1. Both. 2. Both. 3. Software. 4. Hardware. 5. Hardware.
                      6. Hardware. 7. Both. 8. Hardware. 9. Both.
                      §4.12, page 365: First two are false and the last two are true.
                      §4.13, page 4.13-4: Only statement #3 is completely accurate.
                      §4.13, page 4.13-6: Statements #1 and #4 are true.
This page intentionally left blank
