            6
                                                            Parallel Processors
                                                            from Client to Cloud
                                                            6.1          Introduction 516
“I swing big, with                                          6.2          The Difficulty of Creating Parallel
everything I’ve got.                                                     Processing Programs 518
I hit big or I miss big.                                    6.3          SISD, MIMD, SIMD, SPMD, and Vector              523

I like to live as big as                                    6.4          Hardware Multithreading 530
                                                            6.5          Multicore and Other Shared Memory
I can.”
                                                                         Multiprocessors 533
Babe Ruth
American baseball player                                    6.6          Introduction to Graphics Processing
                                                                         Units 538

                           Computer Organization and Design. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801733-3.00020-4
                           © 2016
                             2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
6.7    Clusters, Warehouse Scale Computers, and Other
       Message-Passing Multiprocessors 545
6.8    Introduction to Multiprocessor Network Topologies 550
6.9    Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking 553
6.10   Multiprocessor Benchmarks and Performance Models 554
6.11   Real Stuff: Benchmarking and Rooflines of the Intel
       Core i7 960 and the NVIDIA Tesla GPU 564
6.12   Going Faster: Multiple Processors and Matrix Multiply 569
6.13   Fallacies and Pitfalls 572
6.14   Concluding Remarks 574
6.15   Historical Perspective and Further Reading 577
6.16   Exercises 577

                   Multiprocessor or Cluster Organization

       Computer                                                     Computer

                                          Network

       Computer                                                     Computer

                               6.1           Introduction

Over the Mountains Of        Computer architects have long sought the “The City of Gold” (El Dorado) of
the Moon, Down the           computer design: to create powerful computers simply by connecting many existing
Valley of the Shadow,        smaller ones. This golden vision is the fountainhead of multiprocessors. Ideally,
Ride, boldly ride the        customers order as many processors as they can afford and receive a commensurate
shade replied—If you         amount of performance. Thus, multiprocessor software must be designed to work
seek for El Dorado!          with a variable number of processors. As mentioned in Chapter 1, energy has
Edgar Allan Poe,             become the overriding issue for both microprocessors and datacenters. Replacing
“El Dorado,”                 large inefficient processors with many smaller, efficient processors can deliver
stanza 4, 1849               better performance per joule both in the large and in the small, if software
                             can efficiently use them. Therefore, improved energy efficiency joins scalable
                             performance in the case for multiprocessors.
multiprocessor                  Since multiprocessor software should scale, some designs support operation
A computer system with at    in the presence of broken hardware; that is, if a single processor fails in a
least two processors. This
computer is in contrast to
                             multiprocessor with n processors, these systems would continue to provide service
a uniprocessor, which has    with n – 1 processors. Hence, multiprocessors can also improve availability (see
one, and is increasingly     Chapter 5).
hard to find today.             High performance can mean greater throughput for independent tasks, called
                             task-level parallelism or process-level parallelism. These tasks are independent
                             single-threaded applications, and they are an important and popular use of
                             multiple processors. This approach contrasts with running a single job on multiple
                             processors. We use the term parallel processing program to refer to a single
                             program that runs on multiple processors simultaneously.
                                There have long been scientific problems that have needed much faster
                             computers, and this class of problems has been used to justify many novel parallel
                             computers over the decades. Some of these problems can be handled simply today,
task-level parallelism       using a cluster composed of microprocessors housed in many independent servers
or process-level             (see Section 6.7). In addition, clusters can serve equally demanding applications
parallelism Utilizing        outside the sciences, such as search engines, Web servers, email servers, and
multiple processors by       databases.
running independent
programs simultaneously.
                                As described in Chapter 1, multiprocessors have been shoved into the spotlight
                             because the energy problem means that future increases in performance will
parallel processing          primarily come from explicit hardware parallelism rather than much higher
program A single             clock rates or vastly improved CPI. As we said in Chapter 1, they are called
program that runs on
multiple processors
simultaneously.

cluster A set of
computers connected over
a local area network that
function as a single large
multiprocessor.
                                                                             6.1   Introduction                         517

multicore microprocessors instead of multiprocessor microprocessors,                              multicore
presumably to avoid redundancy in naming. Hence, processors are often called                      microprocessor
                                                                                                  A microprocessor
cores in a multicore chip. The number of cores is expected to increase with
                                                                                                  containing multiple
Moore’s Law. These multicores are almost always Shared Memory Processors                          processors (“cores”)
(SMPs), as they usually share a single physical address space. We’ll see SMPs                     in a single integrated
more in Section 6.5.                                                                              circuit. Virtually all
    The state of technology today means that programmers who care about                           microprocessors today in
performance must become parallel programmers, for sequential code now means                       desktops and servers are
slow code.                                                                                        multicore.
    The tall challenge facing the industry is to create hardware and software that
will make it easy to write correct parallel processing programs that will execute                 shared memory
efficiently in performance and energy as the number of cores per chip scales.                     multiprocessor
    This abrupt shift in microprocessor design caught many off guard, so there is a               (SMP) A parallel
                                                                                                  processor with a single
great deal of confusion about the terminology and what it means. Figure 6.1 tries to              physical address space.
clarify the terms serial, parallel, sequential, and concurrent. The columns of this figure
represent the software, which is either inherently sequential or concurrent. The rows
of the figure represent the hardware, which is either serial or parallel. For example, the
programmers of compilers think of them as sequential programs: the steps include
parsing, code generation, optimization, and so on. In contrast, the programmers
of operating systems normally think of them as concurrent programs: cooperating
processes handling I/O events due to independent jobs running on a computer.
    The point of these two axes of Figure 6.1 is that concurrent software can run on
serial hardware, such as operating systems for the Intel Pentium 4 uniprocessor,
or on parallel hardware, such as an OS on the more recent Intel Core i7. The same
is true for sequential software. For example, the MATLAB programmer writes
a matrix multiply thinking about it sequentially, but it could run serially on the
Pentium 4 or in parallel on the Intel Core i7.
    You might guess that the only challenge of the parallel revolution is figuring out how
to make naturally sequential software have high performance on parallel hardware, but
it is also to make concurrent programs have high performance on multiprocessors
as the number of processors increases. With this distinction made, in the rest of this
chapter we will use parallel processing program or parallel software to mean either
sequential or concurrent software running on parallel hardware. The next section of
this chapter describes why it is hard to create efficient parallel processing programs.

                                                          Software
                                      Sequential                        Concurrent

                          Matrix Multiply written in MatLab   Windows Vista Operating System
               Serial
                          running on an Intel Pentium 4       running on an Intel Pentium 4
  Hardware
                          Matrix Multiply written in MATLAB   Windows Vista Operating System
               Parallel   running on an Intel Core i7         running on an Intel Core i7

FIGURE 6.1 Hardware/software categorization and examples of application perspective
on concurrency versus hardware perspective on parallelism.

                      Before proceeding further down the path to parallelism, don’t forget our initial
                   incursions from the earlier chapters:
                      n   Chapter 2, Section 2.11: Parallelism and Instructions: Synchronization
                      n   Chapter 3, Section 3.6: Parallelism and Computer Arithmetic: Subword
                          Parallelism
                      n   Chapter 4, Section 4.10: Parallelism via Instructions
                      n   Chapter 5, Section 5.10: Parallelism and Memory Hierarchy: Cache
                          Coherence
        Check
      Yourself True or false: To benefit from a multiprocessor, an application must be concurrent.

                                   The Difficulty of Creating Parallel
                      6.2
                                   Processing Programs

                   The difficulty with parallelism is not the hardware; it is that too few important
                   application programs have been rewritten to complete tasks sooner on
                   multiprocessors. It is difficult to write software that uses multiple processors to
                   complete one task faster, and the problem gets worse as the number of processors
                   increases.
                       Why has this been so? Why have parallel processing programs been so much
                   harder to develop than sequential programs?
                       The first reason is that you must get better performance or better energy
                   efficiency from a parallel processing program on a multiprocessor; otherwise, you
                   would just use a sequential program on a uniprocessor, as sequential programming
                   is simpler. In fact, uniprocessor design techniques, such as superscalar and out-of-
                   order execution, take advantage of instruction-level parallelism (see Chapter 4),
                   normally without the involvement of the programmer. Such innovations reduced
                   the demand for rewriting programs for multiprocessors, since programmers
                   could do nothing and yet their sequential programs would run faster on new
                   computers.
                       Why is it difficult to write parallel processing programs that are fast, especially
                   as the number of processors increases? In Chapter 1, we used the analogy of
                   eight reporters trying to write a single story in hopes of doing the work eight
                   times faster. To succeed, the task must be broken into eight equal-sized pieces,
                   because otherwise some reporters would be idle while waiting for the ones with
                   larger pieces to finish. Another speed-up obstacle could be that the reporters
                   would spend too much time communicating with each other instead of writing
                   their pieces of the story. For both this analogy and parallel programming,
                   the challenges include scheduling, partitioning the work into parallel pieces,
                   balancing the load evenly between the workers, time to synchronize, and
                          6.2 The Difficulty of Creating Parallel Processing Programs                   519

overhead for communication between the parties. The challenge is stiffer with the
more reporters for a newspaper story and with the more processors for parallel
programming.
    Our discussion in Chapter 1 reveals another obstacle, namely Amdahl’s Law. It
reminds us that even small parts of a program must be parallelized if the program
is to make good use of many cores.

    Speed-up Challenge
                                                                                             EXAMPLE
    Suppose you want to achieve a speed-up of 90 times faster with 100 processors.
    What percentage of the original computation can be sequential?

    Amdahl’s Law (Chapter 1) says
                                                                                             ANSWER
    Execution time after improvement =
           Execution time affected byy improvement
                                                   + Execution time unaffected
                  Amount of improvement

    We can reformulate Amdahl’s Law in terms of speed-up versus the initial
    execution time:

                                                Execution time before
    Speed-up =
                                                                              Execution time affected
                 (Execution time before − Execution time affected) +
                                                                             Amount of impro ovement

    This formula is usually rewritten assuming that the execution time before is
    1 for some unit of time, and the execution time affected by improvement is
    considered the fraction of the original execution time:

                                                1
     Speed-up =
                                                      Fraction time affected
                  (1 ? Fraction time affected) +
                                                     Amount of improvement

    Substituting 90 for speed-up and 100 for the amount of improvement into the
    formula above:

                                            1
          90 =
                                                    Fraction time affected
                 (1 ? Fraction time affected) +
                                                             100

                   Then simplifying the formula and solving for fraction time affected:

                 90 × (1 − 0.99 × Fraction time affected) = 1
                90 − (90 × 0.99 × Fraction time affected) = 1
                                                  90 − 1 = 90 × 0.99 × Fraction time affected
                                   Fraction time affected = 89/89.1 = 0.999

                   Thus, to achieve a speed-up of 90 from 100 processors, the sequential
                   percentage can only be 0.1%.

                 However, there are applications with plenty of parallelism, as we shall see next.

                   Speed-up Challenge: Bigger Problem
  EXAMPLE
                   Suppose you want to perform two sums: one is a sum of 10 scalar variables, and
                   one is a matrix sum of a pair of two-dimensional arrays, with dimensions 10 by 10.
                   For now let’s assume only the matrix sum is parallelizable; we’ll see soon how to
                   parallelize scalar sums. What speed-up do you get with 10 versus 40 processors?
                   Next, calculate the speed-ups assuming the matrices grow to 20 by 20.

                   If we assume performance is a function of the time for an addition, t, then
      ANSWER       there are 10 additions that do not benefit from parallel processors and 100
                   additions that do. If the time for a single processor is 110 t, the execution time
                   for 10 processors is

                   Execution timeafter improvement =
                          Execution timeaffected by improvement
                                                                        + Execution time unaffected
                                   Amount of improvement

                                                            100t
                   Execution timeafter improvement =             + 10t = 20t
                                                             10

                   so the speed-up with 10 processors is 110t/20t = 5.5. The execution time for
                   40 processors is

                                                                      100t
                            Execution timeafter improvement =              + 10t = 12.5t
                                                                       40
                   so the speed-up with 40 processors is 110t/12.5t = 8.8. Thus, for this problem
                   size, we get about 55% of the potential speed-up with 10 processors, but only
                   22% with 40.
                           6.2 The Difficulty of Creating Parallel Processing Programs                          521

    Look what happens when we increase the matrix. The sequential program now
    takes 10t+400t = 410t. The execution time for 10 processors is

                                                    400t
             Execution timeafter improvement =           + 10t = 50t
                                                     10

    so the speed-up with 10 processors is 410t/50t = 8.2. The execution time for
    40 processors is

                                                    400t
            Execution timeafter improvement =            + 10t = 20t
                                                     40

    so the speed-up with 40 processors is 410t/20t = 20.5. Thus, for this larger
    problem size, we get 82% of the potential speed-up with 10 processors and
    51% with 40.

    These examples show that getting good speed-up on a multiprocessor while
keeping the problem size fixed is harder than getting good speed-up by increasing
the size of the problem. This insight allows us to introduce two terms that describe
ways to scale up.
    Strong scaling means measuring speed-up while keeping the problem size fixed.        strong scaling Speed-
Weak scaling means that the problem size grows proportionally to the increase in the     up achieved on a
                                                                                         multiprocessor without
number of processors. Let’s assume that the size of the problem, M, is the working
                                                                                         increasing the size of the
set in main memory, and we have P processors. Then the memory per processor for          problem.
strong scaling is approximately M/P, and for weak scaling, it is about M.
    Note that the memory hierarchy can interfere with the conventional wisdom            weak scaling Speed-
about weak scaling being easier than strong scaling. For example, if the weakly          up achieved on a
                                                                                         multiprocessor while
scaled dataset no longer fits in the last level cache of a multicore microprocessor,     increasing the size of the
the resulting performance could be much worse than by using strong scaling.              problem proportionally
    Depending on the application, you can argue for either scaling approach. For         to the increase in the
example, the TPC-C debit-credit database benchmark requires that you scale up            number of processors.
the number of customer accounts in proportion to the higher transactions per
minute. The argument is that it’s nonsensical to think that a given customer base
is suddenly going to start using ATMs 100 times a day just because the bank gets a
faster computer. Instead, if you’re going to demonstrate a system that can perform
100 times the numbers of transactions per minute, you should run the experiment
with 100 times as many customers. Bigger problems often need more data, which
is an argument for weak scaling.
    This final example shows the importance of load balancing.

    Speed-up Challenge: Balancing Load

    To achieve the speed-up of 20.5 on the previous larger problem with 40                   EXAMPLE
    processors, we assumed the load was perfectly balanced. That is, each of the 40

                   processors had 2.5% of the work to do. Instead, show the impact on speed-up if
                   one processor’s load is higher than all the rest. Calculate at twice the load (5%)
                   and five times the load (12.5%) for that hardest working processor. How well
                   utilized are the rest of the processors?

                   If one processor has 5% of the parallel load, then it must do 5% × 400 or 20
      ANSWER       additions, and the other 39 will share the remaining 380. Since they are operating
                   simultaneously, we can just calculate the execution time as a maximum

                                                              380t 20t 
                      Execution timeafter improvement = Max      ,       + 10t = 30t
                                                              39 1 

                   The speed-up drops from 20.5 to 410t/30t = 14. The remaining 39 processors
                   are utilized less than half the time: while waiting 20t for the hardest working
                   processor to finish, they only compute for 380t/39 = 9.7t.
                      If one processor has 12.5% of the load, it must perform 50 additions. The
                   formula is:

                                                               350t 50t 
                      Execution time after improvement = Max      ,       + 10t = 60t
                                                               39 1 

                   The speed-up drops even further to 410t/60t = 7. The rest of the processors
                   are utilized less than 20% of the time (9t/50t). This example demonstrates the
                   importance of balancing load, for just a single processor with twice the load
                   of the others cuts speed-up by a third, and five times the load on just one
                   processor reduces speed-up by almost a factor of three.

                  Now that we better understand the goals and challenges of parallel processing,
               we give an overview of the rest of the chapter. Section 6.3 describes a much older
               classification scheme than in Figure 6.1. In addition, it describes two styles of
               instruction set architectures that support running of sequential applications
               on parallel hardware, namely SIMD and vector. Section 6.4 then describes
               multithreading, a term often confused with multiprocessing, in part because it
               relies upon similar concurrency in programs. Section 6.5 describes the first the two
               alternatives of a fundamental parallel hardware characteristic, which is whether
               or not all the processors in the systems rely upon a single physical address space.
               As mentioned above, the two popular versions of these alternatives are called
               shared memory multiprocessors (SMPs) and clusters, and this section covers the
               former. Section 6.6 describes a relatively new style of computer from the graphics
               hardware community, called a graphics-processing unit (GPU) that also assumes
               a single physical address. ( Appendix B describes GPUs in even more detail.)
               Section 6.7 describes clusters, a popular example of a computer with multiple
               physical address spaces. Section 6.8 shows typical topologies used to connect many
               processors together, either server nodes in a cluster or cores in a microprocessor.
                   Section 6.9 describes the hardware and software for communicating between

nodes in a cluster using Ethernet. It shows how to optimize its performance using
custom software and hardware. We next discuss the difficulty of finding parallel
benchmarks in Section 6.10. This section also includes a simple, yet insightful
performance model that helps in the design of applications as well as architectures.
We use this model as well as parallel benchmarks in Section 6.11 to compare a
multicore computer to a GPU. Section 6.12 divulges the final and largest step in
our journey of accelerating matrix multiply. For matrices that don’t fit in the cache,
parallel processing uses 16 cores to improve performance by a factor of 14. We
close with fallacies and pitfalls and our conclusions for parallelism.
   In the next section, we introduce acronyms that you probably have already seen
to identify different types of parallel computers.
                                                                                             Check
True or false: Strong scaling is not bound by Amdahl’s Law.                                  Yourself

  6.3            SISD, MIMD, SIMD, SPMD, and Vector

One categorization of parallel hardware proposed in the 1960s is still used today. It        SISD or Single
was based on the number of instruction streams and the number of data streams.               Instruction stream,
Figure 6.2 shows the categories. Thus, a conventional uniprocessor has a single              Single Data stream.
                                                                                             A uniprocessor.
instruction stream and single data stream, and a conventional multiprocessor has
multiple instruction streams and multiple data streams. These two categories are             MIMD or Multiple
abbreviated SISD and MIMD, respectively.                                                     Instruction streams,
   While it is possible to write separate programs that run on different processors          Multiple Data streams.
on a MIMD computer and yet work together for a grander, coordinated goal,                    A multiprocessor.
programmers normally write a single program that runs on all processors of a
MIMD computer, relying on conditional statements when different processors
should execute distinct sections of code. This style is called Single Program                SPMD Single Program,
Multiple Data (SPMD), but it is just the normal way to program a MIMD computer.              Multiple Data streams.
   The closest we can come to multiple instruction streams and single data stream            The conventional MIMD
(MISD) processor might be a “stream processor” that would perform a series of                programming model,
                                                                                             where a single program
computations on a single data stream in a pipelined fashion: parse the input from
                                                                                             runs across all processors.
the network, decrypt the data, decompress it, search for match, and so on. The
inverse of MISD is much more popular. SIMD computers operate on vectors of                   SIMD or Single
                                                                                             Instruction stream,
                                                                                             Multiple Data streams.
                                                     Data Streams                            The same instruction
                                                                                             is applied to many data
                                    Single                               Multiple            streams, as in a vector
                                                                                             processor.
                Single       SISD: Intel Pentium 4           SIMD: SSE instructions of x86
  Instruction
   Streams      Multiple   MISD: No examples today                  MIMD: Intel Core i7

FIGURE 6.2 Hardware categorization and examples based on number of instruction
streams and data streams: SISD, SIMD, MISD, and MIMD.

                          data. For example, a single SIMD instruction might add 64 numbers by sending 64
                          data streams to 64 ALUs to form 64 sums within a single clock cycle. The subword
                          parallel instructions that we saw in Sections 3.6 and 3.7 are another example of
                          SIMD; indeed, the middle letter of Intel’s SSE acronym stands for SIMD.
                              The virtues of SIMD are that all the parallel execution units are synchronized, and
                          they all respond to a single instruction that emanates from a single program counter
                          (PC). From a programmer’s perspective, this is close to the already familiar SISD.
                          Although every unit will be executing the same instruction, each execution unit has
                          its own address registers, and so each unit can have different data addresses. Thus,
                          in terms of Figure 6.1, a sequential application might be compiled to run on serial
                          hardware organized as a SISD or in parallel hardware that was organized as a SIMD.
                              The original motivation behind SIMD was to amortize the cost of the control
                          unit over dozens of execution units. Another advantage is the reduced instruction
                          bandwidth and space—SIMD needs only one copy of the code that is being
                          simultaneously executed, while message-passing MIMDs may need a copy in every
                          processor and shared memory MIMD will need multiple instruction caches.
                              SIMD works best when dealing with arrays in for loops. Hence, for parallelism
                          to work in SIMD, there must be a great deal of identically structured data, which
data-level                is called data-level parallelism. SIMD is at its weakest in case or switch
parallelism Parallelism   statements, where each execution unit must perform a different operation on its
achieved by performing    data, depending on what data it has. Execution units with the wrong data must be
the same operation on     disabled so that units with proper data may continue. If there are n cases, in these
independent data.
                          situations, SIMD processors essentially run at 1/nth of peak performance.
                              The so-called array processors that inspired the SIMD category have faded
                          into history (see Section 6.15 online), but two current interpretations of SIMD
                          remain active today.

                          SIMD in x86: Multimedia Extensions
                          As described in Chapter 3, subword parallelism for narrow integer data was the
                          original inspiration of the Multimedia Extension (MMX) instructions of the x86
                          in 1996. As Moore’s Law continued, more instructions were added, leading first
                          to Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) and now Advanced Vector Extensions (AVX).
                          AVX supports the simultaneous execution of four 64-bit floating-point numbers.
                          The width of the operation and the registers is encoded in the opcode of these
                          multimedia instructions. As the data width of the registers and operations grew,
                          the number of opcodes for multimedia instructions exploded, and now there are
                          hundreds of SSE and AVX instructions (see Chapter 3).

                          Vector
                          An older and, as we shall see, more elegant interpretation of SIMD is called a vector
                          architecture, which has been closely identified with computers designed by Seymour
                          Cray starting in the 1970s. It is also a great match to problems with lots of data-level
                          parallelism. Rather than having 64 ALUs perform 64 additions simultaneously, like
                          the old array processors, the vector architectures pipelined the ALU to get good
                          performance at lower cost. The basic philosophy of vector architecture is to collect

data elements from memory, put them in order into a large set of registers, operate
on them sequentially in registers using pipelined execution units, and then write
the results back to memory. A key feature of vector architectures is therefore a set of
vector registers. Thus, a vector architecture might have 32 vector registers, each
with 64 64-bit elements.

    Comparing Vector to Conventional Code

    Suppose we extend the LEGv8 instruction set architecture with vector
    instructions and vector registers. Vector operations use the same names as            EXAMPLE
    LEGv8 operations, but with the letter “V” appended. For example, FADDDV adds
    two double-precision vectors. Let’s also expand the 32 V registers used for SIMD
    instructions from two 64-bit elements to sixty-four 64-bit elements. The vector
    instructions take as their input either a pair of vector (V) registers (FADDDVS)
    or a vector register and a scalar register (FADDDVS). In the latter case, the value
    in the scalar register is used as the input for all operations—the operation
    FADDDVS will add the contents of a scalar register to each element in a vector
    register. The names LDURDV and STURDV denote vector load and vector store,
    and they load or store an entire vector of double-precision data. One operand is
    the vector register to be loaded or stored; the other operand, which is a LEGv8
    general-purpose register, is the starting address of the vector in memory.
       Given this short description, show the conventional LEGv8 code versus the
    vector LEGv8 code for
                                  Y = a× X +Y
    where X and Y are vectors of 64 double precision floating-point numbers,
    initially resident in memory, and a is a scalar double precision variable. (This
    example is the so-called DAXPY loop that forms the inner loop of the Linpack
    benchmark; DAXPY stands for double precision a × X plus Y.) Assume that
    the starting addresses of X and Y are in X19 and X20, respectively.

    Here is the conventional LEGv8 code for DAXPY:
                                                                                          ANSWER
          LDURD         D0,[X28,a]         //load scalar a
          ADDI          X0,X19,512         //upper bound of what to load
    loop: LDURD         D2,[X19,#0]        //load x(i)
          FMULD         D2,D2,D0           //a x x(i)
          LDURD         D4,[X20,#0]        //load y(i)
          FADDD         D4,D4,D2           //a x x(i) + y(i)
          STURD         D4,[X20,#0]        //store into y(i)
          ADDI          X19,X19,#8         //increment index to x
          ADDI          X20,X20,#8         //increment index to y
          CMPB          X0,X19             //compute bound
          B.NE          loop               //check if done

              Here is the vector LEGv8 code for DAXPY:

              LDURD           D0,[X28,a]              //load scalar a
              LDURDV          V1,[X19,#0]             //load vector x
              FMULDVS         V2,V1,D0                //vector-scalar multiply
              LDURDV          V3,[X20,#0]             //load vector y
              FADDDV          V4,V2,V3                //add y to product
              STURDV          V4,[X20,#0]             //store the result

         There are some interesting comparisons between the two code segments in this
      example. The most dramatic is that the vector processor greatly reduces the dynamic
      instruction bandwidth, executing only six instructions versus almost 600 for the
      traditional LEGv8 architecture. This reduction occurs both because the vector
      operations work on 64 elements at a time and because the overhead instructions
      that constitute nearly half the loop on LEGv8 are not present in the vector code. As
      you might expect, this reduction in instructions fetched and executed saves energy.
         Another important difference is the frequency of pipeline hazards (Chapter 4).
      In the straightforward LEGv8 code, every FADDD must wait for a FMULD, every
      STURD must wait for the FADDD and every FADDD and FMULD must wait on LDURD.
      On the vector processor, each vector instruction will only stall for the first element
      in each vector, and then subsequent elements will flow smoothly down the pipeline.
      Thus, pipeline stalls are required only once per vector operation, rather than once
      per vector element. In this example, the pipeline stall frequency on LEGv8 will be
      about 64 times higher than it is on the vector version of LEGv8. The pipeline stalls
      can be reduced on LEGv8 by using loop unrolling (see Chapter 4). However, the
      large difference in instruction bandwidth cannot be reduced.
         Since the vector elements are independent, they can be operated on in parallel,
      much like subword parallelism for the Intel x86 AVX instructions. All modern vector
      computers have vector functional units with multiple parallel pipelines (called vector
      lanes; see Figures 6.2 and 6.3) that can produce two or more results per clock cycle.

      Elaboration: The loop in the example above exactly matched the vector length. When
      loops are shorter, vector architectures use a register that reduces the length of vector
      operations. When loops are larger, we add bookkeeping code to iterate full-length vector
      operations and to handle the leftovers. This latter process is called strip mining.

      Vector versus Scalar
      Vector instructions have several important properties compared to conventional
      instruction set architectures, which are called scalar architectures in this context:
         n   A single vector instruction specifies a great deal of work—it is equivalent
             to executing an entire loop. The instruction fetch and decode bandwidth
             needed is dramatically reduced.
         n   By using a vector instruction, the compiler or programmer indicates that the
             computation of each result in the vector is independent of the computation of
             other results in the same vector, so hardware does not have to check for data
             hazards within a vector instruction.

   n   Vector architectures and compilers have a reputation for making it much
       easier than when using MIMD multiprocessors to write efficient applications
       when they contain data-level parallelism.
   n   Hardware need only check for data hazards between two vector instructions
       once per vector operand, not once for every element within the vectors.
       Reduced checking can save energy as well as time.
   n   Vector instructions that access memory have a known access pattern. If the
       vector’s elements are all adjacent, then fetching the vector from a set of heavily
       interleaved memory banks works very well. Thus, the cost of the latency to
       main memory is seen only once for the entire vector, rather than once for
       each word of the vector.
   n   Because a complete loop is replaced by a vector instruction whose behavior
       is predetermined, control hazards that would normally arise from the loop
       branch are nonexistent.
   n   The savings in instruction bandwidth and hazard checking plus the efficient
       use of memory bandwidth give vector architectures advantages in power and
       energy versus scalar architectures.
   For these reasons, vector operations can be made faster than a sequence of
scalar operations on the same number of data items, and designers are motivated
to include vector units if the application domain can often use them.

Vector versus Multimedia Extensions
Like multimedia extensions found in the x86 AVX instructions, a vector instruction
specifies multiple operations. However, multimedia extensions typically denote a few
operations while vector specifies dozens of operations. Unlike multimedia extensions,
the number of elements in a vector operation is not in the opcode but in a separate
register. This distinction means different versions of the vector architecture can be
implemented with a different number of elements just by changing the contents of
that register and hence retain binary compatibility. In contrast, a new large set of
opcodes is added each time the “vector” length changes in the multimedia extension
architecture of the x86: MMX, SSE, SSE2, AVX, AVX2, ….
   Also, unlike multimedia extensions, the data transfers need not be contiguous.
Vectors support both strided accesses, where the hardware loads every nth data
element in memory, and indexed accesses, where hardware finds the addresses of
the items to be loaded into a vector register. Indexed accesses are also called gather-
scatter, in that indexed loads gather elements from main memory into contiguous
vector elements, and indexed stores scatter vector elements across main memory.
   Like multimedia extensions, vector architectures easily capture the flexibility
in data widths, so it is easy to make a vector operation work on 32 64-bit data
elements or 64 32-bit data elements or 128 16-bit data elements or 256 8-bit data
elements. The parallel semantics of a vector instruction allows an implementation
to execute these operations using a deeply pipelined functional unit, an array of
parallel functional units, or a combination of parallel and pipelined functional
units. Figure 6.3 illustrates how to improve vector performance by using parallel
pipelines to execute a vector add instruction.

                                A[9]         B[9]
                                A[8]         B[8]
                                A[7]         B[7]
                                A[6]         B[6]
                                A[5]         B[5]
                                A[4]         B[4]
                                A[3]         B[3]
                                A[2]         B[2]            A[8]        B[8]    A[9]       B[9]
                                A[1]         B[1]            A[4]        B[4]    A[5]       B[5]     A[6]        B[6]   A[7]        B[7]

                                        +                            +                  +                    +                  +

                                       C[0]                         C[0]                C[1]                C[2]               C[3]

                                                                                            Element group
                                       (a)                                                         (b)

                          FIGURE 6.3 Using multiple functional units to improve the performance of a single vector
                          add instruction, C = A + B. The vector processor (a) on the left has a single add pipeline and can complete
                          one addition per cycle. The vector processor (b) on the right has four add pipelines or lanes and can complete
                          four additions per cycle. The elements within a single vector add instruction are interleaved across the four lanes.

vector lane One or            Vector arithmetic instructions usually only allow element N of one vector register
more vector functional    to take part in operations with element N from other vector registers. This dramatically
units and a portion
                          simplifies the construction of a highly parallel vector unit, which can be structured
of the vector register
file. Inspired by lanes   as multiple parallel vector lanes. As with a traffic highway, we can increase the peak
on highways that          throughput of a vector unit by adding more lanes. Figure 6.4 shows the structure of a four-
increase traffic speed,   lane vector unit. Thus, going to four lanes from one lane reduces the number of clocks
multiple lanes execute    per vector instruction by roughly a factor of four. For multiple lanes to be advantageous,
vector operations
                          both the applications and the architecture must support long vectors. Otherwise, they
simultaneously.
                          will execute so quickly that you’ll run out of instructions, requiring instruction level
                          parallel techniques like those in Chapter 4 to supply enough vector instructions.
                              Generally, vector architectures are a very efficient way to execute data parallel
                          processing programs; they are better matches to compiler technology than
                          multimedia extensions; and they are easier to evolve over time than the multimedia
                          extensions to the x86 architecture.
                              Given these classic categories, we next see how to exploit parallel streams of
                          instructions to improve the performance of a single processor, which we will reuse
                          with multiple processors.

               Check True or false: As exemplified in the x86, multimedia extensions can be thought
             Yourself of as a vector architecture with short vectors that support only contiguous vector
                          data transfers.

                 Lane 0                Lane 1               Lane 2                Lane 3

              FP add                FP add                FP add               FP add
              pipe 0                pipe 1                pipe 2               pipe 3

                 Vector                Vector                Vector                Vector
               registers:            registers:            registers:            registers:
               elements              elements              elements              elements
                0,4,8,...             1,5,9,...            2,6,10,...            3,7,11,...

              FP mul                FP mul                FP mul               FP mul
              pipe 0                pipe 1                pipe 2               pipe 3

                                         Vector load store unit

FIGURE 6.4 Structure of a vector unit containing four lanes. The vector-register storage is
divided across the lanes, with each lane holding every fourth element of each vector register. The figure
shows three vector functional units: an FP add, an FP multiply, and a load-store unit. Each of the vector
arithmetic units contains four execution pipelines, one per lane, which acts in concert to complete a single
vector instruction. Note how each section of the vector-register file only needs to provide enough read and
write ports (see Chapter 4) for functional units local to its lane.

Elaboration: Given the advantages of vector, why aren’t they more popular outside
high-performance computing? There were concerns about the larger state for vector
registers increasing context switch time and the difficulty of handling page faults in
vector loads and stores, and SIMD instructions achieved some of the benefits of vector
instructions. In addition, as long as advances in instruction-level parallelism could
deliver on the performance promise of Moore’s Law, there was little reason to take the
chance of changing architecture styles.

Elaboration: Another advantage of vector and multimedia extensions is that it is
relatively easy to extend a scalar instruction set architecture with these instructions to
improve performance of data parallel operations.

Elaboration: The Haswell-generation x86 processors from Intel support AVX2, which
has a gather operation but not a scatter operation.

hardware
multithreading
Increasing utilization of a
processor by switching to
                                6.4           Hardware Multithreading
another thread when one
thread is stalled.            A related concept to MIMD, especially from the programmer’s perspective, is
thread A thread includes      hardware multithreading. While MIMD relies on multiple processes or threads
the program counter, the      to try to keep many processors busy, hardware multithreading allows multiple
register state, and the       threads to share the functional units of a single processor in an overlapping fashion
stack. It is a lightweight    to try to utilize the hardware resources efficiently. To permit this sharing, the
process; whereas threads      processor must duplicate the independent state of each thread. For example, each
commonly share a single       thread would have a separate copy of the register file and the program counter.
address space, processes      The memory itself can be shared through the virtual memory mechanisms, which
don’t.
                              already support multi-programming. In addition, the hardware must support the
process A process             ability to change to a different thread relatively quickly. In particular, a thread
includes one or more          switch should be much more efficient than a process switch, which typically
threads, the address space,   requires hundreds to thousands of processor cycles while a thread switch can be
and the operating system      instantaneous.
state. Hence, a process
switch usually invokes the
                                 There are two main approaches to hardware multithreading. Fine-grained
operating system, but not     multithreading switches between threads on each instruction, resulting in
a thread switch.              interleaved execution of multiple threads. This interleaving is often done in a
                              round-robin fashion, skipping any threads that are stalled at that clock cycle. To
fine-grained
                              make fine-grained multithreading practical, the processor must be able to switch
multithreading
A version of hardware         threads on every clock cycle. One advantage of fine-grained multithreading is
multithreading that           that it can hide the throughput losses that arise from both short and long stalls,
implies switching between     since instructions from other threads can be executed when one thread stalls. The
threads after every           primary disadvantage of fine-grained multithreading is that it slows down the
instruction.                  execution of the individual threads, since a thread that is ready to execute without
coarse-grained                stalls will be delayed by instructions from other threads.
multithreading                   Coarse-grained multithreading was invented as an alternative to fine-grained
A version of hardware         multithreading. Coarse-grained multithreading switches threads only on expensive
multithreading that           stalls, such as last-level cache misses. This change relieves the need to have thread
implies switching between     switching be extremely fast and is much less likely to slow down the execution of an
threads only after
significant events, such as   individual thread, since instructions from other threads will only be issued when
a last-level cache miss.      a thread encounters a costly stall. Coarse-grained multithreading suffers, however,
                              from a major drawback: it is limited in its ability to overcome throughput losses,
                              especially from shorter stalls. This limitation arises from the pipeline start-up
                              costs of coarse-grained multithreading. Because a processor with coarse-grained
                              multithreading issues instructions from a single thread, when a stall occurs, the
                              pipeline must be emptied or frozen. The new thread that begins executing after the
                              stall must fill the pipeline before instructions are able to complete. Due to this start-
                              up overhead, coarse-grained multithreading is much more useful for reducing the
                              penalty of high-cost stalls, where pipeline refill is negligible compared to the stall
                              time.
                                                                          6.4    Hardware Multithreading                                 531

   Simultaneous multithreading (SMT) is a variation on hardware multithreading
that uses the resources of a multiple-issue, dynamically scheduled pipelined
processor to exploit thread-level parallelism at the same time it exploits instruction-
level parallelism (see Chapter 4). The key insight that motivates SMT is that
multiple-issue processors often have more functional unit parallelism available
than most single threads can effectively use. Furthermore, with register renaming
and dynamic scheduling (see Chapter 4), multiple instructions from independent
threads can be issued without regard to the dependences among them; the resolution
of the dependences can be handled by the dynamic scheduling capability.                                            simultaneous
   Since SMT relies on the existing dynamic mechanisms, it does not switch                                         multithreading
resources every cycle. Instead, SMT is always executing instructions from multiple                                 (SMT) A version
                                                                                                                   of multithreading
threads, leaving it up to the hardware to associate instruction slots and renamed
                                                                                                                   that lowers the cost
registers with their proper threads.                                                                               of multithreading by
   Figure 6.5 conceptually illustrates the differences in a processor’s ability to exploit                         utilizing the resources
superscalar resources for the following processor configurations. The top portion shows                            needed for multiple issue,
                                                                                                                   dynamically scheduled
                                                                                                                   microarchitecture.
                           Issue slots
                          Thread A           Thread B            Thread C           Thread D

             Time

                           Issue slots
                         Coarse MT           Fine MT            SMT
             Time

FIGURE 6.5 How four threads use the issue slots of a superscalar processor in different
approaches. The four threads at the top show how each would execute running alone on a standard
superscalar processor without multithreading support. The three examples at the bottom show how they
would execute running together in three multithreading options. The horizontal dimension represents the
instruction issue capability in each clock cycle. The vertical dimension represents a sequence of clock cycles.
An empty (white) box indicates that the corresponding issue slot is unused in that clock cycle. The shades of
gray and color correspond to four different threads in the multithreading processors. The additional pipeline
start-up effects for coarse multithreading, which are not illustrated in this figure, would lead to further loss
in throughput for coarse multithreading.

      how four threads would execute independently on a superscalar with no multithreading
      support. The bottom portion shows how the four threads could be combined to execute
      on the processor more efficiently using three multithreading options:
         n   A superscalar with coarse-grained multithreading
         n   A superscalar with fine-grained multithreading
         n   A superscalar with simultaneous multithreading
         In the superscalar without hardware multithreading support, the use of issue
      slots is limited by a lack of instruction-level parallelism. In addition, a major stall,
      such as an instruction cache miss, can leave the entire processor idle.
         In the coarse-grained multithreaded superscalar, the long stalls are partially
      hidden by switching to another thread that uses the resources of the processor.
      Although this reduces the number of completely idle clock cycles, the pipeline
      start-up overhead still leads to idle cycles, and limitations to ILP mean all issue
      slots will not be used. In the fine-grained case, the interleaving of threads mostly
      eliminates idle clock cycles. Because only a single thread issues instructions in a
      given clock cycle, however, limitations in instruction-level parallelism still lead to
      idle slots within some clock cycles.

                                                                        2.00

                                                                               Speed-up   Energy efficiency
                      i7 SMT performance and energy efficiency ratio

                                                                        1.75

                                                                        1.50

                                                                        1.25

                                                                        1.00

                                                                        0.75
                                                                                 dy s
                                                                                C ck

                                                                                Fa eal

                                                                                           m

                                                                                  ni t
                                                                                R ate

                                                                                 ap er
                                                                                         ns
                                                                                         ps

                                                                                         64
                                                                               am ace
                                                                               da re
                                                                              Bo hole

                                                                                        si

                                                                              Sw ust
                                                                                     tra

                                                                                     tio
                                                                                      Vi

                                                                                     ×2
                                                                             ui Fer
                                                                                      n

                                                                                    m
                                                                                   ce

                                                                                      r
                                                                                  an

                                                                                   yt

                                                                                  cl
                                                                                 sc

                                                                                 a
                                                                          k
                                                                       ac

                                                                            re
                                                                          Fl
                                                 Bl

                                                                         St

      FIGURE 6.6 The speed-up from using multithreading on one core on an i7 processor
      averages 1.31 for the PARSEC benchmarks (see            Section 6.9) and the energy efficiency
      improvement is 1.07. These data were collected and analyzed by Esmaeilzadeh et al. [2011].
                             6.5 Multicore and Other Shared Memory Multiprocessors                 533

    In the SMT case, thread-level parallelism and instruction-level parallelism are
both exploited, with multiple threads using the issue slots in a single clock cycle.
Ideally, the issue slot usage is limited by imbalances in the resource needs and
resource availability over multiple threads. In practice, other factors can restrict
how many slots are used. Although Figure 6.5 greatly simplifies the real operation
of these processors, it does illustrate the potential performance advantages of
multithreading in general and SMT in particular.
    Figure 6.6 plots the performance and energy benefits of multithreading on
a single processor of the Intel Core i7 960, which has hardware support for two
threads. The average speed-up is 1.31, which is not bad given the modest extra
resources for hardware multithreading. The average improvement in energy
efficiency is 1.07, which is excellent. In general, you’d be happy with a performance
speed-up being energy neutral.
    Now that we have seen how multiple threads can utilize the resources of a single
processor more effectively, we next show how to use them to exploit multiple
processors.

  1. True or false: Both multithreading and multicore rely on parallelism to get        Check
     more efficiency from a chip.                                                       Yourself
  2. True or false: Simultaneous multithreading (SMT) uses threads to improve
     resource utilization of a dynamically scheduled, out-of-order processor.

               Multicore and Other Shared Memory
  6.5
               Multiprocessors

While hardware multithreading improved the efficiency of processors at modest
cost, the big challenge of the last decade has been to deliver on the performance
potential of Moore’s Law by efficiently programming the increasing number of
processors per chip.
   Given the difficulty of rewriting old programs to run well on parallel hardware,
a natural question is: what can computer designers do to simplify the task? One
answer was to provide a single physical address space that all processors can
share, so that programs need not concern themselves with where their data are,
merely that programs may be executed in parallel. In this approach, all variables
of a program can be made available at any time to any processor. The alternative is
to have a separate address space per processor that requires that sharing must be
explicit; we’ll describe this option in the Section 6.7. When the physical address
space is common then the hardware typically provides cache coherence to give a
consistent view of the shared memory (see Section 5.8).
   As mentioned above, a shared memory multiprocessor (SMP) is one that offers
the programmer a single physical address space across all processors—which is

uniform memory access       nearly always the case for multicore chips—although a more accurate term would
(UMA) A multiprocessor      have been shared-address multiprocessor. Processors communicate through shared
in which latency to any
                            variables in memory, with all processors capable of accessing any memory location
word in main memory is
about the same no matter    via loads and stores. Figure 6.7 shows the classic organization of an SMP. Note that
which processor requests    such systems can still run independent jobs in their own virtual address spaces,
the access.                 even if they all share a physical address space.
                               Single address space multiprocessors come in two styles. In the first style, the
nonuniform memory
                            latency to a word in memory does not depend on which processor asks for it.
access (NUMA) A type
of single address space     Such machines are called uniform memory access (UMA) multiprocessors. In the
multiprocessor in which     second style, some memory accesses are much faster than others, depending on
some memory accesses        which processor asks for which word, typically because main memory is divided
are much faster than        and attached to different microprocessors or to different memory controllers on
others depending on         the same chip. Such machines are called nonuniform memory access (NUMA)
which processor asks for    multiprocessors. As you might expect, the programming challenges are harder for
which word.
                            a NUMA multiprocessor than for a UMA multiprocessor, but NUMA machines
synchronization The         can scale to larger sizes, and NUMAs can have lower latency to nearby memory.
process of coordinating        As processors operating in parallel will normally share data, they also need to
the behavior of two or      coordinate when operating on shared data; otherwise, one processor could start
more processes, which       working on data before another is finished with it. This coordination is called
may be running on
                            synchronization, which we saw in Chapter 2. When sharing is supported with a
different processors.
                            single address space, there must be a separate mechanism for synchronization. One
lock A synchronization      approach uses a lock for a shared variable. Only one processor at a time can acquire
device that allows access   the lock, and other processors interested in shared data must wait until the original
to data to only one         processor unlocks the variable. Section 2.11 of Chapter 2 describes the instructions
processor at a time.        for locking in the ARMv8 instruction set.

                                           Processor        Processor          ...       Processor

                                            Cache            Cache             ...         Cache

                                                             Interconnection Network

                                                                     Memory                 I/O

                            FIGURE 6.7 Classic organization of a shared memory multiprocessor.
                              6.5 Multicore and Other Shared Memory Multiprocessors                                      535

A Simple Parallel Processing Program for a Shared Address Space
                                                                                                       EXAMPLE
Suppose we want to sum 64,000 numbers on a shared memory multiprocessor
computer with uniform memory access time. Let’s assume we have 64
processors.

The first step is to ensure a balanced load per processor, so we split the set
of numbers into subsets of the same size. We do not allocate the subsets to a                           ANSWER
different memory space, since there is a single memory space for this machine;
we just give different starting addresses to each processor. Pn is the number that
identifies the processor, between 0 and 63. All processors start the program by
running a loop that sums their subset of numbers:

    sum[Pn] = 0;
    for (i = 1000*Pn; i < 1000*(Pn+1); i += 1)
      sum[Pn] += A[i]; /*sum the assigned areas*/

    (Note the C code i += 1 is just a shorter way to say i = i + 1.)

The next step is to add these 64 partial sums. This step is called a reduction,                    reduction A function
where we divide to conquer. Half of the processors add pairs of partial sums,                      that processes a data
and then a quarter add pairs of the new partial sums, and so on until we                           structure and returns a
                                                                                                   single value.
have the single, final sum. Figure 6.8 illustrates the hierarchical nature of this
reduction.
   In this example, the two processors must synchronize before the “consumer”
processor tries to read the result from the memory location written by the
“producer” processor; otherwise, the consumer may read the old value of

                                       0

                            (half = 1) 0 1

                            (half = 2) 0 1 2 3

                            (half = 4) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

FIGURE 6.8 The last four levels of a reduction that sums results from each processor,
from bottom to top. For all processors whose number i is less than half, add the sum produced by
processor number (i + half) to its sum.

                                the data. We want each processor to have its own version of the loop counter
                                variable i, so we must indicate that it is a “private” variable. Here is the code
                                (half is private also):

                                   half = 64; /*64 processors in multiprocessor*/
                                   do
                                      synch(); /*wait for partial sum completion*/
                                      if (half%2 != 0 && Pn == 0)
                                       sum[0] += sum[half–1];
                                        /*Conditional sum needed when half is
                                        odd; Processor0 gets missing element */
                                        half = half/2; /*dividing line on who sums */
                                        if (Pn < half) sum[Pn] += sum[Pn+half];
                                   while (half > 1); /*exit with final sum in Sum[0] */

      Hardware/             Given the long-term interest in parallel programming, there have been hundreds
                            of attempts to build parallel programming systems. A limited but popular example
       Software             is OpenMP. It is just an Application Programmer Interface (API) along with a set of
       Interface            compiler directives, environment variables, and runtime library routines that can
                            extend standard programming languages. It offers a portable, scalable, and simple
OpenMP An API               programming model for shared memory multiprocessors. Its primary goal is to
for shared memory           parallelize loops and perform reductions.
multiprocessing in C,          Most C compilers already have support for OpenMP. The command to use the
C++, or Fortran that runs
                            OpenMP API with the UNIX C compiler is just:
on UNIX and Microsoft
platforms. It includes        cc –fopenmp foo.c
compiler directives, a
library, and runtime           OpenMP extends C using pragmas, which are just commands to the C macro
directives.                 preprocessor like #define and #include. To set the number of processors we
                            want to use to be 64, as we wanted in the example above, we just use the command
                              #define P 64 /* define a constant that we’ll use a few times */
                              #pragma omp parallel num_threads(P)

                            That is, the runtime libraries should use 64 parallel threads.
                                To turn the sequential for loop into a parallel for loop that divides the work
                            equally between all the threads that we told it to use, we just write (assuming sum
                            is initialized to 0)
                              #pragma omp parallel for
                              for (Pn = 0; Pn < P; Pn += 1)
                                for (i = 0; 1000*Pn; i < 1000*(Pn+1); i += 1)
                                 sum[Pn] += A[i]; /*sum the assigned areas*/
                              6.5 Multicore and Other Shared Memory Multiprocessors                   537

   To perform the reduction, we can use another command that tells OpenMP
what the reduction operator is and what variable you need to use to place the result
of the reduction.
   #pragma omp parallel for reduction(+ : FinalSum)
   for (i = 0; i < P; i += 1)
      FinalSum += sum[i]; /* Reduce to a single number */
Note that it is now up to the OpenMP library to find efficient code to sum 64
numbers efficiently using 64 processors.
   While OpenMP makes it easy to write simple parallel code, it is not very
helpful with debugging, so many programmers use more sophisticated parallel
programming systems than OpenMP, just as many programmers today use more
productive languages than C.

   Given this tour of classic MIMD hardware and software, our next path is a more
exotic tour of a type of MIMD architecture with a different heritage and thus a very
different perspective on the parallel programming challenge.

True or false: Shared memory multiprocessors cannot take advantage of task-level           Check
parallelism.                                                                               Yourself

Elaboration: Some writers repurposed the acronym SMP to mean symmetric
multiprocessor, to indicate that the latency from processor to memory was about the
same for all processors. This shift was done to contrast them from large-scale NUMA
multiprocessors, as both classes used a single address space. As clusters proved much
more popular than large-scale NUMA multiprocessors, in this book we restore SMP to its
original meaning, and use it to contrast against those that use multiple address spaces,
such as clusters.

Elaboration: An alternative to sharing the physical address space would be to have
separate physical address spaces but share a common virtual address space, leaving
it up to the operating system to handle communication. This approach has been tried,
but it has too high an overhead to offer a practical shared memory abstraction to the
performance-oriented programmer.

        6.6           Introduction to Graphics Processing Units

      The original justification for adding SIMD instructions to existing architectures
      was that many microprocessors were connected to graphics displays in PCs and
      workstations, so an increasing fraction of processing time was used for graphics.
      As Moore’s Law increased the number of transistors available to microprocessors,
      it therefore made sense to improve graphics processing.
          A major driving force for improving graphics processing was the computer game
      industry, both on PCs and in dedicated game consoles such as the Sony PlayStation.
      The rapidly growing game market encouraged many companies to make increasing
      investments in developing faster graphics hardware, and this positive feedback
      loop led graphics processing to improve at a quicker rate than general-purpose
      processing in mainstream microprocessors.
          Given that the graphics and game community had different goals than the
      microprocessor development community, it evolved its own style of processing and
      terminology. As the graphics processors increased in power, they earned the name
      Graphics Processing Units or GPUs to distinguish themselves from CPUs.
          For a few hundred dollars, anyone can buy a GPU today with hundreds of
      parallel floating-point units, which makes high-performance computing more
      accessible. The interest in GPU computing blossomed when this potential was
      combined with a programming language that made GPUs easier to program.
      Hence, many programmers of scientific and multimedia applications today are
      pondering whether to use GPUs or CPUs.
          (This section concentrates on using GPUs for computing. To see how GPU
      computing combines with the traditional role of graphics acceleration, see
          Appendix B.)
          Here are some of the key characteristics as to how GPUs vary from CPUs:
        n   GPUs are accelerators that supplement a CPU, so they do not need to be able
            to perform all the tasks of a CPU. This role allows them to dedicate all their
            resources to graphics. It’s fine for GPUs to perform some tasks poorly or not
            at all, given that in a system with both a CPU and a GPU, the CPU can do
            them if needed.
        n   The GPU problem sizes are typically hundreds of megabytes to gigabytes, but
            not hundreds of gigabytes to terabytes.
        These differences led to different styles of architecture:
        n   Perhaps the biggest difference is that GPUs do not rely on multilevel caches
            to overcome the long latency to memory, as do CPUs. Instead, GPUs rely on
            hardware multithreading (Section 6.4) to hide the latency to memory. That is,
            between the time of a memory request and the time that data arrive, the GPU
            executes hundreds or thousands of threads that are independent of that request.
                                       6.6 Introduction to Graphics Processing Units               539

  n   The GPU memory is thus oriented toward bandwidth rather than latency.
      There are even special graphics DRAM chips for GPUs that are wider and
      have higher bandwidth than DRAM chips for CPUs. In addition, GPU
      memories have traditionally had smaller main memories than conventional
      microprocessors. In 2013, GPUs typically have 4 to 6 GiB or less, while
      CPUs have 32 to 256 GiB. Finally, keep in mind that for general-purpose
      computation, you must include the time to transfer the data between CPU
      memory and GPU memory, since the GPU is a coprocessor.
  n   Given the reliance on many threads to deliver good memory bandwidth,
      GPUs can accommodate many parallel processors (MIMD) as well as many
      threads. Hence, each GPU processor is more highly multithreaded than a
      typical CPU, plus they have more processors.

Although GPUs were designed for a narrower set of applications, some                   Hardware/
programmers wondered if they could specify their applications in a form that
would let them tap the high potential performance of GPUs. After tiring of trying
                                                                                       Software
to specify their problems using the graphics APIs and languages, they developed        Interface
C-inspired programming languages to allow them to write programs directly for
the GPUs. An example is NVIDIA’s CUDA (Compute Unified Device Architecture),
which enables the programmer to write C programs to execute on GPUs, albeit
with some restrictions.     Appendix B gives examples of CUDA code. (OpenCL
is a multi-company initiative to develop a portable programming language that
provides many of the benefits of CUDA.)
   NVIDIA decided that the unifying theme of all these forms of parallelism is
the CUDA Thread. Using this lowest level of parallelism as the programming
primitive, the compiler and the hardware can gang thousands of CUDA threads
together to utilize the various styles of parallelism within a GPU: multithreading,
MIMD, SIMD, and instruction-level parallelism. These threads are blocked
together and executed in groups of 32 at a time. A multithreaded processor inside
a GPU executes these blocks of threads, and a GPU consists of 8 to 32 of these
multithreaded processors.

An Introduction to the NVIDIA GPU Architecture
We use NVIDIA systems as our example as they are representative of GPU
architectures. Specifically, we follow the terminology of the CUDA parallel
programming language and use the Fermi architecture as the example.
   Like vector architectures, GPUs work well only with data-level parallel problems.
Both styles have gather-scatter data transfers, and GPU processors have even more

                               registers than do vector processors. Unlike most vector architectures, GPUs also
                               rely on hardware multithreading within a single multithreaded SIMD processor to
                               hide memory latency (see Section 6.4).
                                  A multithreaded SIMD processor is similar to a vector processor, but the former
                               has many parallel functional units instead of just a few that are deeply pipelined,
                               as does the latter.
                                  As mentioned above, a GPU contains a collection of multithreaded SIMD
                               processors; that is, a GPU is a MIMD composed of multithreaded SIMD processors.
                               For example, NVIDIA has four implementations of the Fermi architecture at
                               different price points with 7, 11, 14, or 15 multithreaded SIMD processors. To
                               provide transparent scalability across models of GPUs with differing number of
                               multithreaded SIMD processors, the Thread Block Scheduler hardware assigns
                               blocks of threads to multithreaded SIMD processors. Figure 6.9 shows a simplified
                               block diagram of a multithreaded SIMD processor.
                                  Dropping down one more level of detail, the machine object that the hardware
                               creates, manages, schedules, and executes is a thread of SIMD instructions, which
                               we will also call a SIMD thread. It is a traditional thread, but it contains exclusively
                               SIMD instructions. These SIMD threads have their own program counters, and
                               they run on a multithreaded SIMD processor. The SIMD Thread Scheduler includes
                               a controller that lets it know which threads of SIMD instructions are ready to
                               run, and then it sends them off to a dispatch unit to be run on the multithreaded

                                                               Instruction register

                                                                                                                                           SIMD Lanes
                                                                                                                                             (Thread
                                                                                                                                           Processors)
      Regi-    Reg     Reg     Reg     Reg     Reg     Reg       Reg     Reg     Reg       Reg    Reg     Reg     Reg     Reg      Reg
      sters
      1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32

      Load    Load    Load    Load     Load    Load    Load      Load    Load    Load     Load    Load    Load    Load    Load     Load
      store   store   store   store    store   store   store     store   store   store    store   store   store   store   store    store
       unit    unit    unit    unit     unit    unit    unit      unit    unit    unit     unit    unit    unit    unit    unit     unit

                          Address coalescing unit                                        Interconnection network

                                                                                                                                  To Global
                                                                         Local Memory
                                                                                                                                   Memory
                                                                             64 KiB

                               FIGURE 6.9 Simplified block diagram of the datapath of a multithreaded SIMD Processor.
                               It has 16 SIMD lanes. The SIMD Thread Scheduler has many independent SIMD threads that it chooses from
                               to run on this processor.
                                           6.6 Introduction to Graphics Processing Units       541

SIMD processor. It is identical to a hardware thread scheduler in a traditional
multithreaded processor (see Section 6.4), except that it is scheduling threads of
SIMD instructions. Thus, GPU hardware has two levels of hardware schedulers:
   1. The Thread Block Scheduler that assigns blocks of threads to multithreaded
      SIMD processors, and
   2. The SIMD Thread Scheduler within a SIMD processor, which schedules
      when SIMD threads should run.
   The SIMD instructions of these threads are 32 wide, so each thread of SIMD
instructions would compute 32 of the elements of the computation. Since the
thread consists of SIMD instructions, the SIMD processor must have parallel
functional units to perform the operation. We call them SIMD Lanes, and they are
quite similar to the Vector Lanes in Section 6.3.

Elaboration: The number of lanes per SIMD processor varies across GPU generations.
With Fermi, each 32-wide thread of SIMD instructions is mapped to 16 SIMD lanes,
so each SIMD instruction in a thread of SIMD instructions takes two clock cycles to
complete. Each thread of SIMD instructions is executed in lock step. Staying with the
analogy of a SIMD processor as a vector processor, you could say that it has 16 lanes,
and the vector length would be 32. This wide but shallow nature is why we use the term
SIMD processor instead of vector processor, as it is more intuitive.
    Since by definition the threads of SIMD instructions are independent, the SIMD
Thread Scheduler can pick whatever thread of SIMD instructions is ready, and need not
stick with the next SIMD instruction in the sequence within a single thread. Thus, using
the terminology of Section 6.4, it uses fine-grained multithreading.
    To hold these memory elements, a Fermi SIMD processor has an impressive 32,768
32-bit registers. Just like a vector processor, these registers are divided logically across
the vector lanes or, in this case, SIMD lanes. Each SIMD thread is limited to no more than
64 registers, so you might think of a SIMD thread as having up to 64 vector registers,
with each vector register having 32 elements and each element being 32 bits wide.
    Since Fermi has 16 SIMD lanes, each contains 2048 registers. Each CUDA thread
gets one element of each of the vector registers. Note that a CUDA thread is just a
vertical cut of a thread of SIMD instructions, corresponding to one element executed by
one SIMD lane. Beware that CUDA threads are very different from POSIX threads; you
can’t make arbitrary system calls or synchronize arbitrarily in a CUDA thread.

NVIDIA GPU Memory Structures
Figure 6.10 shows the memory structures of an NVIDIA GPU. We call the on-
chip memory that is local to each multithreaded SIMD processor Local Memory.
It is shared by the SIMD lanes within a multithreaded SIMD processor, but this
memory is not shared between multithreaded SIMD processors. We call the off-
chip DRAM shared by the whole GPU and all thread blocks GPU Memory.
    Rather than rely on large caches to contain the entire working sets of an
application, GPUs traditionally use smaller streaming caches and rely on extensive
multithreading of threads of SIMD instructions to hide the long latency to DRAM,

          CUDA Thread

                          Per-CUDA Thread Private Memory

           Thread block

                                    Per-Block
                                  Local Memory

              Grid 0                                                               Sequence

                                            ...

                       Inter-Grid Synchronization                   GPU Memory
              Grid 1

                                            ...

      FIGURE 6.10 GPU Memory structures. GPU Memory is shared by the vectorized loops. All threads
      of SIMD instructions within a thread block share Local Memory.

      since their working sets can be hundreds of megabytes. Thus, they will not fit
      in the last-level cache of a multicore microprocessor. Given the use of hardware
      multithreading to hide DRAM latency, the chip area used for caches in system
      processors is spent instead on computing resources and on the large number of
      registers to hold the state of the many threads of SIMD instructions.

      Elaboration: While hiding memory latency is the underlying philosophy, note that the
      latest GPUs and vector processors have added caches. For example, the recent Fermi
      architecture has added caches, but they are thought of as either bandwidth filters to
      reduce demands on GPU Memory or as accelerators for the few variables whose latency
      cannot be hidden by multithreading. Local memory for stack frames, function calls,
      and register spilling is a good match to caches, since latency matters when calling a
      function. Caches can also save energy, since on-chip cache accesses take much less
      energy than accesses to multiple, external DRAM chips.
                                                   6.6 Introduction to Graphics Processing Units        543

Putting GPUs into Perspective
At a high level, multicore computers with SIMD instruction extensions do share
similarities with GPUs. Figure 6.11 summarizes the similarities and differences.
Both are MIMDs whose processors use multiple SIMD lanes, although GPUs
have more processors and many more lanes. Both use hardware multithreading
to improve processor utilization, although GPUs have hardware support for many
more threads. Both use caches, although GPUs use smaller streaming caches and
multicore computers use large multilevel caches that try to contain whole working
sets completely. Both use a 64-bit address space, although the physical main
memory is much smaller in GPUs. While GPUs support memory protection at the
page level, they do not yet support demand paging.
   SIMD processors are also similar to vector processors. The multiple SIMD
processors in GPUs act as independent MIMD cores, just as many vector computers
have multiple vector processors. This view would consider the Fermi GTX 580 as
a 16-core machine with hardware support for multithreading, where each core has
16 lanes. The biggest difference is multithreading, which is fundamental to GPUs
and missing from most vector processors.
   GPUs and CPUs do not go back in computer architecture genealogy to a shared
ancestor; there is no Missing Link that explains both. As a result of this uncommon
heritage, GPUs have not used the terms common in the computer architecture
community, which has led to confusion about what GPUs are and how they work. To
help resolve the confusion, Figure 6.12 (from left to right) lists the more descriptive
term used in this section, the closest term from mainstream computing, the official
NVIDIA GPU term in case you are interested, and then a short description of the
term. This “GPU Rosetta Stone” may help relate this section and ideas to more
conventional GPU descriptions, such as those found in Appendix B.
   While GPUs are moving toward mainstream computing, they can’t abandon
their responsibility to continue to excel at graphics. Thus, the design of GPUs may
make more sense when architects ask, given the hardware invested to do graphics

Feature                                                          Multicore with SIMD       GPU

SIMD processors                                                        4 to 8             8 to 16
SIMD lanes/processor                                                   2 to 4             8 to 16
Multithreading hardware support for SIMD threads                       2 to 4             16 to 32
Largest cache size                                                     8 MiB             0.75 MiB
Size of memory address                                                 64-bit              64-bit
Size of main memory                                               8 GiB to 256 GiB     4 GiB to 6 GiB
Memory protection at level of page                                      Yes                 Yes
Demand paging                                                           Yes                 No
Cache coherent                                                          Yes                 No

FIGURE 6.11 Similarities and differences between multicore with Multimedia SIMD
extensions and recent GPUs.

                              More descriptive   Closest old term       Official CUDA/
       Type                                                                                                Book definition
                              name               outside of GPUs        NVIDIA GPU term

                               Vectorizable      Vectorizable Loop    Grid                A vectorizable loop, executed on the GPU, made
                               Loop                                                       up of one or more Thread Blocks (bodies of

       Program abstractions
                                                                                          vectorized loop) that can execute in parallel.
                               Body of           Body of a            Thread Block        A vectorized loop executed on a multithreaded
                               Vectorized Loop   (Strip-Mined)                            SIMD Processor, made up of one or more threads
                                                 Vectorized Loop                          of SIMD instructions. They can communicate via
                                                                                          Local Memory.
                               Sequence of       One iteration of     CUDA Thread         A vertical cut of a thread of SIMD instructions
                               SIMD Lane         a Scalar Loop                            corresponding to one element executed by one
                               Operations                                                 SIMD Lane. Result is stored depending on mask
                                                                                          and predicate register.
                               A Thread of       Thread of Vector     Warp                A traditional thread, but it contains just SIMD
       Machine object

                               SIMD              Instructions                             instructions that are executed on a multithreaded
                               Instructions                                               SIMD Processor. Results stored depending on a
                                                                                          per-element mask.
                               SIMD              Vector Instruction   PTX Instruction     A single SIMD instruction executed across SIMD
                               Instruction                                                Lanes.
                               Multithreaded     (Multithreaded)      Streaming           A multithreaded SIMD Processor executes
                               SIMD              Vector Processor     Multiprocessor      threads of SIMD instructions, independent of
                               Processor                                                  other SIMD Processors.
                               Thread Block      Scalar Processor     Giga Thread         Assigns multiple Thread Blocks (bodies of
       Processing hardware

                               Scheduler                              Engine              vectorized loop) to multithreaded SIMD
                                                                                          Processors.
                               SIMD Thread       Thread scheduler     Warp Scheduler      Hardware unit that schedules and issues threads
                               Scheduler         in a Multithreaded                       of SIMD instructions when they are ready to
                                                 CPU                                      execute; includes a scoreboard to track SIMD
                                                                                          Thread execution.
                               SIMD Lane         Vector lane          Thread Processor    A SIMD Lane executes the operations in a thread
                                                                                          of SIMD instructions on a single element. Results
                                                                                          stored depending on mask.
                               GPU Memory        Main Memory          Global Memory       DRAM memory accessible by all multithreaded
                                                                                          SIMD Processors in a GPU.
       Memory hardware

                               Local Memory      Local Memory         Shared Memory       Fast local SRAM for one multithreaded SIMD
                                                                                          Processor, unavailable to other SIMD Processors.

                               SIMD Lane         Vector Lane          Thread Processor    Registers in a single SIMD Lane allocated across
                               Registers         Registers            Registers           a full thread block (body of vectorized loop).

      FIGURE 6.12 Quick guide to GPU terms. We use the first column for hardware terms. Four groups
      cluster these 12 terms. From top to bottom: Program Abstractions, Machine Objects, Processing Hardware,
      and Memory Hardware.

      well, how can we supplement it to improve the performance of a wider range of
      applications?
         Having covered two different styles of MIMD that have a shared address
      space, we next introduce parallel processors where each processor has its own
      private address space, which makes it considerably easier to build much larger
      systems. The Internet services that you use every day depend on these large-scale
      systems.
6.7   Clusters, Warehouse Scale Computers, and Other Message-Passing MultiproCessors                                          545

Elaboration: While the GPU was introduced as having a separate memory from the
CPU, both AMD and Intel have announced “fused” products that combine GPUs and
CPUs to share a single memory. The challenge will be to maintain the high bandwidth
memory in a fused architecture that has been a foundation of GPUs.

True or false: GPUs rely on graphics DRAM chips to reduce memory latency and                             Check
thereby increase performance on graphics applications.                                                   Yourself

                  Clusters, Warehouse Scale Computers,
   6.7            and Other Message-Passing
                  Multiprocessors

The alternative approach to sharing an address space is for the processors to                            message passing
each have their own private physical address space. Figure 6.13 shows the classic                        Communicating between
organization of a multiprocessor with multiple private address spaces. This                              multiple processors by
alternative multiprocessor must communicate via explicit message passing,                                explicitly sending and
which traditionally is the name of such style of computers. Provided the system                          receiving information.
has routines to send and receive messages, coordination is built in with message                         send message routine
passing, since one processor knows when a message is sent, and the receiving                             A routine used by a
processor knows when a message arrives. If the sender needs confirmation that the                        processor in machines
message has arrived, the receiving processor can then send an acknowledgment                             with private memories to
message back to the sender.                                                                              pass a message to another
                                                                                                         processor.
   There have been several attempts to build large-scale computers based on
high-performance message-passing networks, and they do offer better absolute                             receive message routine
                                                                                                         A routine used by a
                                                                                                         processor in machines
                                                                                                         with private memories
                 Processor          Processor              ...            Processor                      to accept a message from
                                                                                                         another processor.

                   Cache              Cache                ...              Cache

                  Memory             Memory                ...             Memory

                                      Interconnection Network

FIGURE 6.13 Classic organization of a multiprocessor with multiple private address
spaces, traditionally called a message-passing multiprocessor. Note that unlike the SMP
in Figure 6.7, the interconnection network is not between the caches and memory but is instead between
processor-memory nodes.

                          communication performance than clusters built using local area networks. Indeed,
                          many supercomputers today use custom networks. The problem is that they are
                          much more expensive than local area networks like Ethernet. Few applications today
                          outside of high-performance computing can justify the higher communication
                          performance, given the much higher costs.

      Hardware/           Computers that rely on message passing for communication rather than cache
                          coherent shared memory are much easier for hardware designers to build (see
       Software           Section 5.8). There is an advantage for programmers as well, in that communication
       Interface          is explicit, which means there are fewer performance surprises than with the implicit
                          communication in cache-coherent shared memory computers. The downside
                          for programmers is that it’s harder to port a sequential program to a message-
                          passing computer, since every communication must be identified in advance or
                          the program doesn’t work. Cache-coherent shared memory allows the hardware to
                          figure out what data need to be communicated, which makes porting easier. There
                          are differences of opinion as to which is the shortest path to high performance,
                          given the pros and cons of implicit communication, but there is no confusion in the
                          marketplace today. Multicore microprocessors use shared physical memory and
                          nodes of a cluster communicate with each other using message passing.

                              Some concurrent applications run well on parallel hardware, independent of
                          whether it offers shared addresses or message passing. In particular, task-level
                          parallelism and applications with little communication—like Web search, mail
                          servers, and file servers—do not require shared addressing to run well. As a result,
clusters Collections of   clusters have become the most widespread example today of the message-passing
computers connected       parallel computer. Given the separate memories, each node of a cluster runs a
via I/O over standard     distinct copy of the operating system. In contrast, the cores inside a microprocessor
network switches to       are connected using a high-speed network inside the chip, and a multichip shared-
form a message-passing    memory system uses the memory interconnect for communication. The memory
multiprocessor.
                          interconnect has higher bandwidth and lower latency, allowing much better
                          communication performance for shared memory multiprocessors.
                              The weakness of separate memories for user memory from a parallel programming
                          perspective turns into a strength in system dependability (see Section 5.5). Since a
                          cluster consists of independent computers connected through a local area network,
                          it is much easier to replace a computer without bringing down the system in a cluster
                          than in a shared memory multiprocessor. Fundamentally, the shared address means
                          that it is difficult to isolate a processor and replace it without heroic work by the
                          operating system and in the physical design of the server. It is also easy for clusters
                          to scale down gracefully when a server fails, thereby improving dependability. Since
                          the cluster software is a layer that runs on top of the local operating systems running
                          on each computer, it is much easier to disconnect and replace a broken computer.
6.7   Clusters, Warehouse Scale Computers, and Other Message-Passing MultiproCessors                         547

   Given that clusters are constructed from whole computers and independent,
scalable networks, this isolation also makes it easier to expand the system without
bringing down the application that runs on top of the cluster.
   Their lower cost, higher availability, and rapid, incremental expandability make
clusters attractive to service Internet providers, despite their poorer communication
performance when compared to large-scale shared-memory multiprocessors. The
search engines that hundreds of millions of us use every day depend upon this
technology. Amazon, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and others all have multiple
datacenters each with clusters of tens of thousands of servers. Clearly, the use of
multiple processors in Internet service companies has been hugely successful.

Warehouse-Scale Computers
Internet services, such as those described above, necessitated the construction         Anyone can build a fast
of new buildings to house, power, and cool 100,000 servers. Although they may           CPU. The trick is to
be classified as just large clusters, their architecture and operation are more         build a fast system.
sophisticated. They act as one giant computer and cost on the order of $150M
                                                                                        Seymour Cray,
for the building, the electrical and cooling infrastructure, the servers, and the       considered the father of
networking equipment that connects and houses 50,000 to 100,000 servers. We             the supercomputer.
consider them a new class of computer, called Warehouse-Scale Computers (WSC).

The most popular framework for batch processing in a WSC is MapReduce [Dean,            Hardware/
2008] and its open-source twin Hadoop. Inspired by the Lisp functions of the same
name, Map first applies a programmer-supplied function to each logical input
                                                                                        Software
record. Map runs on thousands of servers to produce an intermediate result of key-      Interface
value pairs. Reduce collects the output of those distributed tasks and collapses them
using another programmer-defined function. With appropriate software support,
both are highly parallel yet easy to understand and to use. Within 30 minutes, a
novice programmer can run a MapReduce task on thousands of servers.
   For example, one MapReduce program calculates the number of occurrences of
every English word in a large collection of documents. Below is a simplified version
of that program, which shows only the inner loop and assumes just one occurrence
of all English words found in a document:

map(String key, String value):
   // key: document name
   // value: document contents
   for each word w in value:
   EmitIntermediate(w, “1”); // Produce list of all words
reduce(String key, Iterator values):
// key: a word
// values: a list of counts
   int result = 0;
   for each v in values:
   result += ParseInt(v); // get integer from key-value pair
   Emit(AsString(result));

                                 The function EmitIntermediate used in the Map function emits each word
                              in the document and the value one. Then the Reduce function sums all the values
                              per word for each document using ParseInt() to get the number of occurrences
                              per word in all documents. The MapReduce runtime environment schedules map
                              tasks and reduce tasks to the servers of a WSC.

                                 At this extreme scale, which requires innovation in power distribution, cooling,
                              monitoring, and operations, the WSC is a modern descendant of the 1970s
                              supercomputers—making Seymour Cray the godfather of today’s WSC architects.
                              His extreme computers handled computations that could be done nowhere else, but
                              were so expensive that only a few companies could afford them. This time the target
                              is providing information technology for the world instead of high-performance
                              computing for scientists and engineers. Hence, WSCs surely play a more important
                              societal role today than Cray’s supercomputers did in the past.
                                 While they share some common goals with servers, WSCs have three major
                              distinctions:
                                1. Ample, easy parallelism: A concern for a server architect is whether the
                                   applications in the targeted marketplace have enough parallelism to justify
software as a service              the amount of parallel hardware and whether the cost is too high for sufficient
(SaaS) Rather than                 communication hardware to exploit this parallelism. A WSC architect has
selling software that              no such concern. First, batch applications like MapReduce benefit from the
is installed and run               large number of independent data sets that need independent processing,
on customers’ own
computers, software is run
                                   such as billions of Web pages from a Web crawl. Second, interactive Internet
at a remote site and made          service applications, also known as Software as a Service (SaaS), can benefit
available over the Internet        from millions of independent users of interactive Internet services. Reads
typically via a Web                and writes are rarely dependent in SaaS, so SaaS rarely needs to synchronize.
interface to customers.            For example, search uses a read-only index and email is normally reading
SaaS customers are                 and writing independent information. We call this type of easy parallelism
charged based on use               Request-Level Parallelism, as many independent efforts can proceed in
versus on ownership.
                                   parallel naturally with little need for communication or synchronization.
                                2. Operational Costs Count: Traditionally, server architects design their systems
                                   for peak performance within a cost budget and worry about energy only to
                                   make sure they don’t exceed the cooling capacity of their enclosure. They
                                   usually ignored operational costs of a server, assuming that they pale in
                                   comparison to purchase costs. WSCs have longer lifetimes—the building
                                   and electrical and cooling infrastructure are often amortized over 10 or
                                   more years—so the operational costs add up: energy, power distribution,
                                   and cooling represent more than 30% of the costs of a WSC over 10 years.
                                3. Scale and the Opportunities/Problems Associated with Scale: To construct a
                                   single WSC, you must purchase 100,000 servers along with the supporting
                                   infrastructure, which means volume discounts. Hence, WSCs are so massive
6.7   Clusters, Warehouse Scale Computers, and Other Message-Passing MultiproCessors      549

       internally that you get economy of scale even if there are few WSCs. These
       economies of scale led to cloud computing, as the lower per unit costs of a
       WSC meant that cloud companies could rent servers at a profitable rate and
       still be below what it costs outsiders to do it themselves. The flip side of the
       economic opportunity of scale is the need to cope with the failure frequency
       of scale. Even if a server had a Mean Time To Failure of an amazing 25 years
       (200,000 hours), the WSC architect would need to design for five server
       failures every day. Section 5.15 mentioned annualized disk failure rate (AFR)
       was measured at Google at 2% to 4%. If there were four disks per server and
       their annual failure rate was 2%, the WSC architect should expect to see one
       disk fail every hour. Thus, fault tolerance is even more important for the
       WSC architect than for the server architect.
   The economies of scale uncovered by WSC have realized the long dreamed of
goal of computing as a utility. Cloud computing means anyone anywhere with good
ideas, a business model, and a credit card can tap thousands of servers to deliver
their vision almost instantly around the world. Of course, there are important
obstacles that could limit the growth of cloud computing—such as security,
privacy, standards, and the rate of growth of Internet bandwidth—but we foresee
them being addressed so that WSCs and cloud computing can flourish.
   To put the growth rate of cloud computing into perspective, in 2012 Amazon
Web Services announced that it adds enough new server capacity every day to
support all of Amazon’s global infrastructure as of 2003, when Amazon was a
$5.2Bn annual revenue enterprise with 6000 employees.
   Now that we understand the importance of message-passing multiprocessors,
especially for cloud computing, we next cover ways to connect the nodes of a WSC
together. Thanks to Moore’s Law and the increasing number of cores per chip, we
now need networks inside a chip as well, so these topologies are important in the
small as well as in the large.

Elaboration: The MapReduce framework shuffles and sorts the key-value pairs at the
end of the Map phase to produce groups that all share the same key. These groups are
next passed to the Reduce phase.

Elaboration: Another form of large-scale computing is grid computing, where the
computers are spread across large areas, and then the programs that run across them
must communicate via long haul networks. The most popular and unique form of grid
computing was pioneered by the SETI@home project. As millions of PCs are idle at
any one time doing nothing useful, they could be harvested and put to good use if
someone developed software that could run on those computers and then gave each PC
an independent piece of the problem to work on. The first example was the Search for
ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence (SETI), which was launched at UC Berkeley in 1999. Over 5
million computer users in more than 200 countries have signed up for SETI@home, with
more than 50% outside the US. By the end of 2011, the average performance of the
SETI@home grid was 3.5 PetaFLOPS.

        Check       1. True or false: Like SMPs, message-passing computers rely on locks for
      Yourself         synchronization.
                    2. True or false: Clusters have separate memories and thus need many copies of
                       the operating system.

                                 Introduction to Multiprocessor Network
                   6.8
                                 Topologies

                 Multicore chips require on-chip networks to connect cores together, and clusters
                 require local area networks to connect servers together. This section reviews the
                 pros and cons of different interconnection network topologies.
                     Network costs include the number of switches, the number of links on a switch
                 to connect to the network, the width (number of bits) per link, and length of the
                 links when the network is mapped into silicon. For example, some cores or servers
                 may be adjacent and others may be on the other side of the chip or the other side of
                 the datacenter. Network performance is multifaceted as well. It includes the latency
                 on an unloaded network to send and receive a message, the throughput in terms of
                 the maximum number of messages that can be transmitted in a given time period,
                 delays caused by contention for a portion of the network, and variable performance
                 depending on the pattern of communication. Another obligation of the network
                 may be fault tolerance, since systems may be required to operate in the presence
                 of broken components. Finally, in this era of energy-limited systems, the energy
                 efficiency of different organizations may trump other concerns.
                     Networks are normally drawn as graphs, with each edge of the graph representing
                 a link of the communication network. In the figures in this section, the processor-
                 memory node is shown as a black square and the switch is shown as a colored
                 circle. We assume here that all links are bidirectional; that is, information can flow
                 in either direction. All networks consist of switches whose links go to processor-
                 memory nodes and to other switches. The first network connects a sequence of
                 nodes together:

                 This topology is called a ring. Since some nodes are not directly connected, some
                 messages will have to hop along intermediate nodes until they arrive at the final
                 destination.
                    Unlike a bus—a shared set of wires that allows broadcasting to all connected
                 devices—a ring is capable of many simultaneous transfers.
                                6.8 Introduction to Multiprocessor Network Topologies                                551

    Because there are numerous topologies to choose from, performance metrics
are needed to distinguish these designs. Two are popular. The first is total network       network
bandwidth, which is the bandwidth of each link multiplied by the number of links.          bandwidth Informally,
This represents the peak bandwidth. For the ring network above, with P processors,         the peak transfer rate of a
the total network bandwidth would be P times the bandwidth of one link; the total          network; can refer to the
                                                                                           speed of a single link or
network bandwidth of a bus is just the bandwidth of that bus.                              the collective transfer rate
    To balance this best bandwidth case, we include another metric that is closer to       of all links in the network.
the worst case: the bisection bandwidth. This metric is calculated by dividing the
machine into two halves. Then you sum the bandwidth of the links that cross that           bisection
imaginary dividing line. The bisection bandwidth of a ring is two times the link           bandwidth The
                                                                                           bandwidth between
bandwidth. It is one times the link bandwidth for the bus. If a single link is as fast     two equal parts of
as the bus, the ring is only twice as fast as a bus in the worst case, but it is P times   a multiprocessor.
faster in the best case.                                                                   This measure is for a
    Since some network topologies are not symmetric, the question arises                   worst-case split of the
of where to draw the imaginary line when bisecting the machine. Bisection                  multiprocessor.
bandwidth is a worst-case metric, so the answer is to choose the division that
yields the most pessimistic network performance. Stated alternatively, calculate
all possible bisection bandwidths and pick the smallest. We take this pessimistic
view because parallel programs are often limited by the weakest link in the
communication chain.
    At the other extreme from a ring is a fully connected network, where every             fully connected
processor has a bidirectional link to every other processor. For fully connected           network A network
networks, the total network bandwidth is P × (P−1)/2, and the bisection bandwidth          that connects processor-
is (P/2)2.                                                                                 memory nodes by
                                                                                           supplying a dedicated
    The tremendous improvement in performance of fully connected networks is
                                                                                           communication link
offset by the tremendous increase in cost. This consequence inspires engineers             between every node.
to invent new topologies that are between the cost of rings and the performance
of fully connected networks. The evaluation of success depends in large part on
the nature of the communication in the workload of parallel programs run on the
computer.
    The number of different topologies that have been discussed in publications
would be difficult to count, but only a few have been used in commercial parallel
processors. Figure 6.14 illustrates two of the popular topologies.
    An alternative to placing a processor at every node in a network is to leave only      multistage network
the switch at some of these nodes. The switches are smaller than processor-memory-         A network that supplies a
switch nodes, and thus may be packed more densely, thereby lessening distance and          small switch at each node.
increasing performance. Such networks are frequently called multistage networks
to reflect the multiple steps that a message may travel. Types of multistage networks      crossbar network
                                                                                           A network that allows
are as numerous as single-stage networks; Figure 6.15 illustrates two of the popular       any node to communicate
multistage organizations. A fully connected or crossbar network allows any                 with any other node in
node to communicate with any other node in one pass through the network. An                one pass through the
Omega network uses less hardware than the crossbar network (2n log2 n versus n2            network.
switches), but contention can occur between messages, depending on the pattern

                        a. 2-D grid or mesh of 16 nodes               b. n-cube tree of 8 nodes (8 = 23 so n = 3)

                 FIGURE 6.14 Network topologies that have appeared in commercial parallel processors.
                 The colored circles represent switches and the black squares represent processor-memory nodes. Even
                 though a switch has many links, generally only one goes to the processor. The Boolean n-cube topology is
                 an n-dimensional interconnect with 2n nodes, requiring n links per switch (plus one for the processor) and
                 thus n nearest-neighbor nodes. Frequently, these basic topologies have been supplemented with extra arcs to
                 improve performance and reliability.

                 of communication. For example, the Omega network in Figure 6.15 cannot send a
                 message from P0 to P6 at the same time that it sends a message from P1 to P4.

                 Implementing Network Topologies
                 This simple analysis of all the networks in this section ignores important practical
                 considerations in the construction of a network. The distance of each link affects
                 the cost of communicating at a high clock rate—generally, the longer the distance,
                 the more expensive it is to run at a high clock rate. Shorter distances also make
                 it easier to assign more wires to the link, as the power to drive many wires is less
                 if the wires are short. Shorter wires are also cheaper than longer wires. Another
                 practical limitation is that the three-dimensional drawings must be mapped onto
                 chips that are essentially two-dimensional media. The final concern is energy.
                 Energy concerns may force multicore chips to rely on simple grid topologies, for
                 example. The bottom line is that topologies that appear elegant when sketched on
                 the blackboard may be impractical when constructed in silicon or in a datacenter.
                     Now that we understand the importance of clusters and have seen topologies
                 that we can follow to connect them together, we next look at the hardware and
                 software of the interface of the network to the processor.

      Check      True or false: For a ring with P nodes, the ratio of the total network bandwidth to
      Yourself   the bisection bandwidth is P/2.
                                 6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking                        553

                                                                      P0
                                                                      P1
                                                                      P2
                 P0
                                                                      P3
                 P1
                                                                      P4
                 P2
                                                                      P5
                 P3
                                                                      P6
                 P4
                                                                      P7
                 P5
                 P6
                 P7

  a. Crossbar                                            b. Omega network

                                     A                               C
                                     B                               D

                                     c. Omega network switch box

FIGURE 6.15 Popular multistage network topologies for eight nodes. The switches in these
drawings are simpler than in earlier drawings because the links are unidirectional; data come in at the left and
exit out the right link. The switch box in c can pass A to C and B to D or B to C and A to D. The crossbar uses
n2 switches, where n is the number of processors, while the Omega network uses 2n log2n of the large switch
boxes, each of which is logically composed of four of the smaller switches. In this case, the crossbar uses 64
switches versus 12 switch boxes, or 48 switches, in the Omega network. The crossbar, however, can support
any combination of messages between processors, while the Omega network cannot.

    5. 9
    6.9            Communicating to the Outside World:
                   Cluster Networking

This online section describes the networking hardware and software used to connect
the nodes of a cluster together. The example is 10 gigabit/second Ethernet connected
to the computer using Peripheral Component Interconnect Express (PCIe). It shows
both software and hardware optimizations how to improve network performance,
including zero copy messaging, user space communication, using polling instead of I/O
interrupts, and hardware calculation of checksums. While the example is networking,
the techniques in this section apply to storage controllers and other I/O devices as well.
                                  6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking                         553.e1

                    Communicating to the Outside World:
    5. 9
    6.9
                    Cluster Networking

This online section describes the networking hardware and software used to
connect the nodes of cluster together. As there are whole books and courses just on
networking, this section only introduces the main terms and concepts. While our
example is networking, the techniques we describe apply to storage controllers and
other I/O devices as well.
   Ethernet has dominated local-area networks for decades, so it is not surprising
that clusters primarily rely on Ethernet as the cluster interconnect. It became
commercially popular at 10 Megabits per second link speed in the 1980s, but
today 1 Gigabit per second Ethernet is standard and 10 Gigabit per second is being
deployed in datacenters. Figure e6.9.1 shows a network interface card (NIC) for 10
Gigabit Ethernet.
   Computers offer high-speed links to plug in fast I/O devices like this NIC. While
there used to be separate chips to connect the microprocessor to the memory and
high-speed I/O devices, thanks to Moore’s Law these functions have been absorbed
into the main chip in recent offerings like Intel’s Sandy Bridge. A popular high-
speed link today is PCIe, which stands for Peripheral Component Interconnect
Express. It is called a link in that the basic building block, called a serial lane,
consists of only four wires: two for receiving data and two for transmitting data.
This small number contrasts with an earlier version of PCI that consisted of 64

FIGURE e6.9.1 The NetFPGA 10-Gigabit Ethernet card (see http://netfpga.org/), which
connects up to four 10-Gigabit/sec Ethernet links. It is an FPGA-based open platform for
network research and classroom experimentation. The DMA engine and the four “MAC chips”
in Figure e6.9.2 are just portions of the Xilinx Virtex FPGA in the middle of the board. The four PHY chips
in Figure e6.9.2 are the four black squares just to the right of the four white rectangles on the left edge of the
board, which is where the Ethernet cables are plugged in.
553.e2                       6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking

                             wires, which was called a parallel bus. PCIe allows anywhere from one to 32 lanes
                             to be used to connect to I/O devices, depending on its needs. This NIC uses PCI
                             1.1, so each lane transfers at 2 Gigabits/second.
                                The NIC in Figure e6.9.1 connects to the host computer over an eight-lane
                             PCIe link, which offers 16 Gigabits/second in both directions. To communicate,
                             a NIC must both send or transmit messages and receive them, often abbreviated
                             as TX and RX, respectively. For this NIC, each 10 G link uses separate transmit
                             and receive queues, each of which can store two full-length Ethernet packets, used
                             between the Ethernet links and the NIC. Figure e6.9.2 is a block diagram of the
                             NIC showing the TX and RX queues. The NIC also has two 32-entry queues for
                             transmitting and receiving between the host computer and the NIC.
                                To give a command to the NIC, the processor must be able to address the device
memory-mapped                and to supply one or more command words. In memory-mapped I/O, portions of
I/O An I/O scheme in         the address space are assigned to I/O devices. During initialization (at boot time),
which portions of the        PCIe devices can request to be assigned an address region of a specified length.
address space are assigned   All subsequent processor reads and writes to that address region are forwarded
to I/O devices, and reads
and writes to those
                             over PCIe to that device. Reads and writes to those addresses are interpreted as
addresses are interpreted    commands to the I/O device.
as commands to the I/O          For example, a write operation can be used to send data to the network interface
device.                      where the data will be interpreted as a command. When the processor issues the
                             address and data, the memory system ignores the operation because the address
                             indicates a portion of the memory space used for I/O. The NIC, however, sees the
                             operation and records the data. User programs are prevented from issuing I/O
                             operations directly, because the OS does not provide access to the address space
                             assigned to the I/O devices, and thus the addresses are protected by the address
                             translation. Memory-mapped I/O can also be used to transmit data by writing or
                             reading to select addresses. The device uses the address to determine the type of
                             command, and the data may be provided by a write or obtained by a read. In any
                             event, the address encodes both the device identity and the type of transmission
                             between processor and device.

                                                                                              Control
                                                                                              Data
                                                                  PCIe

                                                                                        MAC      PHY     Port 0
                                                   TX
                                                                                        MAC      PHY     Port 1
                                                                  DMA
                                                                                        MAC      PHY     Port 2
                                                   RX
                                                                                        MAC      PHY     Port 3

                             FIGURE e6.9.2 Block diagram of the NetFPGA Ethernet card in Figure e6.9.1 showing the
                             control paths and the data paths. The control path allows the DMA engine to read the status of the
                             queues, such as empty vs. on-empty, and the content of the next available queue entry. The DMA engine also
                             controls port multiplexing. The data path simply passes through the DMA block to the TX/RX queues or
                             to main memory. The “MAC chips” are described below. The PHY chips, which refer to the physical layer,
                             connect the “MAC chips” to physical networking medium, such as copper wire or optical fiber.
                         6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking                          553.e3

   While the processor could transfer the data from the user space into the I/O
space by itself, the overhead for transferring data from or to a high-speed network
could be intolerable, since it could consume a large fraction of the processor. Thus,
computer designers long ago invented a mechanism for offloading the processor and
having the device controller transfer data directly to or from the memory without         direct memory access
involving the processor. This mechanism is called direct memory access (DMA).             (DMA) A mechanism
   DMA is implemented with a specialized controller that transfers data between           that provides a device
                                                                                          controller with the ability
the network interface and memory independent of the processor, and in this case
                                                                                          to transfer data directly
the DMA engine is inside the NIC.                                                         to or from the memory
   To notify the operating system (and eventually the application that will receive       without involving the
the packet) that a transfer is complete, the DMA sends an I/O interrupt.                  processor.
   An I/O interrupt is just like the exceptions we saw in Chapters 4 and 5, with two      interrupt-driven
important distinctions:                                                                   I/O An I/O scheme that
                                                                                          employs interrupts to
  1. An I/O interrupt is asynchronous with respect to the instruction execution.          indicate to the processor
     That is, the interrupt is not associated with any instruction and does not           that an I/O device needs
     prevent the instruction completion, so it is very different from either page fault   attention.
     exceptions or exceptions such as arithmetic overflow. Our control unit needs
     only to check for a pending I/O interrupt at the time it starts a new instruction.
  2. In addition to the fact that an I/O interrupt has occurred, we would like to
     convey further information, such as the identity of the device generating
     the interrupt. Furthermore, the interrupts represent devices that may have
     different priorities and whose interrupt requests have different urgencies
     associated with them.
To communicate information to the processor, such as the identity of the device
raising the interrupt, a system can use either vectored interrupts or an exception
identification register, called the Exception Syndrome Register or ESR in LEGv8
(see Section 4.9). When the processor recognizes the interrupt, the device can
send either the vector address or a status field to place in the Cause register. As
a result, when the OS gets control, it knows the identity of the device that caused
the interrupt and can immediately interrogate the device. An interrupt mechanism
eliminates the need for the processor to keep checking the device and instead
allows the processor to focus on executing programs.

The Role of the Operating System in Networking
The operating system acts as the interface between the hardware and the program
that requests I/O. The network responsibilities of the operating system arise from
three characteristics of networks:
  1. Multiple programs using the processor share the network.
  2. Networks often use interrupts to communicate information about the
     operations. Because interrupts cause a transfer to kernel or supervisor mode,
     they must be handled by the operating system (OS).
553.e4                        6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking

                                3. The low-level control of a network is complex, because it requires managing
                                   a set of concurrent events and because the requirements for correct device
                                   control are often very detailed.

                              These three characteristics of networks specifically and I/O systems in general lead
       Hardware/              to several different functions the OS must provide:
        Software
                                ■   The OS guarantees that a user’s program accesses only the portions of an I/O
        Interface                   device to which the user has rights. For example, the OS must not allow a
                                    program to read or write a file on disk if the owner of the file has not granted
                                    access to this program. In a system with shared I/O devices, protection could
                                    not be provided if user programs could perform I/O directly.
                                ■   The OS provides abstractions for accessing devices by supplying routines that
                                    handle low-level device operations.
                                ■   The OS handles the interrupts generated by I/O devices, just as it handles the
                                    exceptions generated by a program.
                                ■   The OS tries to provide equitable access to the shared I/O resources, as well
                                    as schedule accesses to enhance system throughput.
                                 The software inside the operating system that interfaces to a specific I/O device
device driver A program       like this NIC is called a device driver. The driver for this NIC follows five steps
that controls an I/O device   when transmitting or receiving a message. Figure e6.9.3 shows the relationship of
that is attached to the       these steps as an Ethernet packet is sent from one node of the cluster and received
computer.
                              by another node in the cluster.

                                First, the transmit steps:
                                1. The driver first prepares a packet buffer in host memory. It copies a packet
                                   from the user address space into a buffer that it allocates in the operating
                                   system address space.
                                2. Next, it “talks” to the NIC. The driver writes an I/O descriptor to the
                                   appropriate NIC register that gives the address of the buffer and its length.
                                3. The DMA in the NIC next copies the outgoing Ethernet packet from the host
                                   buffer over PCIe.
                                4. When the transmission is complete, the DMA interrupts the processor to
                                   notify the processor that the packet has been successfully transmitted.
                                5. Finally, the driver de-allocates the transmit buffer.
                          6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking       553.e5

                        Source

                          Step 1         RAM            Step 5
                                         CPU
                              Step 2       PCIe        Step 4
                                         NIC

                                        Step 3

                                            Ethernet

                                        Step 3

                                         NIC
                              Step 2        PCIe       Step 4

                                         CPU
                          Step 1         RAM            Step 5
                                                       Destination

FIGURE e6.9.3 Relationship of the five steps of the driver when transmitting an Ethernet
packet from one node and receiving that packet on another node.

   Next, the receive steps:
   1. First, the driver prepares a packet buffer in host memory, allocating a new
      buffer in which to place the received packet.
   2. Next, it “talks” to the NIC. The driver writes an I/O descriptor to the
      appropriate NIC register that gives the address of the buffer and its length.
   3. The DMA in the NIC next copies the incoming Ethernet packet over PCIe
      into the allocated host buffer.
   4. When the transmission is complete, the DMA interrupts the processor to
      notify the host of the newly received packet and its size.
   5. Finally, the driver copies the received packet into the user address space.
As you can see in Figure e6.9.3, the first three steps are time-critical when
transmitting a packet (since the last two occur after the packet is sent), and the
last three steps are time-critical when receiving a packet (since the first two occur
before a packet arrives). However, these non-critical steps must be completed
before individual nodes run out of resources, such as memory space. Failure to do
so negatively affects network performance.
553.e6                      6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking

                            Improving Network Performance
                            The importance of networking in clusters means it is certainly worthwhile to try to
                            improve performance. We show both software and hardware techniques.
                                Starting with software optimizations, one performance target is reducing the
                            number of times the packet is copied, which you may have noticed happening
                            repeatedly in the five steps of the driver above. The zero-copy optimization allows
                            the DMA engine to get the message directly from the user program data space
                            during transmission and be placed where the user wants it when the message is
                            received, rather than go through intermediary buffers in the operating system
                            along the way.
                                A second software optimization is to cut out the operating system almost entirely
                            by moving the communication into the user address space. By not invoking the
                            operating system and not causing a context switch, we can reduce the software
                            overhead considerably.
                                In this more radical scenario, a third step would be to drop interrupts. One
                            reason is that modern processors normally go into lower power mode while
                            waiting for an interrupt, and it takes time to come out of low power to service the
                            interrupt as well for the disruption to the pipeline, which increases latency. The
                            alternative to interrupts is for the processor to periodically check status bits to see
polling The process of      if I/O operation is complete, which is called polling. Hence, we can require the user
periodically checking the   program to poll the NIC continuously to see when the DMA unit has delivered a
status of an I/O device     message, and as a side effect the processor does not go into low-power mode.
to determine the need to
                                Looking at hardware optimizations, one potential target for improvement is
service the device.
                            in calculating the values of the fields of the Ethernet packet. The 48-bit Ethernet
                            address, called the Media Access Control address or MAC address, is a unique
                            number assigned to each Ethernet NIC. To improve performance, the “MAC
                            chip”—actually just a portion of the FPGA on this NIC—calculates the value for
                            the preamble fields and the CRC field (see Section 5.5). The driver is left with
                            placing the MAC destination address, MAC source address, message type, the
                            data payload, and padding if needed. (Ethernet requires that the minimum packet,
                            including the header and CRC fields but not the preamble, be 64 bytes.) Note that
                            even the least expensive Ethernet NICs do CRC calculation in hardware today.
                                A second hardware optimization, available on the most recent Intel processors
                            such as Ivy Bridge, improves the performance of the NIC with respect to the memory
                            hierarchy. Direct Data IO (DDIO) allowing up to 10% of the last-level cache is used
                            as a fast scratchpad for the DMA engine. Data are copied directly into the last-level
                            cache rather than to DRAM by the DMA, and only written to DRAM upon eviction
                            from the cache. This optimization helps with latency, but also with bandwidth; some
                            memory regions used for control might be written by the NIC repeatedly, and these
                            writes no longer need to go to DRAM. Thus, DDIO offers benefits similar to those
                            of a write back cache versus a write through cache (Chapter 5).
                                Let’s look at an object store that follows a client-server architecture and uses most
                            of the optimizations above: zero copy messaging, user space communication, polling
                            instead of interrupts, and hardware calculation of preamble and CRC. The driver
                                      6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking                 553.e7

                           14

                           12
  Latency (microseconds)

                           10

                           8
                                                                                            Driver RX
                                                                                            NIC RX
                           6                                                                Time of Flight
                                                                                            NIC TX
                                                                                            Driver TX
                           4

                           2

                           0
                                1024
                                1088
                                1152
                                1216
                                1280
                                1344
                                1408
                                 128
                                 192
                                 256
                                 320
                                 384
                                 448
                                 512
                                 576
                                 640
                                 704
                                 768
                                 832
                                 896
                                 960
                                  64
                                   0

                                             Object Size (B)

FIGURE e6.9.4 Time to send an object broken into transmit driver and NIC hardware time
vs. receive driver and NIC hardware time. NIC transmit time is much larger than the NIC receive
time because transmit requires more PCIe round-trips. The NIC does PCIe reads to read the descriptor and
data, but on receive the NIC does PCIe writes of data, length of data, and interrupt. PCIe reads incur a round
trip latency because NIC waits for the reply, but PCIe writes require no response because PCIe is reliable, so
PCIe writes can be sent back-to-back.

operates in user address space as a library that the application invokes. It grants this
application exclusive and direct access to the NIC. All of the I/O register space on the
NIC is mapped into the application, and all of the driver state is kept in the application.
The OS kernel doesn’t even see the NIC as such, which avoids the overheads of context
switching, the standard kernel network software stack, and interrupts.
   Figure e6.9.4 shows the time to send an object from one node to another. It
varies from about 9.5 to 12.5 microseconds, depending on the size of the object.
Here is the time for each step in microseconds:
              0.7 – for the client “driver” (library) to make the request (Driver TX in Figure e6.9.4).
              6.4 to 8.7 – for the NIC hardware to transmit the client’s request over the PCIe bus
              to the Ethernet, depending on the size of the object (NIC TX).
              0.02 – to send object over the 10 G Ethernet (Time of Flight). The time of flight
              is limited by speed of light to 5 ns per meter. The three-meter cables used in this
              measurement mean the time of flight is 15 ns, which is too small to be clearly visible
              in the figure.
553.e8   6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking

            1.8 to 2.5 – for the NIC hardware to receive the object, depending on its size
            (NIC RX).
            0.6 – for the server “driver” to transmit the message with the requested object to
            the app (Driver RX).
            Now that we have seen how to measure the performance of network at a low
         level of detail, let’s raise the perspective to see how to benchmark multiprocessors
         of all kinds with much higher-level programs.

         Elaboration There are three versions of PCIe. This NIC uses PCIe 1.1, which transfers
         at 2 gigabits per second per lane, so this NIC transfers at up to 16 gigabits per second
         in each direction. PCIe 2.0, which is found on most PC motherboards today, doubles
         the lane bandwidth to 4 gigabits per second. PCIe 3.0 doubles again to 8 gigabits per
         second, and it is starting to be found on some motherboards. We applaud the standard
         committee’s logical rate of bandwidth improvement, which has been about 2version number
         gigabits/second. The limitations of the Virtex 5 FPGA prevented the NIC from using
         faster versions of PCIe.

         Elaboration While Ethernet is the foundation of cluster communication, clusters
         commonly use higher-level protocols for reliable communication. Transmission Control
         Protocol and Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), although invented for planet-wide communication,
         is often used inside a warehouse-scale computer, due in part to its dependability. While
         IP makes no delivery guarantees in the protocol, TCP does. The sender keeps the packet
         sent until it gets the acknowledgment message back that it was received correctly from
         the receiver. The receiver knows that the message was not corrupted along the way, by
         double-checking the contents with the TCP CRC field. To ensure that IP delivers to the right
         destination, the IP header includes a checksum to make sure the destination number
         remains unchanged. The success of the Internet is due in large part to the elegance
         and popularity of TCP/IP, which allows independent local-area networks to communicate
         dependably. Given its importance in the Internet and in clusters, many have accelerated
         TCP/IP, using techniques like those listed in this section [Regnier, 2004].

         Elaboration Adding DMA is another path to the memory system—one that does not
         go through the address translation mechanism or the cache hierarchy. This difference
         generates some problems both in virtual memory and in caches. These problems are
         usually solved with a combination of hardware techniques and software support. The
         difficulties in having DMA in a virtual memory system arise because pages have both
         a physical and a virtual address. DMA also creates problems for systems with caches,
         because there can be two copies of a data item: one in the cache and one in memory.
         Because the DMA issues memory requests directly to the memory rather than through
         the processor cache, the value of a memory location seen by the DMA unit and the
         processor may differ. Consider a read from a NIC that the DMA unit places directly
         into memory. If some of the locations into which the DMA writes are in the cache, the
         processor will receive the old value when it does a read. Similarly, if the cache is write-
         back, the DMA may read a value directly from memory when a newer value is in the
                           6.9 Communicating to the Outside World: Cluster Networking                    553.e9

cache, and the value has not been written back. This is called the stale data problem or
coherence problem (see Chapter 5). Similar solutions for coherence are used with DMA.

Elaboration Virtual Machine support clearly can negatively impact networking
performance. As a result, microprocessor designers have been adding hardware
to reduce the performance overhead of virtual machines for networking in particular
and I/O in general. Intel offers Virtualization Technology for Directed I/O (VT-d) to help
virtualize I/O. It is an I/O memory management unit that enables guest virtual machines
to directly use I/O devices, such as Ethernet. It supports DMA remapping, which allows
the DMA to read or write the data directly in the I/O buffers of the guest virtual machine,
rather than into the host I/O buffers and then copy them into the guest I/O buffers. It
also supports interrupt remapping, which lets the virtual machine monitor route interrupt
requests directly to the proper virtual machine.

Two options for networking are using interrupts or polling, and using DMA or                  Check
using the processor via load and store instructions.                                          Yourself
   1. If we want the lowest latency for small packets, which combination is likely
      best?
   2. If we want the lowest latency for large packets, which combination is likely
      best?

         After covering the performance of network at a low level of detail in this online
      section, the next section shows how to benchmark multiprocessors of all kinds
      with much higher-level programs.

                      Multiprocessor Benchmarks and
       6.10
                      Performance Models

      As we saw in Chapter 1, benchmarking systems is always a sensitive topic, because
      it is a highly visible way to try to determine which system is better. The results
      affect not only the sales of commercial systems, but also the reputation of the
      designers of those systems. Hence, all participants want to win the competition,
      but they also want to be sure that if someone else wins, they deserve it because
      they have a genuinely better system. This desire leads to rules to ensure that the
      benchmark results are not simply engineering tricks for that benchmark, but are
      instead advances that improve performance of real applications.
          To avoid possible tricks, a typical rule is that you can’t change the benchmark.
      The source code and data sets are fixed, and there is a single proper answer. Any
      deviation from those rules makes the results invalid.
          Many multiprocessor benchmarks follow these traditions. A common exception
      is to be able to increase the size of the problem so that you can run the benchmark
      on systems with a widely different number of processors. That is, many benchmarks
      allow weak scaling rather than require strong scaling, even though you must take
      care when comparing results for programs running different problem sizes.
          Figure 6.16 gives a summary of several parallel benchmarks, also described below:
        n   Linpack is a collection of linear algebra routines, and the routines for
            performing Gaussian elimination constitute what is known as the Linpack
            benchmark. The DGEMM routine in the example on page 223 represents a
            small fraction of the source code of the Linpack benchmark, but it accounts
            for most of the execution time for the benchmark. It allows weak scaling,
            letting the user pick any size problem. Moreover, it allows the user to rewrite
            Linpack in almost any form and in any language, as long as it computes the
            proper result and performs the same number of floating point operations
            for a given problem size. Twice a year, the 500 computers with the fastest
            Linpack performance are published at www.top500.org. The first on this list
            is considered by the press to be the world’s fastest computer.
        n   SPECrate is a throughput metric based on the SPEC CPU benchmarks,
            such as SPEC CPU 2006 (see Chapter 1). Rather than report performance
            of the individual programs, SPECrate runs many copies of the program
            simultaneously. Thus, it measures task-level parallelism, as there is no
            communication between the tasks. You can run as many copies of the
            programs as you want, so this is again a form of weak scaling.

  Benchmark           Scaling?     Reprogram?                                   Description

     Linpack            Weak           Yes         Dense matrix linear algebra [Dongarra, 1979]
    SPECrate            Weak            No         Independent job parallelism [Henning, 2007]
                                                   Complex 1D FFT
                                                   Blocked LU Decomposition
                                                   Blocked Sparse Cholesky Factorization
                                                   Integer Radix Sort
 Stanford Parallel       Strong                    Barnes-Hut
 Applications for      (although                   Adaptive Fast Multipole
 Shared Memory           offers         No
                                                   Ocean Simulation
 SPLASH 2 [Woo       two problem
   et al., 1995]         sizes)                    Hierarchical Radiosity
                                                   Ray Tracer
                                                   Volume Renderer
                                                   Water Simulation with Spatial Data Structure
                                                   Water Simulation without Spatial Data Structure
                                                   EP: embarrassingly parallel
   NAS Parallel                                    MG: simplified multigrid
                                        Yes
  Benchmarks                                       CG: unstructured grid for a conjugate gradient method
                        Weak           (C or
  [Bailey et al.,
                                   Fortran only)   FT: 3-D partial differential equation solution using FFTs
     1991]
                                                   IS: large integer sort
                                                   Blackscholes—Option pricing with Black-Scholes PDE
                                                   Bodytrack—Body tracking of a person
                                                   Canneal—Simulated cache-aware annealing to optimize routing
                                                   Dedup—Next-generation compression with data deduplication
                                                   Facesim—Simulates the motions of a human face
     PARSEC
 Benchmark Suite                                   Ferret—Content similarity search server
                        Weak            No         Fluidanimate—Fluid dynamics for animation with SPH method
  [Bienia et al.,
      2008]                                        Freqmine—Frequent itemset mining
                                                   Streamcluster—Online clustering of an input stream
                                                   Swaptions—Pricing of a portfolio of swaptions
                                                   Vips—Image processing
                                                   x264—H.264 video encoding
                                                   Finite-State Machine
                                                   Combinational Logic
                                                   Graph Traversal
                                                   Structured Grid
                                                   Dense Matrix
    Berkeley
     Design                                        Sparse Matrix
                      Strong or        Yes         Spectral Methods (FFT)
    Patterns
                        Weak
 [Asanovic et al.,                                 Dynamic Programming
     2006]                                         N-Body
                                                   MapReduce
                                                   Backtrack/Branch and Bound
                                                   Graphical Model Inference
                                                   Unstructured Grid

FIGURE 6.16 Examples of parallel benchmarks.

   n    SPLASH and SPLASH 2 (Stanford Parallel Applications for Shared Memory)
        were efforts by researchers at Stanford University in the 1990s to put together
        a parallel benchmark suite similar in goals to the SPEC CPU benchmark
        suite. It includes both kernels and applications, including many from the
        high-performance computing community. This benchmark requires strong
        scaling, although it comes with two data sets.

                                 n   The NAS (NASA Advanced Supercomputing) parallel benchmarks were
                                     another attempt from the 1990s to benchmark multiprocessors. Taken from
                                     computational fluid dynamics, they consist of five kernels. They allow weak
                                     scaling by defining a few data sets. Like Linpack, these benchmarks can be
                                     rewritten, but the rules require that the programming language can only be C
                                     or Fortran.
                                 n   The recent PARSEC (Princeton Application Repository for Shared Memory
                                     Computers) benchmark suite consists of multithreaded programs that use
Pthreads A UNIX                      Pthreads (POSIX threads) and OpenMP (Open MultiProcessing; see Section
API for creating and                 6.5). They focus on emerging computational domains and consist of nine
manipulating threads. It is          applications and three kernels. Eight rely on data parallelism, three rely on
structured as a library.             pipelined parallelism, and one on unstructured parallelism.
                                 n   On the cloud front, the goal of the Yahoo! Cloud Serving Benchmark (YCSB)
                                     is to compare performance of cloud data services. It offers a framework that
                                     makes it easy for a client to benchmark new data services, using Cassandra
                                     and HBase as representative examples [Cooper, 2010].
                                 The downside of such traditional restrictions to benchmarks is that innovation is
                              chiefly limited to the architecture and compiler. Better data structures, algorithms,
                              programming languages, and so on often cannot be used, since that would give a
                              misleading result. The system could win because of, say, the algorithm, and not
                              because of the hardware or the compiler.
                                 While these guidelines are understandable when the foundations of computing
                              are relatively stable—as they were in the 1990s and the first half of this decade—
                              they are undesirable during a programming revolution. For this revolution to
                              succeed, we need to encourage innovation at all levels.
                                 Researchers at the University of California at Berkeley have advocated one
                              approach. They identified 13 design patterns that they claim will be part of
                              applications of the future. Frameworks or kernels implement these design
                              patterns. Examples are sparse matrices, structured grids, finite-state machines,
                              map reduce, and graph traversal. By keeping the definitions at a high level, they
                              hope to encourage innovations at any level of the system. Thus, the system with the
                              fastest sparse matrix solver is welcome to use any data structure, algorithm, and
                              programming language, in addition to novel architectures and compilers.

                              Performance Models
                              A topic related to benchmarks is performance models. As we have seen with the
                              increasing architectural diversity in this chapter—multithreading, SIMD, GPUs—
                              it would be especially helpful if we had a simple model that offered insights into the
                              performance of different architectures. It need not be perfect, just insightful.
                                  The 3Cs for cache performance from Chapter 5 is an example performance
                              model. It is not a perfect performance model, since it ignores potentially important

factors like block size, block allocation policy, and block replacement policy.
Moreover, it has quirks. For example, a miss can be ascribed due to capacity in one
design, and to a conflict miss in another cache of the same size. Yet 3Cs model has
been popular for 25 years, because it offers insight into the behavior of programs,
helping both architects and programmers improve their creations based on insights
from that model.
   To find such a model for parallel computers, let’s start with small kernels,
like those from the 13 Berkeley design patterns in Figure 6.16. While there are
versions with different data types for these kernels, floating point is popular in
several implementations. Hence, peak floating-point performance is a limit on the
speed of such kernels on a given computer. For multicore chips, peak floating-point
performance is the collective peak performance of all the cores on the chip. If there
were multiple microprocessors in the system, you would multiply the peak per chip
by the total number of chips.
   The demands on the memory system can be estimated by dividing this peak
floating-point performance by the average number of floating-point operations per
byte accessed:

                          Floating-PointOperations/Sec
                                                                      = Bytes/Sec
                         Floating-Point Operations/Byte
                                                                                                                    arithmetic intensity
   The ratio of floating-point operations per byte of memory accessed is called the                                 The ratio of floating-
                                                                                                                    point operations in a
arithmetic intensity. It can be calculated by taking the total number of floating-                                  program to the number
point operations for a program divided by the total number of data bytes transferred                                of data bytes accessed by
to main memory during program execution. Figure 6.17 shows the arithmetic                                           a program from main
intensity of several of the Berkeley design patterns from Figure 6.16.                                              memory.

                     O(1)                 O(log(N))                    O(N)

                                Arithmetic Intensity

                                         Spectral
               Sparse                                                       Dense
                                         Methods                                                N-body
               Matrix                                                       Matrix
                                         (FFTs)                                                 (Particle
               (SpMV)                                                       (BLAS3)             Methods)
                     Structured Structured
                     Grids      Grids
                     (Stencils, (Lattice
                     PDEs)      Methods)

FIGURE 6.17 Arithmetic intensity, specified as the number of floating-point operations
to run the program divided by the number of bytes accessed in main memory [Williams,
Waterman, and Patterson 2009]. Some kernels have an arithmetic intensity that scales with problem
size, such as Dense Matrix, but there are many kernels with arithmetic intensities independent of problem
size. For kernels in this former case, weak scaling can lead to different results, since it puts much less demand
on the memory system.

      The Roofline Model
      This simple model ties floating-point performance, arithmetic intensity, and memory
      performance together in a two-dimensional graph [Williams, Waterman, and
      Patterson 2009]. Peak floating-point performance can be found using the hardware
      specifications mentioned above. The working sets of the kernels we consider here
      do not fit in on-chip caches, so peak memory performance may be defined by the
      memory system behind the caches. One way to find the peak memory performance
      is the Stream benchmark. (See the Elaboration on page 395 in Chapter 5.)
          Figure 6.18 shows the model, which is done once for a computer, not for each
      kernel. The vertical Y-axis is achievable floating-point performance from 0.5 to
      64.0 GFLOPs/second. The horizontal X-axis is arithmetic intensity, varying from
      1/8 FLOPs/DRAM byte accessed to 16 FLOPs/DRAM byte accessed. Note that the
      graph is a log-log scale.
          For a given kernel, we can find a point on the X-axis based on its arithmetic
      intensity. If we draw a vertical line through that point, the performance of the kernel
      on that computer must lie somewhere along that line. We can plot a horizontal line
      showing peak floating-point performance of the computer. Obviously, the actual
      floating-point performance can be no higher than the horizontal line, since that is
      a hardware limit.

                                                     64.0

                                                     32.0
                          Attainable GFLOPs/second

                                                                                       peak floating-point performance
                                                     16.0
                                                                                   )
                                                                                  am
                                                                             tre
                                                                             (s
                                                                        BW

                                                      8.0
                                                                         y
                                                                      or
                                                                  em

                                                      4.0
                                                                  m
                                                              ak
                                                            pe

                                                      2.0                         Kernel 1           Kernel 2
                                                                                  (Memory            (Computation
                                                      1.0                         Bandwidth          limited)
                                                                                  limited)

                                                      0.5
                                                            1/     1/    1/       1      2     4     8          16
                                                              8      4      2
                                                                  Arithmetic Intensity: FLOPs/Byte Ratio

      FIGURE 6.18 Roofline Model [Williams, Waterman, and Patterson 2009]. This example has a
      peak floating-point performance of 16 GFLOPS/sec and a peak memory bandwidth of 16 GB/sec from the
      Stream benchmark. (Since Stream is actually four measurements, this line is the average of the four.) The
      dotted vertical line in color on the left represents Kernel 1, which has an arithmetic intensity of 0.5 FLOPs/
      byte. It is limited by memory bandwidth to no more than 8 GFLOPS/sec on this Opteron X2. The dotted
      vertical line to the right represents Kernel 2, which has an arithmetic intensity of 4 FLOPs/byte. It is limited
      only computationally to 16 GFLOPS/s. (These data are based on the AMD Opteron X2 (Revision F) using
      dual cores running at 2 GHz in a dual socket system.)

    How could we plot the peak memory performance, which is measured in bytes/
second? Since the X-axis is FLOPs/byte and the Y-axis FLOPs/second, bytes/second
is just a diagonal line at a 45-degree angle in this figure. Hence, we can plot a third
line that gives the maximum floating-point performance that the memory system
of that computer can support for a given arithmetic intensity. We can express the
limits as a formula to plot the line in the graph in Figure 6.18:

 Attainable GFLOPs/sec = Min (Peak Memory BW × Arithmetic Intensity, Peak
                         Floating-Point Performance)
    The horizontal and diagonal lines give this simple model its name and indicate its
value. The “roofline” sets an upper bound on performance of a kernel depending on
its arithmetic intensity. Given a roofline of a computer, you can apply it repeatedly,
since it doesn’t vary by kernel.
    If we think of arithmetic intensity as a pole that hits the roof, either it hits
the slanted part of the roof, which means performance is ultimately limited by
memory bandwidth, or it hits the flat part of the roof, which means performance is
computationally limited. In Figure 6.18, kernel 1 is an example of the former, and
kernel 2 is an example of the latter.
    Note that the “ridge point,” where the diagonal and horizontal roofs meet, offers
an interesting insight into the computer. If it is far to the right, then only kernels
with very high arithmetic intensity can achieve the maximum performance of
that computer. If it is far to the left, then almost any kernel can potentially hit the
maximum performance.

Comparing Two Generations of Opterons
The AMD Opteron X4 (Barcelona) with four cores is the successor to the Opteron
X2 with two cores. To simplify board design, they use the same socket. Hence, they
have the same DRAM channels and thus the same peak memory bandwidth. In
addition to doubling the number of cores, the Opteron X4 also has twice the peak
floating-point performance per core: Opteron X4 cores can issue two floating-
point SSE2 instructions per clock cycle, while Opteron X2 cores issue at most one.
As the two systems we’re comparing have similar clock rates—2.2 GHz for Opteron
X2 versus 2.3 GHz for Opteron X4—the Opteron X4 has about four times the peak
floating-point performance of the Opteron X2 with the same DRAM bandwidth.
The Opteron X4 also has a 2MiB L3 cache, which is not found in the Opteron X2.
   In Figure 6.19 the roofline models for both systems are compared. As we would
expect, the ridge point moves to the right, from 1 in the Opteron X2 to 5 in the
Opteron X4. Hence, to see a performance gain in the next generation, kernels need
an arithmetic intensity higher than 1, or their working sets must fit in the caches
of the Opteron X4.
   The roofline model gives an upper bound to performance. Suppose your
program is far below that bound. What optimizations should you perform, and in
what order?

                                                           128.0       Opteron X4 (Barcelona)

                                                            64.0

                                                            32.0

                                     Attainable GFLOPs/s
                                                            16.0

                                                             8.0

                                                             4.0                   Opteron X2

                                                             2.0

                                                             1.0

                                                             0.5
                                                                   1/  1  1
                                                                     8 /4 /2   1   2   4   8 16
                                                                      Actual FLOPbyte ratio

      FIGURE 6.19 Roofline models of two generations of Opterons. The Opteron X2 roofline, which
      is the same as in Figure 6.18, is in black, and the Opteron X4 roofline is in color. The bigger ridge point of
      Opteron X4 means that kernels that were computationally bound on the Opteron X2 could be memory-
      performance bound on the Opteron X4.

         To reduce computational bottlenecks, the following two optimizations can help
      almost any kernel:
         1. Floating-point operation mix. Peak floating-point performance for a computer
            typically requires an equal number of nearly simultaneous additions and
            multiplications. That balance is necessary either because the computer
            supports a fused multiply-add instruction (see the Elaboration on page 228
            in Chapter 3) or because the floating-point unit has an equal number of
            floating-point adders and floating-point multipliers. The best performance
            also requires that a significant fraction of the instruction mix is floating-
            point operations and not integer instructions.
         2. Improve instruction-level parallelism and apply SIMD. For modern archi-
            tectures, the highest performance comes when fetching, executing, and
            committing three to four instructions per clock cycle (see Section 4.10). The
            goal for this step is to improve the code from the compiler to increase ILP. One
            way is by unrolling loops, as we saw in Section 4.12. For the x86 architectures,
            a single AVX instruction can operate on four double precision operands, so
            they should be used whenever possible (see Sections 3.7 and 3.8).
         To reduce memory bottlenecks, the following two optimizations can help:
         1. Software prefetching. Usually the highest performance requires keeping many
            memory operations in flight, which is easier to do by performing predicting
            accesses via software prefetch instructions rather than waiting until the data
            are required by the computation.

  2. Memory affinity. Microprocessors today include a memory controller on
     the same chip with the microprocessor, which improves performance of the
     memory hierarchy. If the system has multiple chips, this means that some
     addresses go to the DRAM that is local to one chip, and the rest require
     accesses over the chip interconnect to access the DRAM that is local to
     another chip. This split results in non-uniform memory accesses, which we
     described in Section 6.5. Accessing memory through another chip lowers
     performance. This second optimization tries to allocate data and the threads
     tasked to operate on that data to the same memory-processor pair, so that
     the processors rarely have to access the memory of the other chips.
   The roofline model can help decide which of these two optimizations to
perform and the order in which to perform them. We can think of each of these
optimizations as a “ceiling” below the appropriate roofline, meaning that you
cannot break through a ceiling without performing the associated optimization.
   The computational roofline can be found from the manuals, and the memory
roofline can be found from running the Stream benchmark. The computational
ceilings, such as floating-point balance, can also come from the manuals for
that computer. A memory ceiling, such as memory affinity, requires running
experiments on each computer to determine the gap between them. The good
news is that this process only need be done once per computer, for once someone
characterizes a computer’s ceilings, everyone can use the results to prioritize their
optimizations for that computer.
   Figure 6.20 adds ceilings to the roofline model in Figure 6.18, showing the
computational ceilings in the top graph and the memory bandwidth ceilings on the
bottom graph. Although the higher ceilings are not labeled with both optimizations,
they are implied in this figure; to break through the highest ceiling, you need to
have already broken through all the ones below.
   The width of the gap between the ceiling and the next higher limit is the reward
for trying that optimization. Thus, Figure 6.20 suggests that optimization 2, which
improves ILP, has a large benefit for improving computation on that computer, and
optimization 4, which improves memory affinity, has a large benefit for improving
memory bandwidth on that computer.
   Figure 6.21 combines the ceilings of Figure 6.20 into a single graph. The
arithmetic intensity of a kernel determines the optimization region, which in turn
suggests which optimizations to try. Note that the computational optimizations
and the memory bandwidth optimizations overlap for much of the arithmetic
intensity. Three regions are shaded differently in Figure 6.21 to indicate the
different optimization strategies. For example, Kernel 2 falls in the blue trapezoid
on the right, which suggests working only on the computational optimizations.
Kernel 1 falls in the blue-gray parallelogram in the middle, which suggests trying
both types of optimizations. Moreover, it suggests starting with optimizations 2
and 4. Note that the Kernel 1 vertical lines fall below the floating-point imbalance
optimization, so optimization 1 may be unnecessary. If a kernel fell in the gray
triangle on the lower left, it would suggest trying just memory optimizations.

                                                                                         AMD Opteron

                                                   64.0

                                                   32.0

                        Attainable GFLOPs/second
                                                                                              peak floating-point performance

                                                                                         )
                                                   16.0

                                                                                      am
                                                                                  tre
                                                                                (s
                                                                                                       1. Fl. Pt. imbalance

                                                                           BW
                                                    8.0

                                                                           y
                                                                      or
                                                                  em
                                                    4.0

                                                                m
                                                             ak
                                                          pe
                                                                                                  2. Without ILP or SIMD
                                                    2.0

                                                    1.0

                                                    0.5
                                                          1/         1/         1/          1          2    4      8      16
                                                            8          4          2
                                                                      Arithmetic Intensity: FLOPs/Byte Ratio

                                                                                         AMD Opteron

                                                   64.0

                                                   32.0
                        Attainable GFLOPs/second

                                                                                              peak floating-point performance
                                                                                                   )

                                                   16.0
                                                                                             in am
                                                                                           ch re
                                                                                         et (st
                                                                                               g
                                                                                   pr BW

                                                    8.0
                                                                             SW ory
                                                                                      ef

                                                                                     ity
                                                                          ut m

                                                                                 fin
                                                                        /o me

                                                                              Af

                                                    4.0
                                                                            y
                                                                    3. eak

                                                                          or
                                                                      em
                                                                       p
                                                                      w

                                                                     M

                                                    2.0
                                                                  ut
                                                               /o
                                                             w
                                                          4.

                                                    1.0

                                                    0.5
                                                          1/         1/         1/          1          2    4      8      16
                                                            8          4          2
                                                                      Arithmetic Intensity: FLOPs/Byte Ratio

      FIGURE 6.20 Roofline model with ceilings. The top graph shows the computational “ceilings” of
      8 GFLOPs/sec if the floating-point operation mix is imbalanced and 2 GFLOPs/sec if the optimizations to
      increase ILP and SIMD are also missing. The bottom graph shows the memory bandwidth ceilings of 11 GB/
      sec without software prefetching and 4.8 GB/sec if memory affinity optimizations are also missing.

                                                 64.0

                                                 32.0
                      Attainable GFLOPs/second                                                  peak floating-point performance
                                                 16.0

                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                in m
                                                                                              ch ea
                                                                                            et (str
                                                                                                  g
                                                                                                         1. Fl. Pt. imbalance

                                                                                      pr W
                                                  8.0

                                                                                  W ry B
                                                                                         ef

                                                                                       ity
                                                                                        o
                                                                                  em

                                                                                   fin
                                                                                Af
                                                  4.0
                                                                                m
                                                                                S

                                                                              y
                                                           ak

                                                                    ut

                                                                           or
                                                                  /o
                                                        pe

                                                                        em
                                                                w

                                                                                                2. Without ILP or SIMD
                                                               3.

                                                  2.0                 M
                                                                   ut
                                                                /o
                                                                       w

                                                                                        Kernel 1                    Kernel 2
                                                                    4.

                                                  1.0

                                                  0.5
                                                        1/           1/          1/           1           2     4      8       16
                                                           8           4            2

                                                               Arithmetic Intensity: FLOPs/Byte Ratio

FIGURE 6.21 Roofline model with ceilings, overlapping areas shaded, and the two kernels
from Figure 6.18. Kernels whose arithmetic intensity land in the blue trapezoid on the right should focus
on computation optimizations, and kernels whose arithmetic intensity land in the gray triangle in the lower
left should focus on memory bandwidth optimizations. Those that land in the blue-gray parallelogram in
the middle need to worry about both. As Kernel 1 falls in the parallelogram in the middle, try optimizing
ILP and SIMD, memory affinity, and software prefetching. Kernel 2 falls in the trapezoid on the right, so try
optimizing ILP and SIMD and the balance of floating-point operations.

   Thus far, we have been assuming that the arithmetic intensity is fixed, but that is
not really the case. First, there are kernels where the arithmetic intensity increases
with problem size, such as for Dense Matrix and N-body problems (see Figure
6.17). Indeed, this can be a reason that programmers have more success with weak
scaling than with strong scaling. Second, the effectiveness of the memory hierarchy
affects the number of accesses that go to memory, so optimizations that improve
cache performance also improve arithmetic intensity. One example is improving
temporal locality by unrolling loops and then grouping together statements with
similar addresses. Many computers have special cache instructions that allocate
data in a cache but do not first fill the data from memory at that address, since it
will soon be over-written. Both these optimizations reduce memory traffic, thereby
moving the arithmetic intensity pole to the right by a factor of, say, 1.5. This shift
right could put the kernel in a different optimization region.
   While the examples above show how to help programmers improve performance,
architects can also use the model to decide where they should optimize hardware to
improve the performance of the kernels that they think will be important.
   The next section uses the roofline model to demonstrate the performance
difference between a multicore microprocessor and a GPU and to see whether
these differences reflect performance of real programs.

                   Elaboration: The ceilings are ordered so that lower ceilings are easier to optimize.
                   Clearly, a programmer can optimize in any order, but following this sequence reduces the
                   chances of wasting effort on an optimization that has no benefit due to other constraints.
                   Like the 3Cs model, as long as the roofline model delivers on insights, a model can
                   have assumptions that may prove optimistic. For example, roofline assumes the load is
                   balanced between all processors.

                   Elaboration: An alternative to the Stream benchmark is to use the raw DRAM
                   bandwidth as the roofline. While the raw bandwidth definitely is a hard upper bound,
                   actual memory performance is often so far from that boundary that it’s not that useful.
                   That is, no program can go close to that bound. The downside to using Stream is that
                   very careful programming may exceed the Stream results, so the memory roofline may
                   not be as hard a limit as the computational roofline. We stick with Stream because few
                   programmers will be able to deliver more memory bandwidth than Stream discovers.

                   Elaboration: Although the roofline model shown is for multicore processors, it clearly
                   would work for a uniprocessor as well.

        Check True or false: The main drawback with conventional approaches to benchmarks
      Yourself for parallel computers is that the rules that ensure fairness also slow software
                   innovation.

                                   Real Stuff: Benchmarking and Rooflines
                    6.11           of the Intel Core i7 960 and the NVIDIA
                                   Tesla GPU

                   A group of Intel researchers published a paper [Lee et al., 2010] comparing a
                   quad-core Intel Core i7 960 with multimedia SIMD extensions to the previous
                   generation GPU, the NVIDIA Tesla GTX 280. Figure 6.22 lists the characteristics
                   of the two systems. Both products were purchased in Fall 2009. The Core i7 is
                   in Intel’s 45-nanometer semiconductor technology while the GPU is in TSMC’s
                   65-nanometer technology. Although it might have been fairer to have a comparison
                   by a neutral party or by both interested parties, the purpose of this section is not to
                   determine how much faster one product is than another, but to try to understand
                   the relative value of features of these two contrasting architecture styles.
                      The rooflines of the Core i7 960 and GTX 280 in Figure 6.23 illustrate the
                   differences in the computers. Not only does the GTX 280 have much higher
                   memory bandwidth and double-precision floating-point performance, but also its
                   double-precision ridge point is considerably to the left. The double-precision ridge
                   point is 0.6 for the GTX 280 versus 3.1 for the Core i7. As mentioned above, it is
                   much easier to hit peak computational performance the further the ridge point of
6.11   Real Stuff: Benchmarking and Rooflines of the Intel Core i7 960 and the NVIDIA Tesla GPU                                              565

                                                                    Core i7-                                              Ratio       Ratio
                                                                     960              GTX 280            GTX 480         280/i7      480/i7

  Number of processing elements (cores or SMs)                          4                 30                15             7.5         3.8
  Clock frequency (GHz)                                                3.2                1.3               1.4           0.41        0.44
  Die size                                                             263               576                520            2.2         2.0
  Technology                                                       Intel 45 nm      TSMC 65 nm         TSMC 40 nm          1.6         1.0
  Power (chip, not module)                                             130               130                167            1.0         1.3
  Transistors                                                        700 M             1400 M             3030 M           2.0         4.4
  Memory brandwith (GBytes/sec)                                        32                141                177            4.4         5.5
  Single-precision SIMD width                                           4                  8                32             2.0         8.0
  Double-precision SIMD width                                           2                  1                16             0.5         8.0
  Peak single-precision scalar FLOPS (GFLOPs/sec)                      26                117                63             4.6         2.5
  Peak single-precision SIMD FLOPS (GFLOPs/sec)                        102           311 to 933        515 or 1344      3.0–9.1     6.6–13.1
  (SP 1 add or multiply)                                               N.A.              (311)             (515)          (3.0)       (6.6)
  (SP 1 instruction fused multiply-adds)                               N.A.              (622)            (1344)          (6.1)      (13.1)
  (Rare SP dual issue fused multiply-add and multiply)                 N.A.              (933)              N.A.          (9.1)         –
  Peak double-precision SIMD FLOPS (GFLOPs/sec)                        51                 78                515            1.5        10.1

FIGURE 6.22 Intel Core i7-960, NVIDIA GTX 280, and GTX 480 specifications. The rightmost columns show the ratios of the
Tesla GTX 280 and the Fermi GTX 480 to Core i7. Although the case study is between the Tesla 280 and i7, we include the Fermi 480 to show
its relationship to the Tesla 280 since it is described in this chapter. Note that these memory bandwidths are higher than in Figure 6.23 because
these are DRAM pin bandwidths and those in Figure 6.23 are at the processors as measured by a benchmark program. (From Table 2 in Lee
et al. [2010].)

the roofline is to the left. For single-precision performance, the ridge point moves
far to the right for both computers, so it’s considerably harder to hit the roof of
single-precision performance. Note that the arithmetic intensity of the kernel is
based on the bytes that go to main memory, not the bytes that go to cache memory.
Thus, as mentioned above, caching can change the arithmetic intensity of a kernel
on a particular computer, if most references really go to the cache. Note also that
this bandwidth is for unit-stride accesses in both architectures. Real gather-scatter
addresses can be slower on the GTX 280 and on the Core i7, as we shall see.
   The researchers selected the benchmark programs by analyzing the
computational and memory characteristics of four recently proposed benchmark
suites and then “formulated the set of throughput computing kernels that capture
these characteristics.” Figure 6.24 shows the performance results, with larger
numbers meaning faster. The Rooflines help explain the relative performance in
this case study.
   Given that the raw performance specifications of the GTX 280 vary from 2.5×
slower (clock rate) to 7.5× faster (cores per chip) while the performance varies

                                                    Core i7 960
             128                                                                                           128                                   NVIDIA GTX280
                                                    (Nehalem)
                                                                       51.2 GF/s
                                                                                                                                         B /s
              64                                                    Double Precision                        64
                                                                                                                                     27G                            Peak = 78 GF/s
                                                                                                                                  =1                                Double Precision
              32                                                                                            32               am
                                                                                                                          re
                                                       s                                                                St
                                                    B/
 GFLOPs/s

                                                   G

                                                                                                GFLOPs/s
              16                              .4                                                            16
                                          16
                                      =
               8              am                                                                             8
                            re
                        St
               4                                                                                             4

               2                                                                                             2

               1                                                                                             1
                1/8   1/4         1/2               1           2   4       8     16       32                     1/8          1/4       1/2         1   2      4       8     16    32
                                          Arithmetic intensity                                                                                  Arithmetic intensity

                                                    Core i7 960
            1024                                                                                           1024                                  NVIDIA GTX280
                                                    (Nehalem)

             512                                                                                            512                                                         624 GF/s
                                                                                                                                                                     Single Precision
             256                                                                                            256
                                                                          102.4 GF/s
                                                                        Single Precision                                                         s
             128                                                                                            128                                 B/
                                                                                                                                                                       78 GF/s
                                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                GFLOPs/s

                                                                                                                                         27

                                                                                                                                                                    Double Precision
                                                                                                                                     =1
 GFLOPs/s

             64                                                                                             64
                                                                                                                                  am
                                                                                                                                re

                                                                           51.2 GF/s
                                                                                                                               St

             32                                             s           Double Precision                    32
                                                         B/
                                                        G
                                                   .4
             16                                16                                                           16
                                          =
                                   am
                                 re
              8              St                                                                              8

               4                                                                                             4
                1/8   1/4         1/2               1           2   4       8     16       32                     1/8          1/4       1/2         1   2      4       8     16    32
                                          Arithmetic intensity                                                                                  Arithmetic intensity

FIGURE 6.23 Roofline model [Williams, Waterman, and Patterson 2009]. These rooflines show double-precision floating-point
performance in the top row and single-precision performance in the bottom row. (The DP FP performance ceiling is also in the bottom row
to give perspective.) The Core i7 960 on the left has a peak DP FP performance of 51.2 GFLOPs/sec, a SP FP peak of 102.4 GFLOPs/sec, and
a peak memory bandwidth of 16.4 GBytes/sec. The NVIDIA GTX 280 has a DP FP peak of 78 GFLOPs/sec, SP FP peak of 624 GFLOPs/sec,
and 127 GBytes/sec of memory bandwidth. The dashed vertical line on the left represents an arithmetic intensity of 0.5 FLOP/byte. It is limited
by memory bandwidth to no more than 8 DP GFLOPs/sec or 8 SP GFLOPs/sec on the Core i7. The dashed vertical line to the right has an
arithmetic intensity of 4 FLOP/byte. It is limited only computationally to 51.2 DP GFLOPs/sec and 102.4 SP GFLOPs/sec on the Core i7 and
78 DP GFLOPs/sec and 624 SP GFLOPs/sec on the GTX 280. To hit the highest computation rate on the Core i7 you need to use all four cores
and SSE instructions with an equal number of multiplies and adds. For the GTX 280, you need to use fused multiply-add instructions on all
multithreaded SIMD processors.
6.11   Real Stuff: Benchmarking and Rooflines of the Intel Core i7 960 and the NVIDIA Tesla GPU           567

                                                                                GTX 280/
            Kernel              Units            Core i7-960       GTX 280
                                                                                 i7-960

          SGEMM          GFLOPs/sec                     94            364            3.9
          MC             Billion paths/sec             0.8            1.4            1.8
          Conv           Million pixels/sec          1250           3500             2.8
          FFT            GFLOPs/sec                   71.4            213            3.0
          SAXPY          GBytes/sec                   16.8           88.8            5.3
          LBM            Million lookups/sec            85            426            5.0
          Solv           Frames/sec                    103             52            0.5
          SpMV           GFLOPs/sec                    4.9            9.1            1.9
          GJK            Frames/sec                     67          1020           15.2
          Sort           Million elements/sec          250            198            0.8
          RC             Frames/sec                      5            8.1            1.6
          Search         Million queries/sec            50             90            1.8
          Hist           Million pixels/sec          1517           2583             1.7
          Bilat          Million pixels/sec             83            475            5.7

FIGURE 6.24 Raw and relative performance measured for the two platforms. In this study,
SAXPY is just used as a measure of memory bandwidth, so the right unit is GBytes/sec and not GFLOP/sec.
(Based on Table 3 in [Lee et al., 2010].)

from 2.0× slower (Solv) to 15.2× faster (GJK), the Intel researchers decided to find
the reasons for the differences:
   n   Memory bandwidth. The GPU has 4.4× the memory bandwidth, which helps
       explain why LBM and SAXPY run 5.0 and 5.3× faster; their working sets are
       hundreds of megabytes and hence don’t fit into the Core i7 cache. (So as to
       access memory intensively, they purposely did not use cache blocking as in
       Chapter 5.) Hence, the slope of the rooflines explains their performance. SpMV
       also has a large working set, but it only runs 1.9× faster because the double-
       precision floating point of the GTX 280 is only 1.5× as fast as the Core i7.
   n   Compute bandwidth. Five of the remaining kernels are compute bound:
       SGEMM, Conv, FFT, MC, and Bilat. The GTX is faster by 3.9, 2.8, 3.0, 1.8, and
       5.7×, respectively. The first three of these use single-precision floating-point
       arithmetic, and GTX 280 single precision is 3 to 6× faster. MC uses double
       precision, which explains why it’s only 1.8× faster since DP performance
       is only 1.5× faster. Bilat uses transcendental functions, which the GTX
       280 supports directly. The Core i7 spends two-thirds of its time calculating
       transcendental functions for Bilat, so the GTX 280 is 5.7× faster. This
       observation helps point out the value of hardware support for operations that
       occur in your workload: double-precision floating point and perhaps even
       transcendentals.

        n   Cache benefits. Ray casting (RC) is only 1.6× faster on the GTX because
            cache blocking with the Core i7 caches prevents it from becoming memory
            bandwidth bound (see Sections 5.4 and 5.14), as it is on GPUs. Cache blocking
            can help Search, too. If the index trees are small so that they fit in the cache,
            the Core i7 is twice as fast. Larger index trees make them memory bandwidth
            bound. Overall, the GTX 280 runs search 1.8× faster. Cache blocking also
            helps Sort. While most programmers wouldn’t run Sort on a SIMD processor,
            it can be written with a 1-bit Sort primitive called split. However, the split
            algorithm executes many more instructions than a scalar sort does. As a
            result, the Core i7 runs 1.25× as fast as the GTX 280. Note that caches also
            help other kernels on the Core i7, since cache blocking allows SGEMM, FFT,
            and SpMV to become compute bound. This observation re-emphasizes the
            importance of cache blocking optimizations in Chapter 5.
        n   Gather-Scatter. The multimedia SIMD extensions are of little help if the data are
            scattered throughout main memory; optimal performance comes only when
            accesses to data are aligned on 16-byte boundaries. Thus, GJK gets little benefit
            from SIMD on the Core i7. As mentioned above, GPUs offer gather-scatter
            addressing that is found in a vector architecture but omitted from most SIMD
            extensions. The memory controller even batches accesses to the same DRAM
            page together (see Section 5.2). This combination means the GTX 280 runs GJK
            a startling 15.2× as fast as the Core i7, which is larger than any single physical
            parameter in Figure 6.22. This observation reinforces the importance of gather-
            scatter to vector and GPU architectures that is missing from SIMD extensions.
        n   Synchronization. The performance of synchronization is limited by atomic
            updates, which are responsible for 28% of the total runtime on the Core i7
            despite its having a hardware fetch-and-increment instruction. Thus, Hist is only
            1.7× faster on the GTX 280. Solv solves a batch of independent constraints in
            a small amount of computation followed by barrier synchronization. The Core
            i7 benefits from the atomic instructions and a memory consistency model that
            ensures the right results even if not all previous accesses to memory hierarchy
            have completed. Without the memory consistency model, the GTX 280
            version launches some batches from the system processor, which leads to the
            GTX 280 running 0.5× as fast as the Core i7. This observation points out how
            synchronization performance can be important for some data parallel problems.
         It is striking how often weaknesses in the Tesla GTX 280 that were uncovered by
      kernels selected by Intel researchers were already being addressed in the successor
      architecture to Tesla: Fermi has faster double-precision floating-point performance,
      faster atomic operations, and caches. It was also interesting that the gather-scatter
      support of vector architectures that predate the SIMD instructions by decades was
      so important to the effective usefulness of these SIMD extensions, which some
      had predicted before the comparison. The Intel researchers noted that six of the 14
      kernels would exploit SIMD better with more efficient gather-scatter support on the
      Core i7. This study certainly establishes the importance of cache blocking as well.
                             6.12 Going Faster: Multiple Processors and Matrix Multiply        569

  Now that we have seen a wide range of results of benchmarking different
multiprocessors, let’s return to our DGEMM example to see in detail how much we
have to change the C code to exploit multiple processors.

                Going Faster: Multiple Processors and
 6.12
                Matrix Multiply

This section is the final and largest step in our incremental performance journey of
adapting DGEMM to the underlying hardware of the Intel Core i7 (Sandy Bridge).
Each Core i7 has eight cores, and the computer we have been using has two Core
i7s. Thus, we have 16 cores on which to run DGEMM.
    Figure 6.25 shows the OpenMP version of DGEMM that utilizes those cores.
Note that line 30 is the single line added to Figure 5.48 to make this code run on
multiple processors: an OpenMP pragma that tells the compiler to use multiple
threads in the outermost loop. It tells the computer to spread the work of the
outermost loop across all the threads.
    Figure 6.26 plots a classic multiprocessor speed-up graph, showing the
performance improvement versus a single thread as the number of threads increase.
This graph makes it easy to see the challenges of strong scaling versus weak scaling.
When everything fits in the first-level data cache, as is the case for 32 × 32 matrices,
adding threads actually hurts performance. The 16-threaded version of DGEMM
is almost half as fast as the single-threaded version in this case. In contrast, the two
largest matrices get a 14 × speedup from 16 threads, and hence the classic two “up
and to the right” lines in Figure 6.26.
    Figure 6.27 shows the absolute performance increase as we increase the number
of threads from one to 16. DGEMM now operates at 174 GLOPS for 960 × 960
matrices. As our unoptimized C version of DGEMM in Figure 3.22 ran this code
at just 0.8 GFLOPS, the optimizations in Chapters 3 to 6 that tailor the code to the
underlying hardware result in a speed-up of over 200 times!
    Next up is our warnings of the fallacies and pitfalls of multiprocessing. The
computer architecture graveyard is filled with parallel processing projects that have
ignored them.

Elaboration: These results are with Turbo mode turned off. We are using a dual chip
system in this system, so not surprisingly, we can get the full Turbo speed-up (3.3/2.6 =
1.27) with either one thread (only one core on one of the chips) or two threads (one core
per chip). As we increase the number of threads and hence the number of active cores,
the benefit of Turbo mode decreases, as there is less of the power budget to spend on
the active cores. For four threads the average Turbo speed-up is 1.23, for eight it is 1.13,
and for 16 it is 1.11.

       1 #include <x86intrin.h>
       2 #define UNROLL (4)
       3 #define BLOCKSIZE 32
       4 void do_block (int n, int si, int sj, int sk,
       5                 double *A, double *B, double *C)
       6 {
       7   for ( int i = si; i < si+BLOCKSIZE; i+=UNROLL*4 )
       8     for ( int j = sj; j < sj+BLOCKSIZE; j++ ) {
       9        __m256d c[4];
      10        for ( int x = 0; x < UNROLL; x++ )
      11          c[x] = _mm256_load_pd(C+i+x*4+j*n);
      12       /* c[x] = C[i][j] */
      13        for( int k = sk; k < sk+BLOCKSIZE; k++ )
      14        {
      15          __m256d b = _mm256_broadcast_sd(B+k+j*n);
      16       /* b = B[k][j] */
      17          for (int x = 0; x < UNROLL; x++)
      18            c[x] = _mm256_add_pd(c[x], /* c[x]+=A[i][k]*b */
      19                   _mm256_mul_pd(_mm256_load_pd(A+n*k+x*4+i), b));
      20        }
      21
      22        for ( int x = 0; x < UNROLL; x++ )
      23          _mm256_store_pd(C+i+x*4+j*n, c[x]);
      24          /* C[i][j] = c[x] */
      25     }
      26 }
      27
      28 void dgemm (int n, double* A, double* B, double* C)
      29 {
      30 #pragma omp parallel for
      31   for ( int sj = 0; sj < n; sj += BLOCKSIZE )
      32     for ( int si = 0; si < n; si += BLOCKSIZE )
      33        for ( int sk = 0; sk < n; sk += BLOCKSIZE )
      34          do_block(n, si, sj, sk, A, B, C);
      35 }

      FIGURE 6.25 OpenMP version of DGEMM from Figure 5.48. Line 30 is the only OpenMP code, making
      the outermost for loop operate in parallel. This line is the only difference from Figure 5.48.

               Elaboration: Although the Sandy Bridge supports two hardware threads per core, we
               do not get more performance from 32 threads. The reason is that a single AVX hardware
               is shared between the two threads multiplexed onto one core, so assigning two threads
               per core actually hurts performance due to the multiplexing overhead.
                                  14

                                  13

                                  12

                                  11

                                  10
Speed-up relative to one core

                                     9

                                     8
                                                                                                                                                 960 X 960
                                     7
                                                                                                                                                 480 X 480
                                     6
                                                                                                                                                 160 X 160
                                     5
                                                                                                                                                 32 X 32
                                     4

                                     3

                                     2

                                     1

                                     –
                                         0                4                    8                       12                     16
                                                                           Threads

FIGURE 6.26 Performance improvements relative to a single thread as the number of
threads increase. The most honest way to present such graphs is to make performance relative to the best
version of a single processor program, which we did. This plot is relative to the performance of the code in
Figure 5.48 without including OpenMP pragmas.

                                                               32 x 32      160 x 160          480 x 480         960 x 960
                                         200

                                                                                                                                               174
                                                                                                                                            169

                                         150
                                GFLOPs

                                         100
                                                                                                                      85 87

                                                                                                                 61                    60

                                          50                                                   43 44
                                                                                          31
                                                                     20 22 23
                                                 14 13 12 12    12                   11                     11                     8
                                             -
                                                      1                2                    4                         8                     16
                                                                                          Threads

FIGURE 6.27 DGEMM performance versus the number of threads for four matrix sizes.
The performance improvement compared unoptimized code in Figure 3.22 for the 960 × 960 matrix with 16
threads is an astounding 212 times faster!

                               6.13           Fallacies and Pitfalls

For over a decade             The many assaults on parallel processing have uncovered numerous fallacies and
prophets have voiced          pitfalls. We cover four here.
the contention that             Fallacy: Amdahl’s Law doesn’t apply to parallel computers.
the organization of a
single computer has              In 1987, the head of a research organization claimed that a multiprocessor
reached its limits and        machine had broken Amdahl’s Law. To try to understand the basis of the media
that truly significant        reports, let’s see the quote that gave us Amdahl’s Law [1967, p. 483]:
advances can be made            A fairly obvious conclusion which can be drawn at this point is that the effort
only by interconnection         expended on achieving high parallel processing rates is wasted unless it is
of a multiplicity of            accompanied by achievements in sequential processing rates of very nearly the
computers in such a             same magnitude.
manner as to permit              This statement must still be true; the neglected portion of the program must
cooperative solution.         limit performance. One interpretation of the law leads to the following lemma:
…Demonstration is             portions of every program must be sequential, so there must be an economic upper
made of the continued         bound to the number of processors—say, 100. By showing linear speed-up with
validity of the single        1000 processors, this lemma is disproved; hence the claim that Amdahl’s Law was
processor approach …          broken.
Gene Amdahl, “Validity           The approach of the researchers was just to use weak scaling: rather than going
of the single processor       1000 times faster on the same data set, they computed 1000 times more work in
approach to achieving         comparable time. For their algorithm, the sequential portion of the program was
large scale computing
                              constant, independent of the size of the input, and the rest was fully parallel—
capabilities,” Spring Joint
Computer Conference,
                              hence, linear speed-up with 1000 processors.
1967                             Amdahl’s Law obviously applies to parallel processors. What this research does
                              point out is that one of the main uses of faster computers is to run larger problems.
                              Just be sure that users really care about those problems versus being a justification
                              to buying an expensive computer by finding a problem that simply keeps lots of
                              processors busy.
                                Fallacy: Peak performance tracks observed performance.
                                  The supercomputer industry once used this metric in marketing, and the
                              fallacy is exacerbated with parallel machines. Not only are marketers using the
                              nearly unattainable peak performance of a uniprocessor node, but also they are
                              then multiplying it by the total number of processors, assuming perfect speed-up!
                              Amdahl’s Law suggests how difficult it is to reach either peak; multiplying the two
                              together multiplies the sins. The roofline model helps put peak performance in
                              perspective.
                                Pitfall: Not developing the software to take advantage of, or optimize for, a
                                multiprocessor architecture.
                                 There is a long history of parallel software lagging behind parallel hardware,
                              possibly because the software problems are much harder. We give one example to
                              show the subtlety of the issues, but there are many examples we could choose!
                                                             6.13 Fallacies and Pitfalls    573

    One frequently encountered problem occurs when software designed for a
uniprocessor is adapted to a multiprocessor environment. For example, the Silicon
Graphics operating system originally protected the page table with a single lock,
assuming that page allocation is infrequent. In a uniprocessor, this does not
represent a performance problem. In a multiprocessor, it can become a major
performance bottleneck for some programs. Consider a program that uses a large
number of pages that are initialized at start-up, which UNIX does for statically
allocated pages. Suppose the program is parallelized so that multiple processes
allocate the pages. Because page allocation requires the use of the page table, which
is locked whenever it is in use, even an OS kernel that allows multiple threads in the
OS will be serialized if the processes all try to allocate their pages at once (which is
exactly what we might expect at initialization time!).
    This page table serialization eliminates parallelism in initialization and has a
significant impact on overall parallel performance. This performance bottleneck
persists even for task-level parallelism. For example, suppose we split the parallel
processing program apart into separate jobs and run them, one job per processor,
so that there is no sharing between the jobs. (This is exactly what one user did,
since he reasonably believed that the performance problem was due to unintended
sharing or interference in his application.) Unfortunately, the lock still serializes all
the jobs—so even the independent job performance is poor.
    This pitfall indicates the kind of subtle but significant performance bugs
that can arise when software runs on multiprocessors. Like many other key
software components, the OS algorithms and data structures must be rethought
in a multiprocessor context. Placing locks on smaller portions of the page table
effectively eliminated the problem.
   Fallacy: You can get good vector performance without providing memory
   bandwidth.
As we saw in the Roofline model, memory bandwidth is quite important to all
architectures. DAXPY requires 1.5 memory references per floating-point operation,
and this ratio is typical of many scientific codes. Even if the floating-point
operations took no time, a Cray-1 could not increase the DAXPY performance of
the vector sequence used, since it was memory limited. The Cray-1 performance on
Linpack jumped when the compiler used blocking to change the computation so
that values could be kept in the vector registers. This approach lowered the number
of memory references per FLOP and improved the performance by nearly a factor
of two! Thus, the memory bandwidth on the Cray-1 became sufficient for a loop
that formerly required more bandwidth, which is just what the Roofline model
would predict.

                           6.14           Concluding Remarks

We are dedicating         The dream of building computers by simply aggregating processors has been
all of our future         around since the earliest days of computing. Progress in building and using effective
product development       and efficient parallel processors, however, has been slow. This rate of progress has
to multicore designs.     been limited by difficult software problems as well as by a long process of evolving
We believe this is a      the architecture of multiprocessors to enhance usability and improve efficiency.
key inflection point      We have discussed many of the software challenges in this chapter, including the
for the industry. …       difficulty of writing programs that obtain good speed-up due to Amdahl’s Law. The
This is not a race.       wide variety of different architectural approaches and the limited success and short
This is a sea change in   life of many of the parallel architectures of the past have compounded the software
computing…”               difficulties. We discuss the history of the development of these multiprocessors
Paul Otellini, Intel      in online Section 6.15. To go into even greater depth on topics in this chapter,
President, Intel          see Chapter 4 of Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, Fifth Edition for
Developers Forum, 2004    more on GPUs and comparisons between GPUs and CPUs and Chapter 6 for more
                          on WSCs.
                              As we said in Chapter 1, despite this long and checkered past, the information
                          technology industry has now tied its future to parallel computing. Although it is
                          easy to make the case that this effort will fail like many in the past, there are reasons
                          to be hopeful:
                             n   Clearly, software as a service (SaaS) is growing in importance, and
                                 clusters have proven to be a very successful way to deliver such services.
                                 By providing redundancy at a higher level, including geographically
                                 distributed datacenters, such services have delivered 24 × 7 × 365
                                 availability for customers around the world.
                             n   We believe that Warehouse-Scale Computers are changing the goals and
                                 principles of server design, just as the needs of mobile clients are changing the
                                 goals and principles of microprocessor design. Both are revolutionizing the
                                 software industry as well. Performance per dollar and performance per joule
                                 drive both mobile client hardware and the WSC hardware, and parallelism is
                                 the key to delivering on those sets of goals.
                             n   SIMD and vector operations are a good match to multimedia applications,
                                 which are playing a larger role in the post-PC era. They share the advantage
                                 of being easier for the programmer than classic parallel MIMD programming
                                 and being more energy-efficient than MIMD. To put into perspective the
                                 importance of SIMD versus MIMD, Figure 6.28 plots the number of cores
                                 for MIMD versus the number of 32-bit and 64-bit operations per clock
                                 cycle in SIMD mode for x86 computers over time. For x86 computers, we
                                 expect to see two additional cores per chip about every 2 years and the SIMD
                                 width to double about every 4 years. Given these assumptions, over the
                                 next decade the potential speed-up from SIMD parallelism is twice that of
                                                                               6.14   Concluding Remarks   575

                                          1000
                                                   MIMD*SIMD (32 b)
                                                   MIMD*SIMD (64 b)
                                                   SIMD (32 b)
                                                   SIMD (64 b)
                                                   MIMD
            Potential parallel speed-up

                                          100

                                           10

                                            1
                                            2003      2007       2011   2015   2019      2023

FIGURE 6.28 Potential speed-up via parallelism from MIMD, SIMD, and both MIMD and
SIMD over time for x86 computers. This figure assumes that two cores per chip for MIMD will be
added every 2 years and the number of operations for SIMD will double every 4 years.

       MIMD parallelism. Given the effectiveness of SIMD for multimedia and its
       increasing importance in the post-PC era, that emphasis may be appropriate.
       Hence, it’s as least as important to understand SIMD parallelism as MIMD
       parallelism, even though the latter has received much more attention.
   n   The use of parallel processing in domains such as scientific and engineering
       computation is popular. This application domain has an almost limitless
       thirst for more computation. It also has many applications that have lots of
       natural concurrency. Once again, clusters dominate this application area. For
       example, using the 2012 Top 500 report, clusters are responsible for more
       than 80% of the 500 fastest Linpack results.
   n   All desktop and server microprocessor manufacturers are building
       multiprocessors to achieve higher performance, so, unlike in the past, there
       is no easy path to higher performance for sequential applications. As we said
       earlier, sequential programs are now slow programs. Hence, programmers
       who need higher performance must parallelize their codes or write new
       parallel processing programs.

        n   In the past, microprocessors and multiprocessors were subject to
            different definitions of success. When scaling uniprocessor performance,
            microprocessor architects were happy if single thread performance went up
            by the square root of the increased silicon area. Thus, they were pleased with
            sublinear performance in terms of resources. Multiprocessor success used
            to be defined as linear speed-up as a function of the number of processors,
            assuming that the cost of purchase or cost of administration of n processors
            was n times as much as one processor. Now that parallelism is happening on-
            chip via multicore, we can use the traditional microprocessor metric of being
            successful with sublinear performance improvement.
        n   The success of just-in-time runtime compilation and autotuning makes it
            feasible to think of software adapting itself to take advantage of the increasing
            number of cores per chip, which provides flexibility that is not available when
            limited to static compilers.
        n   Unlike in the past, the open source movement has become a critical portion
            of the software industry. This movement is a meritocracy, where better
            engineering solutions can win the mind share of the developers over legacy
            concerns. It also embraces innovation, inviting change to old software and
            welcoming new languages and software products. Such an open culture could
            be extremely helpful during this time of rapid change.
         To motivate readers to embrace this revolution, we demonstrated the potential
      of parallelism concretely for matrix multiply on the Intel Core i7 (Sandy Bridge) in
      the Going Faster sections of Chapters 3 to 6:
        n   Data-level parallelism in Chapter 3 improved performance by a factor of 3.85
            by executing four 64-bit floating-point operations in parallel using the 256-
            bit operands of the AVX instructions, demonstrating the value of SIMD.
        n   Instruction-level parallelism in Chapter 4 pushed performance up by another
            factor of 2.3 by unrolling loops four times to give the out-of-order execution
            hardware more instructions to schedule.
        n   Cache optimizations in Chapter 5 improved performance of matrices that
            didn’t fit into the L1 data cache by another factor of 2.0 to 2.5 by using cache
            blocking to reduce cache misses.
        n   Thread-level parallelism in this chapter improved performance of matrices
            that don’t fit into a single L1 data cache by another factor of 4 to 14 by utilizing
            all 16 cores of our multicore chips, demonstrating the value of MIMD. We
            did this by adding a single line using an OpenMP pragma.
         Using the ideas in this book and tailoring the software to this computer added
      24 lines of code to DGEMM. For the matrix sizes of 32 × 32, 160 × 160, 480 × 480,
      and 960 × 960, the overall performance speed-up from these ideas realized in those
      two-dozen lines of code is factors of 8, 39, 129, and 212!
