                                                                        6.16   Exercises   577

    This parallel revolution in the hardware/software interface is perhaps the
greatest challenge facing the field in the last 60 years. You can also think of it as an
outstanding opportunity, as our Going Faster sections demonstrate. This revolution
will provide many new research and business prospects inside and outside the IT
field, and the companies that dominate the multicore era may not be the same
ones that dominated the uniprocessor era. After understanding the underlying
hardware trends and learning to adapt software to them, perhaps you will be one
of the innovators who will seize the opportunities that are certain to appear in the
uncertain times ahead. We look forward to benefiting from your inventions!

		
 5. 9 Historical Perspective and Further
6.15
      Reading

This section online gives the rich and often disastrous history of multiprocessors
over the last 50 years.

References
B. F. Cooper, A. Silberstein, E. Tam, R. Ramakrishnan, R. Sears. Benchmarking
cloud serving systems with YCSB, In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM Symposium
on Cloud computing, June 10–11, 2010, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA,
doi:10.1145/1807128.1807152.
   G. Regnier, S. Makineni, R. Illikkal, R. Iyer, D. Minturn, R. Huggahalli, D. Newell,
L. Cline, and A. Foong. TCP onloading for data center servers. IEEE Computer,
37(11):48–58, 2004.

 6.16          Exercises

6.1 First, write down a list of your daily activities that you typically do on a
weekday. For instance, you might get out of bed, take a shower, get dressed, eat
breakfast, dry your hair, brush your teeth. Make sure to break down your list so you
have a minimum of 10 activities.
6.1.1 [5] <§6.2> Now consider which of these activities is already exploiting
some form of parallelism (e.g., brushing multiple teeth at the same time, versus one
at a time, carrying one book at a time to school, versus loading them all into your
backpack and then carry them “in parallel”). For each of your activities, discuss if
they are already working in parallel, but if not, why they are not.
                                      6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading       577.e1

               Historical Perspective and Further
  5. 9
 6.15          Reading

There is a tremendous amount of history in multiprocessors; in this section, we
divide our discussion by both time period and architecture. We start with the
SIMD approach and the Illiac IV. We then turn to a short discussion of some other
early experimental multiprocessors and progress to a discussion of some of the
great debates in parallel processing. Next we describe the historical roots of the
present multiprocessors and conclude by discussing recent advances.

SIMD Computers: Attractive Idea, Many Attempts, No
Lasting Successes
  The cost of a general multiprocessor is, however, very high and further design
  options were considered which would decrease the cost without seriously degrading
  the power or efficiency of the system. The options consist of recentralizing one of the
  three major components.… Centralizing the [control unit] gives rise to the basic
  organization of [an] … array processor such as the Illiac IV.
                                                                  Bouknight et al. [1972]

The SIMD model was one of the earliest models of parallel computing, dating
back to the first large-scale multiprocessor, the Illiac IV. The key idea in that
multiprocessor, as in more recent SIMD multiprocessors, is to have a single
instruction that operates on many data items at once, using many functional units
(see Figure e6.15.1).
   Although successful in pushing several technologies that proved useful in later
projects, it failed as a computer. Costs escalated from the $8 million estimate in
1966 to $31 million by 1972, despite construction of only a quarter of the planned
multiprocessor. Actual performance was at best 15 MFLOPS, versus initial
predictions of 1000 MFLOPS for the full system [Hord, 1982]. Delivered to NASA
Ames Research in 1972, the computer required three more years of engineering
before it was usable.
   These events slowed the investigation of SIMD, with Danny Hillis [1985]
resuscitating this style in the Connection Machine, which had 65,636 1-bit
processors.
   Real SIMD computers need to have a mixture of SISD and SIMD instructions.
There is an SISD host computer to perform operations such as branches and
address calculations that do not need parallel operation. The SIMD instructions are
broadcast to all the execution units, each of which has its own set of registers. For
flexibility, individual execution units can be disabled during an SIMD instruction.
In addition, massively parallel SIMD multiprocessors rely on interconnection or
communication networks to exchange data between processing elements.
577.e2   6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

         FIGURE e6.15.1 The Illiac IV control unit followed by its 64 processing elements. It was
         perhaps the most infamous of supercomputers. The project started in 1965 and ran its first real application in
         1976. The 64 processors used a 13-MHz clock, and their combined main memory size was 1 MB: 64 × 16 KB.
         The Illiac IV was the first machine to teach us that software for parallel machines dominates hardware issues.
         Photo courtesy of NASA Ames Research Center.

             SIMD works best in dealing with arrays in for loops. Hence, to have the
         opportunity for massive parallelism in SIMD, there must be massive amounts of
         data, or data parallelism. SIMD is at its weakest in case statements, in which each
         execution unit must perform a different operation on its data, depending on what
         data it has. The execution units with the wrong data are disabled so that the proper
         units can continue. Such situations essentially run at 1/nth performance, where n
         is the number of cases.
             The basic tradeoff in SIMD multiprocessors is performance of a processor
         versus the number of processors. Recent multiprocessors emphasize a large degree
         of parallelism over performance of the individual processors. The Connection
         Multiprocessor 2, for example, offered 65,536 single-bit-wide processors, while the
         Illiac IV had 64 64-bit processors.
                                     6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading    577.e3

    After being resurrected in the 1980s, originally by Thinking Machines and then
by MasPar, the SIMD model has once again been put to bed as a general-purpose
multiprocessor architecture, for two main reasons. First, it is too inflexible. A
number of important problems cannot use such a style of multiprocessor, and
the architecture does not scale down in a competitive fashion; that is, small-
scale SIMD multiprocessors often have worse cost performance than that of the
alternatives. Second, SIMD cannot take advantage of the tremendous performance
and cost advantages of microprocessor technology. Instead of leveraging this low-
cost technology, designers of SIMD multiprocessors must build custom processors
for their multiprocessors.
    Although SIMD computers have departed from the scene as general-purpose
alternatives, this style of architecture will continue to have a role in special-
purpose designs. Many special-purpose tasks are highly data parallel and require
a limited set of functional units. Thus, designers can build in support for certain
operations, as well as hardwired interconnection paths among functional units.
Such organizations are often called array processors, and they are useful for tasks
like image and signal processing.

Multimedia Extensions as SIMD Extensions to
Instruction Sets
Many recent architectures have laid claim to being the first to offer multimedia
extensions, in which a set of new instructions takes advantage of a single wide
ALU that can be partitioned so that it will act as several narrower ALUs operating
in parallel. It’s unlikely that any appeared before 1957, however, when the Lincoln
Lab’s TX-2 computer offered instructions that operated on the ALU as either one
36-bit operation, two 18-bit operations, or four 9-bit operations. Ivan Sutherland,
considered the Father of Computer Graphics, built his historic Sketchpad system
on the TX-2. Sketchpad did, in fact, take advantage of these SIMD instructions,
despite TX-2 appearing before invention of the term SIMD.

Other Early Experiments
It is difficult to distinguish the first MIMD multiprocessor. Surprisingly, the first
computer from the Eckert-Mauchly Corporation, for example, had duplicate units
to improve availability.
    Two of the best-documented multiprocessor projects were undertaken in the
1970s at Carnegie Mellon University. The first of these was C.mmp, which consisted
of 16 PDP-11s connected by a crossbar switch to 16 memory units. It was among
the first multiprocessors with more than a few processors, and it had a shared
memory programming model. Much of the focus of the research in the C.mmp
project was on software, especially in the OS area. A later multiprocessor, Cm*, was
577.e4   6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

         a cluster-based multiprocessor with a distributed memory and a nonuniform access
         time. The absence of caches and a long remote access latency made data placement
         critical. Many of the ideas in these multiprocessors would be reused in the 1980s,
         when the microprocessor made it much cheaper to build multiprocessors.

         Great Debates in Parallel Processing
            The turning away from the conventional organization came in the middle 1960s,
            when the law of diminishing returns began to take effect in the effort to increase
            the operational speed of a computer.… Electronic circuits are ultimately limited
            in their speed of operation by the speed of light … and many of the circuits were
            already operating in the nanosecond range.
                                                                             W. Jack Bouknight et al.
                                                                          The Illiac IV System [1972]

            … sequential computers are approaching a fundamental physical limit on their
            potential computational power. Such a limit is the speed of light …
                                                                                Angel L. DeCegama
                                             The Technology of Parallel Processing, Volume I [1989]

            … today’s multiprocessors … are nearing an impasse as technologies approach the
            speed of light. Even if the components of a sequential processor could be made to work
            this fast, the best that could be expected is no more than a few million instructions
            per second.
                                                                                    David Mitchell
                                                            The Transputer: The Time Is Now [1989]

         The quotes above give the classic arguments for abandoning the current form of
         computing, and Amdahl [1967] gave the classic reply in support of continued focus
         on the IBM 360 architecture. Arguments for the advantages of parallel execution can
         be traced back to the 19th century [Menabrea, 1842]! Despite this, the effectiveness
         of the multiprocessor in reducing the latency of individual important programs is
         still being explored. Aside from these debates about the advantages and limitations
         of parallelism, several hot debates have focused on how to build multiprocessors.
             From today’s perspective, it is clear that the speed of light was not the brick wall; the
         brick wall was, instead, the power consumption of CMOS as the clock rates increased.
             It’s hard to predict the future, yet in 1989 Gordon Bell made two predictions
         for 1995. We included these predictions in the first edition of the book, when the
         outcome was completely unclear. We discuss them in this section, together with an
         assessment of the accuracy of the prediction.
             The first was that a computer capable of sustaining a tera FLOPS—one million
         MFLOPS—would be constructed by 1995, using either a multicomputer with 4K to
         32K nodes or a Connection Multiprocessor with several million processing elements.
                                      6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading     577.e5

To put this prediction in perspective, each year the Gordon Bell Prize acknowledges
advances in parallelism, including the fastest real program (highest MFLOPS).
In 1989, the winner used an eight-processor Cray Y-MP to run at 1680 MFLOPS.
On the basis of these numbers, multiprocessors and programs would have to have
improved by a factor of 3.6 each year for the fastest program to achieve 1 TFLOPS
in 1995. In 1999, the first Gordon Bell prize winner crossed the 1 TFLOPS bar.
Using a 5832-processor IBM RS/6000 SST system designed specially for Livermore
Laboratories, they achieved 1.18 TFLOPS on a shock wave simulation. This ratio
represents a year-to-year improvement of 1.93, which is still quite impressive.
   What has been recognized since the 1990s is that although we may have the
technology to build a TFLOPS multiprocessor, it is not clear that the machine is
cost-effective, except perhaps for a few very specialized and critically important
applications related to national security. We estimated in 1990 that achieving 1
TFLOPS would require a machine with about 5000 processors and would cost about
$100 million. The 5832-processor IBM system at Livermore cost $110 million.
As might be expected, improvements in the performance of individual micro-
processors both in cost and performance directly affect the cost and performance
of large-scale multiprocessors, but a 5000-processor system will cost more than
5000 times the price of a desktop system using the same processor. Since that time,
much faster multiprocessors have been built, but the major improvements have
increasingly come from the processors in the past 5 years, rather than fundamental
breakthroughs in parallel architecture.
   The second Bell prediction concerned the number of data streams in super-
computers shipped in 1995. Danny Hillis believed that although supercomputers
with a small number of data streams might be the best sellers, the biggest
multiprocessors would be multiprocessors with many data streams, and these
would perform the bulk of the computations. Bell bet Hillis that in the last quarter of
calendar year 1995, more sustained MFLOPS would be shipped in multiprocessors
using few data streams (<100) rather than many data streams (>1000). This bet
concerned only supercomputers, defined as multiprocessors costing more than $1
million and used for scientific applications. Sustained MFLOPS was defined for
this bet as the number of floating-point operations per month, so availability of
multiprocessors affects their rating.
   In 1989, when this bet was made, it was totally unclear who would win. In
1995, a survey of the current publicly known supercomputers showed only six
multiprocessors in existence in the world with more than 1000 data streams, so
Bell’s prediction was a clear winner. In fact, in 1995, much smaller microprocessor-
based multiprocessors (<20 processors) were becoming dominant.
   In 1995, a survey of the 500 highest-performance multiprocessors in use
(based on Linpack ratings), called the Top 500, showed that the largest number
of multiprocessors were bus-based shared memory multiprocessors! By 2005,
577.e6   6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

         various clusters or multicomputers played a large role. For example, in the top 25
         systems, 11 were custom clusters, such as the IBM Blue Gene system or the Cray
         XT3, 10 were clusters of shared memory multiprocessors (both using distributed
         and centralized memory), and the remaining four were clusters built using PCs
         with an off-the-shelf interconnect.

         More Recent Advances and Developments
         With the primary exception of the parallel vector multiprocessors and more
         recently of the IBM Blue Gene design, all other modern MIMD computers have
         been built from off-the-shelf microprocessors using a bus and logically central
         memory or an interconnection network and a distributed memory. A number of
         experimental multiprocessors built in the 1980s further refined and enhanced the
         concepts that form the basis for many of today’s multiprocessors.

         The Development of Bus-Based Coherent Multiprocessors
         Although very large mainframes were built with multiple processors in the 1960s
         and 1970s, multiprocessors did not become highly successful until the 1980s. Bell
         [1985] suggests the key was that the smaller size of the microprocessor allowed
         the memory bus to replace the interconnection network hardware and that
         portable operating systems meant that multiprocessor projects no longer required
         the invention of a new operating system. In this paper, Bell defined the terms
         multiprocessor and multicomputer and set the stage for two different approaches
         to building larger-scale multiprocessors. The first bus-based multiprocessor with
         snooping caches was the Synapse N + 1 in 1984.
            The early 1990s saw the beginning of an expansion of such systems with the
         use of very wide, high-speed buses (the SGI Challenge system used a 256-bit,
         packet-oriented bus supporting up to eight processor boards and 32 processors)
         and later the use of multiple buses and crossbar interconnects, for example, in the
         Sun SPARCCenter and Enterprise systems. In 2001, the Sun Enterprise servers
         represented the primary example of large-scale (>16 processors), symmetric
         multiprocessors in active use.

         Toward Large-Scale Multiprocessors
         In the effort to build large-scale multiprocessors, two different directions
         were explored: message-passing multicomputers and scalable shared memory
         multiprocessors. Although there had been many attempts to build mesh and
         hypercube-connected multiprocessors, one of the first multiprocessors to
         successfully bring together all the pieces was the Cosmic Cube built at Caltech [Seitz,
         1985]. It introduced important advances in routing and interconnect technology
         and substantially reduced the cost of the interconnect, which helped make the
         multicomputer viable. The Intel iPSC 860, a hypercube-connected collection of i860s,
                                       6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading      577.e7

was based on these ideas. More recent multiprocessors, such as the Intel Paragon, have
used networks with lower dimensionality and higher individual links. The Paragon
also employed a separate i860 as a communications controller in each node, although
a number of users have found it better to use both i860 processors for computation
as well as communication. The Thinking Multiprocessors CM-5 made use of off-the-
shelf microprocessors. It provided user-level access to the communication channel,
significantly improving communication latency. In 1995, these two multiprocessors
represented the state of the art in message-passing multicomputers.

Clusters
Clusters were probably “invented” in the 1960s by customers who could not fit
all their work on one computer, or who needed a backup machine in case of
failure of the primary machine [Pfister, 1998]. Tandem introduced a 16-node
cluster in 1975. Digital followed with VAX clusters, introduced in 1984. They
were originally independent computers that shared I/O devices, requiring a
distributed operating system to coordinate activity. Soon they had communication
links between computers, in part so that the computers could be geographically
distributed to increase availability in case of a disaster at a single site. Users log on
to the cluster and are unaware of which machine they are using. DEC (now HP)
sold more than 25,000 clusters by 1993. Other early companies were Tandem (now
HP) and IBM (still IBM). Today, virtually every company has cluster products.
Most of these products are aimed at availability, with performance scaling as a
secondary benefit.
    Scientific computing on clusters emerged as a competitor to MPPs. In 1993, the
Beowulf project started with the goal of fulfilling NASA’s desire for a 1-GFLOPS
computer for less than $50,000. In 1994, a 16-node cluster built from off-the-shelf
PCs using 80486s achieved that goal. This emphasis led to a variety of software
interfaces to make it easier to submit, coordinate, and debug large programs or a
large number of independent programs.
    Efforts were made to reduce latency of communication in clusters as well as to
increase bandwidth, and several research projects worked on that problem. (One
commercial result of the low-latency research was the VI interface standard, which
has been embraced by Infiniband, discussed below.) Low latency then proved useful
in other applications. For example, in 1997 a cluster of 100 UltraSPARC desktop
computers at U.C. Berkeley, connected by 160 MB/sec per link Myrinet switches,
was used to set world records in database sort (sorting 8.6 GB of data originally on
disk in 1 minute) and in cracking an encrypted message (taking just 3.5 hours to
decipher a 40-bit DES key).
    This research project, called Network of Workstations, also developed the
Inktomi search engine, which led to a start-up company with the same name.
577.e8   6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

         Google followed the example of Inktomi to build search engines from clusters
         of desktop computers rather than large-scale SMPs, which was the strategy of
         the leading search engine, Alta Vista, that Google took over. In 2013, virtually all
         Internet services rely on clusters to serve their millions of customers.
            Clusters are also very popular with scientists. One reason is their low cost, which
         enables individual scientists or small groups to own a cluster dedicated to their
         programs. Such clusters can get results faster than waiting in the long job queues of
         the shared MPPs at supercomputer centers, which can stretch to weeks.
            For those interested in learning more, Pfister [1998] has written an entertaining
         book on clusters.

         Recent Trends in Large-Scale Multiprocessors
         In the mid-to-late 1990s, it became clear that the hoped-for growth in the market
         for ultralarge-scale parallel computing was unlikely to occur. Without this market
         growth, it became increasingly obvious that the high-end parallel computing
         market was too small to support the costs of highly customized hardware and
         software designed for a small market. Perhaps the most important trend to come
         out of this observation was that clustering would be used to reach the highest levels
         of performance. There are now three general classes of large-scale multiprocessors:
            1. Clusters that integrate standard desktop motherboards using interconnection
               technology, such as Myrinet or Infiniban
            2. Multicomputers built from standard microprocessors configured into
               processing elements and connected with a custom interconnect, such as the
               IBM Blue Gene
            3. Clusters of small-scale shared memory computers, possibly with vector
               support, including the Earth Simulator
            The IBM Blue Gene is the most interesting of these designs, since its rationale
         parallels the underlying causes of the recent trend towards multicore in uniprocessor
         architectures. Blue Gene started as a research project within IBM aimed at the
         protein sequencing and folding problem. The Blue Gene designers observed that
         power was becoming an increasing concern in large-scale multiprocessors and that
         the performance/watt of processors from the embedded space was much better
         than those in the high-end uniprocessor space. If parallelism was the route to high
         performance, why not start with the most efficient building block and simply have
         more of them?
            Thus, Blue Gene is constructed using a custom chip that includes an embedded
         PowerPC microprocessor offering half the performance of a high-end PowerPC,
         but at a much smaller fraction of the area and the power. This allows more system
         functions, including the global interconnect, to be integrated onto the same die.
                                      6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading     577.e9

The result is a highly replicable and efficient building block, allowing Blue Gene to
reach much larger processor counts more efficiently. Instead of using stand-alone
microprocessors or standard desktop boards as building blocks, Blue Gene uses
processor cores. No doubt such an approach provides much greater efficiency.
Whether the market can support the cost of a customized design and special
software remains an open question.
   In 2006, a Blue Gene processor at Lawrence Livermore with 32K processors held a
factor of 2.6 lead in Linpack performance over the third-place system, which consisted
of 20 SGI Altix 512-processor systems interconnected with Infiniband as a cluster.
   Blue Gene’s predecessor was an experimental machine, QCDOD, which
pioneered the concept of a machine using a lower-power embedded microprocessor
and tightly integrated interconnect to drive down the cost and power consumption
of a node.

Looking Further
There is an almost unbounded amount of information on multiprocessors and
multicomputers: conferences, journal papers, and even books seem to appear faster
than any single person can absorb the ideas. No doubt many of these papers will
go unnoticed—not unlike the past. Most of the major architecture conferences
contain papers on multiprocessors. An annual conference, Supercomputing XY
(where X and Y are the last two digits of the year), brings together users, architects,
software developers, and vendors and publishes the proceedings in book, CD-
ROM, and online (see www.scXY.org) form. Two major journals, Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing and the IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, contain papers on all aspects of parallel processing. Several books focusing
on parallel processing are included in the following references, with Culler et al.
[1998] being the most recent, large-scale effort. For years, Eugene Miya of NASA
Ames has collected an online bibliography of parallel processing papers. The
bibliography, which now contains more than 35,000 entries, is available online at:
www.ira.uka.de/bibliography/Parallel/Eugene/index.html.
   Asanovic et al. [2006] surveyed the wide-ranging challenges for the industry in
this multicore challenge. That report may be helpful in understanding the depth of
the various challenges.
   In addition to documenting the discovery of concepts now used in practice,
these references also provide descriptions of many ideas that have been explored
and found wanting, as well as ideas whose time has just not yet come. Given the
move toward multicore and multiprocessors as the future of high-performance
computer architecture, we expect that many new approaches will be explored in
the years ahead. A few of them will manage to solve the hardware and software
problems that have been the key to using multiprocessing for the past 40 years!
577.e10   6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

          Further Reading
          Almasi, G. S. and A. Gottlieb [1989]. Highly Parallel Computing, Benjamin/Cummings, Redwood City, CA.

          A textbook covering parallel computers.

          Amdahl, G. M. [1967]. “Validity of the single processor approach to achieving large scale computing
          capabilities,” Proc. AFIPS Spring Joint Computer Conf., Atlantic City, NJ (April), 483–85.

          Written in response to the claims of the Illiac IV, this three-page article describes Amdahl’s law and gives the
          classic reply to arguments for abandoning the current form of computing.

          Andrews, G. R. [1991]. Concurrent Programming: Principles and Practice, Benjamin/Cummings, Redwood
          City, CA.

          A text that gives the principles of parallel programming.

          Archibald, J. and J. -L. Baer [1986]. “Cache coherence protocols: Evaluation using a multiprocessor simulation
          model”, ACM Trans. on Computer Systems 4 4 (November), 273–98.

          Classic survey paper of shared-bus cache coherence protocols.

          Arpaci-Dusseau, A., R. Arpaci-Dusseau, D. Culler, J. Hellerstein, and D. Patterson [1997]. “High-performance
          sorting on networks of workstations,” Proc. ACM SIG MOD/PODS Conference on Management of Data,
          Tucson, AZ (May), 12–15.

          How a world record sort was performed on a cluster, including architecture critique of the workstation and
          network interface. By April 1, 1997, they pushed the record to 8.6 GB in 1 minute and 2.2 seconds to sort 100 MB.

          Asanovic, K., R. Bodik, B. C. Catanzaro, J. J. Gebis, P. Husbands, K. Keutzer, D. A. Patterson, W. L. Plishker, J. Shalf,
          S. W. Williams, and K. A. Yelick. [2006]. “The landscape of parallel computing research: A view from Berkeley.”
          Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2006-183, EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley (December 18).

          Nicknamed the “Berkeley View,” this report lays out the landscape of the multicore challenge.

          Bailey, D. H., E. Barszcz, J. T. Barton, D. S. Browning, R. L. Carter, L. Dagum, R. A. Fatoohi, P. O. Frederickson,
          T. A. Lasinski, R. S. Schreiber, H. D. Simon, V. Venkatakrishnan, and S. K. Weeratunga. [1991]. “The NAS
          parallel benchmarks—summary and preliminary results,” Proceedings of the 1991 ACM/IEEE conference on
          Super-computing (August).

          Describes the NAS parallel benchmarks.

          Bell, C. G. [1985]. “Multis: A new class of multiprocessor computers”, Science 228(April 26), 462–467.

          Distinguishes shared address and nonshared address multiprocessors based on micro processors.

          Bienia, C., S. Kumar, J. P. Singh, and K. Li [2008]. “The PARSEC benchmark suite: characterization and
          architectural implications,” Princeton University Technical Report TR-81 1-008 (January).

          Describes the PARSEC parallel benchmarks. Also see http://parsec.cs.princeton.edu/.

          Bouknight, W. J., Denenberg, S. A., McIntyre, D. E., Randall, J. M., Sameh, A. H., and Slotnick, D. L. [1972].
          The Illiac IV system, Proceedings of the IEEE, 60(4), 369–388.

          This describes the most infamous SIMD supercomputer.

          Culler, D. E. and J. P. Singh, with A. Gupta [1998]. Parallel Computer Architecture, Morgan Kaufmann, San
          Francisco.

          A textbook on parallel computers.
                                                    6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading                  577.e11

Dongarra, J. J., J. R. Bunch, G. B. Moler, G. W. Stewart [1979]. LINPACK Users’ Guide, Society for Industrial
Mathematics.

The original document describing Linpack, which became a widely used parallel bench mark.

Falk, H. [1976]. “Reaching for the gigaflop”, IEEE Spectrum 13: 10 (October), 65–70.

Chronicles the sad story of the Illiac IV: four times the cost and less than one-tenth the performance of original
goals.

Flynn, M. J. [1966]. “Very high-speed computing systems”, Proc. IEEE 54 12 (December), 1901–09.

Classic article showing SISD/SIMD/MISD/MIMD classifications.

Hennessy, J. and D. Patterson [2003]. Chapters 6 and 8 in Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach,
third edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.

A more in-depth coverage of a variety of multiprocessor and cluster topics, including programs and measurements.

Henning, J. L. [2007]. “SPEC CPU suite growth: an historical perspective”, Computer Architecture News Vol.
35, no. 1 (March).

Gives the history of SPEC, including the use of SPECrate to measure performance on independent jobs, which is
being used as a parallel benchmark.

Hillis, W. D. [1989]. The connection machine. The MIT Press.

PhD Dissertation that makes case for 1-bit SIMD computer.

Hord, R. M. [1982]. The Illiac-IV, the First Supercomputer, Computer Science Press, Rockville, MD.

A historical accounting of the Illiac IV project.

Hwang, K. [1993]. Advanced Computer Architecture with Parallel Programming, McGraw-Hill, New York.

Another textbook covering parallel computers.

Kozyrakis, C. and D. Patterson [2003]. “Scalable vector processors for embedded systems”, IEEE Micro 23:6
(November–December), 36–45.

Examination of a vector architecture for the MIPS instruction set in media and signal processing.

Menabrea, L. F. [1842]. “Sketch of the analytical engine invented by Charles Babbage”, Bibliothèque Universelle
de Genève (October).

Certainly the earliest reference on multiprocessors, this mathematician made this comment while translating
papers on Babbage’s mechanical computer.

Pfister, G. F. [1998]. In Search of Clusters: The Coming Battle in Lowly Parallel Computing, second edition,
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

An entertaining book that advocates clusters and is critical of NUMA multiprocessors.

Regnier, G., S. Makineni, I. Illikkal, R. Iyer, D. Minturn, R. Huggahalli, and A. Foong [2004]. TCP onloading
for data center servers. Computer, 37(11), 48–58.

A paper describing benefits of doing TCP/IP inside servers vs. external hardware.

Seitz, C. [1985]. “The Cosmic Cube”, Comm. ACM 28 1 (January), 22–31.

A tutorial article on a parallel processor connected via a hypertree. The Cosmic Cube is the ancestor of the Intel
supercomputers.
577.e12   6.15 Historical Perspective and Further Reading

          Slotnick, D. L. [1982]. “The conception and development of parallel processors—a personal memoir”, Annals
          of the History of Computing 4: 1 (January), 20–30.

          Recollections of the beginnings of parallel processing by the architect of the Illiac I V.

          Williams, S., J. Carter, L. Oliker, J. Shalf, and K. Yelick [2008]. “Lattice Boltzmann simulation optimization on
          leading multicore platforms,” International Parallel & Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS).

          Paper containing the results of the four multicores for LBMHD.

          Williams, S., L. Oliker, R. Vuduc, J. Shalf, K. Yelick, and J. Demmel [2007]. “Optimization of sparse matrix-
          vector multiplication on emerging multicore platforms,” Supercomputing (SC).

          Paper containing the results of the four multicores for SPmV.

          Williams, S. [2008]. Autotuning Performance of Multicore Computers, Ph.D. Dissertation, U.C. Berkeley.

          Dissertation containing the roofline model.

          Woo, S. C., M. Ohara, E. Torrie, J. P. Singh, and A. Gupta. “The SPLASH-2 programs: characterization and
          methodological considerations,” Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International Symposium on Computer
          Architecture (ISCA ’95), May, 24–36.

          Paper describing the second version of the Stanford parallel benchmarks.

      6.1.2 [5] <§6.2> Next, consider which of the activities could be carried out
      concurrently (e.g., eating breakfast and listening to the news). For each of your
      activities, describe which other activity could be paired with this activity.
      6.1.3 [5] <§6.2> For Exercise 6.1.2, what could we change about current systems
      (e.g., showers, clothes, TVs, cars) so that we could perform more tasks in parallel?
      6.1.4 [5] <§6.2> Estimate how much shorter time it would take to carry out these
      activities if you tried to carry out as many tasks in parallel as possible.

      6.2 You are trying to bake three blueberry pound cakes. Cake ingredients are as
      follows:
      1 cup butter, softened
      1 cup sugar
      4 large eggs
      1 teaspoon vanilla extract
      1/2 teaspoon salt
      1/4 teaspoon nutmeg
      1 1/2 cups flour
      1 cup blueberries
      The recipe for a single cake is as follows:
         Step 1: Preheat oven to 325°F (160°C). Grease and flour your cake pan.
         Step 2: In large bowl, beat together with a mixer butter and sugar at medium
         speed until light and fluffy. Add eggs, vanilla, salt and nutmeg. Beat until
         thoroughly blended. Reduce mixer speed to low and add flour, 1/2 cup at a time,
         beating just until blended.
         Step 3: Gently fold in blueberries. Spread evenly in prepared baking pan. Bake
         for 60 minutes.
      6.2.1 [5] <§6.2> Your job is to cook three cakes as efficiently as possible.
      Assuming that you only have one oven large enough to hold one cake, one large
      bowl, one cake pan, and one mixer, come up with a schedule to make three cakes as
      quickly as possible. Identify the bottlenecks in completing this task.
      6.2.2 [5] <§6.2> Assume now that you have three bowls, three cake pans and
      three mixers. How much faster is the process now that you have additional resources?
      6.2.3 [5] <§6.2> Assume now that you have two friends that will help you cook,
      and that you have a large oven that can accommodate all three cakes. How will this
      change the schedule you arrived at in Exercise 6.2.1 above?
      6.2.4 [5] <§6.2> Compare the cake-making task to computing three iterations
      of a loop on a parallel computer. Identify data-level parallelism and task-level
      parallelism in the cake-making loop.

6.3 Many computer applications involve searching through a set of data and
sorting the data. A number of efficient searching and sorting algorithms have been
devised in order to reduce the runtime of these tedious tasks. In this problem we
will consider how best to parallelize these tasks.
6.3.1 [10] <§6.2> Consider the following binary search algorithm (a classic
divide and conquer algorithm) that searches for a value X in a sorted N-element
array A and returns the index of matched entry:

     BinarySearch(A[0..N−1], X) {
        low = 0
        high = N −1
        while (low <= high) {
          mid = (low + high) / 2
         if (A[mid] >X)
           high = mid −1
         else if (A[mid] <X)
           low = mid + 1
         else
           return mid // found
       }
        return −1 // not found
     }
Assume that you have Y cores on a multi-core processor to run BinarySearch.
Assuming that Y is much smaller than N, express the speed-up factor you might
expect to obtain for values of Y and N. Plot these on a graph.
6.3.2 [5] <§6.2> Next, assume that Y is equal to N. How would this affect your
conclusions in your previous answer? If you were tasked with obtaining the best
speed-up factor possible (i.e., strong scaling), explain how you might change this
code to obtain it.

6.4 Consider the following piece of C code:

     for (j=2;j<=1000;j++)
        D[j] = D[j−1]+D[j−2];

The ARMv8 code corresponding to the above fragment is:

           MOV          X10 #8000
           ADD          X2, X0, X10
           ADDI         X1, X0, #16
     LOOP: LDUR         D0, [X1, #-16]
           LDUR         D2, [X1, #-8]
           FADDD        D4, D0, D2

                    STUR          D4, [X1, #0]
                    ADDI          X1, X1, #8
                    CMP           X1, X2
                    B.LE          LOOP

         The latency of an instruction is the number of cycles that must come between that
      instruction and an instruction using the result. Assume floating point instructions
      have the following associated latencies (in cycles):
        FADD      LDUR      STUR
          4         6         1

      6.4.1 [10] <§6.2> How many cycles does it take to execute this code?
      6.4.2 [10] <§6.2> Re-order the code to reduce stalls. Now, how many cycles does
      it take to execute this code? (Hint: You can remove additional stalls by changing the
      offset on the STUR instruction.)
      6.4.3 [10] <§6.2> When an instruction in a later iteration of a loop depends
      upon a data value produced in an earlier iteration of the same loop, we say that
      there is a loop-carried dependence between iterations of the loop. Identify the loop-
      carried dependences in the above code. Identify the dependent program variable
      and assembly-level registers. You can ignore the loop induction variable j.
      6.4.4 [15] <§6.2> Rewrite the code by using registers to carry the data between
      iterations of the loop (as opposed to storing and re-loading the data from main
      memory). Show where this code stalls and calculate the number of cycles required
      to execute.
      6.4.5 [10] <§6.2> Loop unrolling was described in Chapter 4. Unroll and
      optimize the loop above so that each unrolled loop handles three iterations of
      the original loop. Show where this code stalls and calculate the number of cycles
      required to execute.
      6.4.6 [10] <§6.2> The unrolling from Exercise 6.4.5. works nicely because we
      happen to want a multiple of three iterations. What happens if the number of
      iterations is not known at compile time? How can we efficiently handle a number
      of iterations that isn’t a multiple of the number of iterations per unrolled loop?
      6.4.7 [15] <§6.2> Consider running this code on a two-node distributed
      memory message passing system. Assume that we are going to use message passing
      as described in Section 6.7, where we introduce a new operation send (x, y) that
      sends to node x the value y, and an operation receive( ) that waits for the value
      being sent to it. Assume that send operations take one cycle to issue (i.e., later
      instructions on the same node can proceed on the next cycle), but take several
      cycles to be received on the receiving node. Receive instructions stall execution on
      the node where they are executed until they receive a message. Can you use such a
      system to speed up the code for this exercise? If so, what is the maximum latency
      for receiving information that can be tolerated? If not, why not?

6.5 Consider the following recursive mergesort algorithm (another classic divide
and conquer algorithm). Mergesort was first described by John Von Neumann in
1945. The basic idea is to divide an unsorted list x of m elements into two sublists
of about half the size of the original list. Repeat this operation on each sublist, and
continue until we have lists of size 1 in length. Then starting with sublists of length
1, “merge” the two sublists into a single sorted list.
      Mergesort(m)
        var list left, right, result
         if length(m) ≤ 1
          return m
        else
           var middle = length(m) / 2
           for each x in m up to middle
            add x to left
           for each x in m after middle
            add x to right
          left = Mergesort(left)
          right = Mergesort(right)
          result = Merge(left, right)
          return result

The merge step is carried out by the following code:

      Merge(left,right)
         var list result
         while length(left) >0 and length(right) > 0
          if first(left) ≤ first(right)
            append first(left) to result
            left = rest(left)
          else
            append first(right) to result
            right = rest(right)
         if length(left) >0
          append rest(left) to result
         if length(right) >0
          append rest(right) to result
        return result

6.5.1 [10] <§6.2> Assume that you have Y cores on a multicore processor to run
Mergesort. Assuming that Y is much smaller than length (m), express the speed-up
factor you might expect to obtain for values of Y and length (m). Plot these on a graph.
6.5.2 [10] <§6.2> Next, assume that Y is equal to length (m). How would this
affect your conclusions in your previous answer? If you were tasked with obtaining
the best speed-up factor possible (i.e., strong scaling), explain how you might
change this code to obtain it.

      6.6 Matrix multiplication plays an important role in a number of applications.
      Two matrices can only be multiplied if the number of columns of the first matrix is
      equal to the number of rows in the second.
      Let’s assume we have an m × n matrix A and we want to multiply it by an n × p
      matrix B. We can express their product as an m × p matrix denoted by AB (or A·B).
      If we assign C = AB, and ci,j denotes the entry in C at position (i, j), then for each
                                                              n
      element i and j with 1≤ i ≤ m and 1≤ j ≤ p ci , j      ∑ ai,k   bk, j. Now we want to
                                                             k =1
      see if we can parallelize the computation of C. Assume that matrices are laid out in
      memory sequentially as follows: a1,1, a2,1, a3,1, a4,1, …, etc.
      6.6.1 [10] <§6.5> Assume that we are going to compute C on both a single-core
      shared-memory machine and a four-core shared-memory machine. Compute
      the speed-up we would expect to obtain on the four-core machine, ignoring any
      memory issues.
      6.6.2 [10] <§6.5> Repeat Exercise 6.6.1, assuming that updates to C incur a cache
      miss due to false sharing when consecutive elements are in a row (i.e., index i) are
      updated.
      6.6.3 [10] <§6.5> How would you fix the false sharing issue that can occur?

      6.7 Consider the following portions of two different programs running at the
      same time on four processors in a symmetric multicore processor (SMP). Assume
      that before this code is run, both x and y are 0.

      Core 1: x = 2;
      Core 2: y = 2;
      Core 3: w = x + y + 1;
      Core 4: z = x + y;

      6.7.1 [10] <§6.5> What are all the possible resulting values of w,x,y, and z?
      For each possible outcome, explain how we might arrive at those values. You will
      need to examine all possible interleavings of instructions.
      6.7.2 [5] <§6.5> How could you make the execution more deterministic so that
      only one set of values is possible?

      6.8 The dining philosopher’s problem is a classic problem of synchronization and
      concurrency. The general problem is stated as philosophers sitting at a round table
      doing one of two things: eating or thinking. When they are eating, they are not
      thinking, and when they are thinking, they are not eating. There is a bowl of pasta
      in the center. A fork is placed in between each philosopher. The result is that each
      philosopher has one fork to her left and one fork to her right. Given the nature of
      eating pasta, the philosopher needs two forks to eat, and can only use the forks on
      her immediate left and right. The philosophers do not speak to one another.

6.8.1 [10] <§6.7> Describe the scenario where none of philosophers ever eats
(i.e., starvation). What is the sequence of events that happen that lead up to this
problem?
6.8.2 [10] <§6.7> Describe how we can solve this problem by introducing the
concept of a priority. Can we guarantee that we will treat all the philosophers fairly?
Explain.
Now assume we hire a waiter who is in charge of assigning forks to philosophers.
Nobody can pick up a fork until the waiter says they can. The waiter has global
knowledge of all forks. Further, if we impose the policy that philosophers will
always request to pick up their left fork before requesting to pick up their right
fork, then we can guarantee to avoid deadlock.
6.8.3 [10] <§6.7> We can implement requests to the waiter as either a queue of
requests or as a periodic retry of a request. With a queue, requests are handled in
the order they are received. The problem with using the queue is that we may not
always be able to service the philosopher whose request is at the head of the queue
(due to the unavailability of resources). Describe a scenario with five philosophers
where a queue is provided, but service is not granted even though there are forks
available for another philosopher (whose request is deeper in the queue) to eat.
6.8.4 [10] <§6.7> If we implement requests to the waiter by periodically repeating
our request until the resources become available, will this solve the problem
described in Exercise 6.8.3? Explain.
6.9 Consider the following three CPU organizations:
CPU SS: A two-core superscalar microprocessor that provides out-of-order issue
capabilities on two function units (FUs). Only a single thread can run on each core
at a time.
CPU MT: A fine-grained multithreaded processor that allows instructions from
two threads to be run concurrently (i.e., there are two functional units), though
only instructions from a single thread can be issued on any cycle.
CPU SMT: An SMT processor that allows instructions from two threads to be run
concurrently (i.e., there are two functional units), and instructions from either or
both threads can be issued to run on any cycle.
Assume we have two threads X and Y to run on these CPUs that include the
following operations:

                  Thread X                                          Thread Y
A1 – takes three cycles to execute             B1 – take two cycles to execute
A2 – no dependences                            B2 – conflicts for a functional unit with B1
A3 – conflicts for a functional unit with A1   B3 – depends on the result of B2
A4 – depends on the result of A3               B4 – no dependences and takes two cycles to execute

      Assume all instructions take a single cycle to execute unless noted otherwise or
      they encounter a hazard.
      6.9.1 [10] <§6.4> Assume that you have one SS CPU. How many cycles will it
      take to execute these two threads? How many issue slots are wasted due to hazards?
      6.9.2 [10] <§6.4> Now assume you have two SS CPUs. How many cycles will it
      take to execute these two threads? How many issue slots are wasted due to hazards?
      6.9.3 [10] <§6.4> Assume that you have one MT CPU. How many cycles will it
      take to execute these two threads? How many issue slots are wasted due to hazards?
      6.9.4 [10] <§6.4> Assume you have one SMT CPU. How many cycles will it take
      to execute the two threads? How many issue slots are wasted due to hazards?

      6.10 Virtualization software is being aggressively deployed to reduce the costs of
      managing today’s high-performance servers. Companies like VMWare, Microsoft
      and IBM have all developed a range of virtualization products. The general concept,
      described in Chapter 5, is that a hypervisor layer can be introduced between the
      hardware and the operating system to allow multiple operating systems to share
      the same physical hardware. The hypervisor layer is then responsible for allocating
      CPU and memory resources, as well as handling services typically handled by the
      operating system (e.g., I/O).
      Virtualization provides an abstract view of the underlying hardware to the hosted
      operating system and application software. This will require us to rethink how
      multi-core and multiprocessor systems will be designed in the future to support
      the sharing of CPUs and memories by a number of operating systems concurrently.
      6.10.1 [30] <§6.4> Select two hypervisors on the market today, and compare
      and contrast how they virtualize and manage the underlying hardware (CPUs and
      memory).
      6.10.2 [15] <§6.4> Discuss what changes may be necessary in future multi-core
      CPU platforms in order to better match the resource demands placed on these
      systems. For instance, can multithreading play an effective role in alleviating the
      competition for computing resources?

      6.11 We would like to execute the loop below as efficiently as possible. We have
      two different machines, a MIMD machine and a SIMD machine.

           for (i=0; i<2000; i++)
             for (j=0; j<3000; j++)
                     X_array[i][j] = Y_array[j][i] + 200;

      6.11.1 [10] <§6.3> For a four CPU MIMD machine, show the sequence of
      LEGv8 instructions that you would execute on each CPU. What is the speed-up for
      this MIMD machine?

6.11.2 [20] <§6.3> For an eight-wide SIMD machine (i.e., eight parallel SIMD
functional units), write an assembly program in using your own SIMD extensions
to LEGv8 to execute the loop. Compare the number of instructions executed on the
SIMD machine to the MIMD machine.

6.12 A systolic array is an example of an MISD machine. A systolic array is a
pipeline network or “wavefront” of data processing elements. Each of these elements
does not need a program counter since execution is triggered by the arrival of data.
Clocked systolic arrays compute in “lock-step” with each processor undertaking
alternate compute and communication phases.
6.12.1 [10] <§6.3> Consider proposed implementations of a systolic array
(you can find these on the Internet or in technical publications). Then attempt to
program the loop provided in Exercise 6.11 using this MISD model. Discuss any
difficulties you encounter.
6.12.2 [10] <§6.3> Discuss the similarities and differences between an MISD
and SIMD machines. Answer this question in terms of data-level parallelism.

6.13 Assume we want to execute the DAXP loop shown on page 526 in ARMv8t
assembly on the NVIDIA 8800 GTX GPU described in this chapter. In this problem,
we will assume that all math operations are performed on single-precision floating-
point numbers (we will rename the loop SAXPY). Assume that instructions take
the following number of cycles to execute.
       Loads                 Stores                 Add.S                Mult.S
         5                           2                3                     4

6.13.1 [20] <§6.6> Describe how you will constructs warps for the SAXPY loop
to exploit the eight cores provided in a single multiprocessor.

6.14 Download the CUDA Toolkit and SDK from https://developer.nvidia.com/
cuda-toolkit. Make sure to use the “emurelease” (Emulation Mode) version of the
code. (You will not need actual NVIDIA hardware for this assignment.) Build the
example programs provided in the SDK, and confirm that they run on the emulator.
6.14.1 [90] <§6.6> Using the “template” SDK sample as a starting point, write a
CUDA program to perform the following vector operations:
1) a − b (vector-vector subtraction)
2) a · b (vector dot product)
The dot product of two vectors a = [a1, a2, …, an] and b = [b1, b2, …, bn] is defined as:
                                 n
                     a ⋅ b = ∑ai bi = a1b1 + a2b2 + ? + anbn
                                i =1

Submit code for each program that demonstrates each operation and verifies the
correctness of the results.

      6.14.2 [90] <§6.6> If you have GPU hardware available, complete a performance
      analysis on your program, examining the computation time for the GPU and a CPU
      version of your program for a range of vector sizes. Explain any results you see.

      6.15 AMD has recently announced integrating a graphics processing unit with
      their x86 cores into a single package (though with different clocks for each of the
      cores). This is an example of a heterogeneous multiprocessor system. One of the
      key design points is to allow for fast data communication between the CPU and the
      GPU. Before AMD’s Fusion architecture, communications were needed between
      discrete CPU and GPU chips. Presently, the plan is to use multiple (at least 16) PCI
      express channels to facilitate intercommunication.
      6.15.1 [25] <§6.6> Compare the bandwidth and latency associated with these
      two interconnect technologies.

      6.16 Refer to Figure 6.14b, which shows an n-cube interconnect topology
      of order 3 that interconnects eight nodes. One attractive feature of an n-cube
      interconnection network topology is its ability to sustain broken links and still
      provide connectivity.
      6.16.1 [10] <§6.8> Develop an equation that computes how many links in the
      n-cube (where n is the order of the cube) can fail and we can still guarantee an
      unbroken link will exist to connect any node in the n-cube.
      6.16.2 [10] <§6.8> Compare the resiliency to failure of n-cube to a fully
      connected interconnection network. Plot a comparison of reliability as a function
      of the added number of links for the two topologies.

      6.17 Benchmarking is a field of study that involves identifying representative
      workloads to run on specific computing platforms in order to be able to objectively
      compare performance of one system to another. In this exercise we will compare
      two classes of benchmarks: the Whetstone CPU benchmark and the PARSEC
      Benchmark suite. Select one program from PARSEC. All programs should be freely
      available on the Internet. Consider running multiple copies of Whetstone versus
      running the PARSEC Benchmark on any of the systems described in Section 6.11.
      6.17.1 [60] <§6.10> What is inherently different between these two classes of
      workload when run on these multi-core systems?
      6.17.2 [60] <§6.10> In terms of the Roofline Model, how dependent will the
      results you obtain when running these benchmarks be on the amount of sharing
      and synchronization present in the workload used?

      6.18 When performing computations on sparse matrices, latency in the memory
      hierarchy becomes much more of a factor. Sparse matrices lack the spatial locality
      in the datastream typically found in matrix operations. As a result, new matrix
      representations have been proposed.

One of the earliest sparse matrix representations is the Yale Sparse Matrix Format.
It stores an initial sparse m × n matrix, M in row form using three one-dimensional
arrays. Let R be the number of nonzero entries in M. We construct an array A
of length R that contains all nonzero entries of M (in left-to-right top-to-bottom
order). We also construct a second array IA of length m+1 (i.e., one entry per row,
plus one). IA(i) contains the index in A of the first nonzero element of row i. Row i
of the original matrix extends from A(IA(i)) to A(IA(i+1)−1). The third array, JA,
contains the column index of each element of A, so it also is of length R.
6.18.1 [15] <§6.10> Consider the sparse matrix X below and write C code that
would store this code in Yale Sparse Matrix Format.

    Row 1 [1, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0]
    Row 2 [0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0]
    Row 3 [0, 0, 0, 0, 9, 0]
    Row 4 [2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2]
    Row 5 [0, 0, 3, 3, 0, 7]
    Row 6 [1, 3, 0, 0, 0, 1]

6.18.2 [10] <§6.10> In terms of storage space, assuming that each element in
matrix X is single-precision floating point, compute the amount of storage used to
store the matrix above in Yale Sparse Matrix Format.
6.18.3 [15] <§6.10> Perform matrix multiplication of matrix X by matrix Y
shown below.

    [2, 4, 1, 99, 7, 2]
Put this computation in a loop, and time its execution. Make sure to increase
the number of times this loop is executed to get good resolution in your timing
measurement. Compare the runtime of using a naïve representation of the matrix,
and the Yale Sparse Matrix Format.
6.18.4 [15] <§6.10> Can you find a more efficient sparse matrix representation
(in terms of space and computational overhead)?

6.19 In future systems, we expect to see heterogeneous computing platforms
constructed out of heterogeneous CPUs. We have begun to see some appear in the
embedded processing market in systems that contain both floating-point DSPs and
microcontroller CPUs in a multichip module package.
Assume that you have three classes of CPU:
CPU A—A moderate-speed multi-core CPU (with a floating-point unit) that can
execute multiple instructions per cycle.
CPU B—A fast single-core integer CPU (i.e., no floating-point unit) that can
execute a single instruction per cycle.
CPU C—A slow vector CPU (with floating-point capability) that can execute
multiple copies of the same instruction per cycle.

      Assume that our processors run at the following frequencies:
        CPU A       CPU B       CPU C
         1 GHz       3 GHz     250 MHz

      CPU A can execute two instructions per cycle, CPU B can execute one
      instruction per cycle, and CPU C can execute eight instructions (through the
      same instruction) per cycle. Assume all operations can complete execution in a
      single cycle of latency without any hazards.
      All three CPUs have the ability to perform integer arithmetic, though CPU B
      cannot perform floating point arithmetic. CPU A and B have an instruction set
      similar to a LEGv8 processor. CPU C can only perform floating point add and
      subtract operations, as well as memory loads and stores. Assume all CPUs have
      access to shared memory and that synchronization has zero cost.
      The task at hand is to compare two matrices X and Y that each contain 1024 × 1024
      floating-point elements. The output should be a count of the number of indices
      where the value in X was larger or equal to the value in Y.
      6.19.1 [10] <§6.11> Describe how you would partition the problem on the three
      different CPUs to obtain the best performance.
      6.19.2 [10] <§6.11> What kind of instruction would you add to the vector CPU
      C to obtain better performance?

      6.20 This question looks at the amount of queuing that is occurring in the system
      given a maximum transaction processing rate, and the latency observed on average
      for a transaction. The latency includes both the service time (which is computed by
      the maximum rate) and the queue time.
      Assume a quad-core computer system can process database queries at a steady
      state maximum rate of rate requests per second. Also assume that each transaction
      takes, on average, lat ms to process. For each of the pairs in the table, answer the
      following questions:

        Average Transaction Latency      Maximum transaction processing rate
                     1 ms                               5000/sec
                     2 ms                               5000/sec
                     1 ms                              10,000/sec
                     2 ms                              10,000/sec

      For each of the pairs in the table, answer the following questions:
      6.20.1 [10] <§6.11> On average, how many requests are being processed at any
      given instant?
      6.20.2 [10] <§6.11> If we move to an eight-core system, ideally, what will happen
      to the system throughput (i.e., how many queries/second will the computer process)?
      6.20.3 [10] <§6.11> Discuss why we rarely obtain this kind of speed-up by
      simply increasing the number of cores.

§6.1, page 518: False. Task-level parallelism can help sequential applications and      Answers to
sequential applications can be made to run on parallel hardware, although it is         Check Yourself
more challenging.
§6.2, page 523: False. Weak scaling can compensate for a serial portion of the
program that would otherwise limit scalability, but not so for strong scaling.
§6.3, page 528: True, but they are missing useful vector features like gather-scatter
and vector length registers that improve the efficiency of vector architectures.
(As an elaboration in this section mentions, the AVX2 SIMD extensions offers
indexed loads via a gather operation but not scatter for indexed stores. The Haswell
generation x86 microprocessor is the first to support AVX2.)
§6.4, page 533: 1. True. 2. True.
§6.5, page 537: False. Since the shared address is a physical address, multiple
tasks each in their own virtual address spaces can run well on a shared memory
multiprocessor.
§6.6, page 545: False. Graphics DRAM chips are prized for their higher bandwidth.
§6.7, page 550: 1. False. Sending and receiving a message is an implicit
synchronization, as well as a way to share data. 2. True.
§6.8, page 552: True.
§6.9, page 6.9-10: 1. polling with loads and stores. 2. interrupts with DMA.
§6.10, page 564: True. We likely need innovation at all levels of the hardware and
software stack for parallel computing to succeed.
