          B
A     P     P       E   N   D   I   X
                                        Graphics and
                                        Computing GPUs
                                        John Nickolls
Imagination is more                     Director of Architecture
important than                          NVIDIA
knowledge.                              David Kirk
                                        Chief Scientist
Albert Einstein
                                        NVIDIA
On Science, 1930s
B.1     Introduction B-3
B.2     GPU System Architectures B-7
B.3     Programming GPUs B-12
B.4     Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture B-25
B.5     Parallel Memory System B-36
B.6     Floating-point Arithmetic B-41
B.7     Real Stuff: The NVIDIA GeForce 8800 B-46
B.8     Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs B-55
B.9     Fallacies and Pitfalls B-72
B.10    Concluding Remarks B-76
B.11    Historical Perspective and Further Reading B-77

  B.1         Introduction

This appendix focuses on the GPU—the ubiquitous graphics processing unit              graphics processing
in every PC, laptop, desktop computer, and workstation. In its most basic form,       unit (GPU) A processor
the GPU generates 2D and 3D graphics, images, and video that enable Window-           optimized for 2D and 3D
based operating systems, graphical user interfaces, video games, visual imaging       graphics, video, visual
                                                                                      computing, and display.
applications, and video. The modern GPU that we describe here is a highly parallel,
highly multithreaded multiprocessor optimized for visual computing. To provide        visual computing A mix
real-time visual interaction with computed objects via graphics, images, and video,   of graphics processing
the GPU has a unified graphics and computing architecture that serves as both a       and computing that lets
                                                                                      you visually interact with
programmable graphics processor and a scalable parallel computing platform. PCs
                                                                                      computed objects via
and game consoles combine a GPU with a CPU to form heterogeneous systems.             graphics, images, and
                                                                                      video.
A Brief History of GPU Evolution
Fifteen years ago, there was no such thing as a GPU. Graphics on a PC were            heterogeneous
performed by a video graphics array (VGA) controller. A VGA controller was            system A system
simply a memory controller and display generator connected to some DRAM. In           combining different
the 1990s, semiconductor technology advanced sufficiently that more functions         processor types. A PC is a
                                                                                      heterogeneous CPU–GPU
could be added to the VGA controller. By 1997, VGA controllers were beginning         system.
to incorporate some three-dimensional (3D) acceleration functions, including
B-4                         Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                            hardware for triangle setup and rasterization (dicing triangles into individual
                            pixels) and texture mapping and shading (applying “decals” or patterns to pixels
                            and blending colors).
                               In 2000, the single chip graphics processor incorporated almost every detail of
                            the traditional high-end workstation graphics pipeline and, therefore, deserved a
                            new name beyond VGA controller. The term GPU was coined to denote that the
                            graphics device had become a processor.
                               Over time, GPUs became more programmable, as programmable processors
                            replaced fixed-function dedicated logic while maintaining the basic 3D graphics
                            pipeline organization. In addition, computations became more precise over time,
                            progressing from indexed arithmetic, to integer and fixed point, to single-precision
                            floating-point, and recently to double-precision floating-point. GPUs have become
                            massively parallel programmable processors with hundreds of cores and thousands
                            of threads.
                               Recently, processor instructions and memory hardware were added to support
                            general purpose programming languages, and a programming environment was
                            created to allow GPUs to be programmed using familiar languages, including C
                            and C++. This innovation makes a GPU a fully general-purpose, programmable,
                            manycore processor, albeit still with some special benefits and limitations.

                            GPU Graphics Trends
                            GPUs and their associated drivers implement the OpenGL and DirectX
                            models of graphics processing. OpenGL is an open standard for 3D graphics
                            programming available for most computers. DirectX is a series of Microsoft
                            multimedia programming interfaces, including Direct3D for 3D graphics. Since
application                 these application programming interfaces (APIs) have well-defined behavior,
programming interface       it is possible to build effective hardware acceleration of the graphics processing
(API) A set of function     functions defined by the APIs. This is one of the reasons (in addition to increasing
and data structure          device density) why new GPUs are being developed every 12 to 18 months that
definitions providing an
interface to a library of
                            double the performance of the previous generation on existing applications.
functions.                      Frequent doubling of GPU performance enables new applications that were
                            not previously possible. The intersection of graphics processing and parallel
                            computing invites a new paradigm for graphics, known as visual computing. It
                            replaces large sections of the traditional sequential hardware graphics pipeline
                            model with programmable elements for geometry, vertex, and pixel programs.
                            Visual computing in a modern GPU combines graphics processing and parallel
                            computing in novel ways that permit new graphics algorithms to be implemented,
                            and opens the door to entirely new parallel processing applications on pervasive
                            high-performance GPUs.

                            Heterogeneous System
                            Although the GPU is arguably the most parallel and most powerful processor in
                            a typical PC, it is certainly not the only processor. The CPU, now multicore and
                                                                     B.1   Introduction                         B-5

soon to be manycore, is a complementary, primarily serial processor companion
to the massively parallel manycore GPU. Together, these two types of processors
comprise a heterogeneous multiprocessor system.
   The best performance for many applications comes from using both the CPU
and the GPU. This appendix will help you understand how and when to best split
the work between these two increasingly parallel processors.

GPU Evolves into Scalable Parallel Processor
GPUs have evolved functionally from hardwired, limited capability VGA controllers
to programmable parallel processors. This evolution has proceeded by changing
the logical (API-based) graphics pipeline to incorporate programmable elements
and also by making the underlying hardware pipeline stages less specialized and
more programmable. Eventually, it made sense to merge disparate programmable
pipeline elements into one unified array of many programmable processors.
    In the GeForce 8-series generation of GPUs, the geometry, vertex, and pixel
processing all run on the same type of processor. This unification allows for
dramatic scalability. More programmable processor cores increase the total system
throughput. Unifying the processors also delivers very effective load balancing,
since any processing function can use the whole processor array. At the other end
of the spectrum, a processor array can now be built with very few processors, since
all of the functions can be run on the same processors.

Why CUDA and GPU Computing?
This uniform and scalable array of processors invites a new model of programming
for the GPU. The large amount of floating-point processing power in the GPU
processor array is very attractive for solving nongraphics problems. Given the large      GPU computing Using
degree of parallelism and the range of scalability of the processor array for graphics    a GPU for computing via
                                                                                          a parallel programming
applications, the programming model for more general computing must express
                                                                                          language and API.
the massive parallelism directly, but allow for scalable execution.
   GPU computing is the term coined for using the GPU for computing via a
parallel programming language and API, without using the traditional graphics
API and graphics pipeline model. This is in contrast to the earlier General Purpose       GPGPU Using a GPU
computation on GPU (GPGPU) approach, which involves programming the GPU                   for general-purpose
using a graphics API and graphics pipeline to perform nongraphics tasks.                  computation via a
                                                                                          traditional graphics API
   Compute Unifed Device Architecture (CUDA) is a scalable parallel programming
                                                                                          and graphics pipeline.
model and software platform for the GPU and other parallel processors that allows
the programmer to bypass the graphics API and graphics interfaces of the GPU
                                                                                          CUDA A scalable
and simply program in C or C++. The CUDA programming model has an SPMD                    parallel programming
(single-program multiple data) software style, in which a programmer writes a             model and language based
program for one thread that is instanced and executed by many threads in parallel         on C/C++. It is a parallel
on the multiple processors of the GPU. In fact, CUDA also provides a facility for         programming platform
programming multiple CPU cores as well, so CUDA is an environment for writing             for GPUs and multicore
parallel programs for the entire heterogeneous computer system.                           CPUs.
B-6   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

      GPU Unifes Graphics and Computing
      With the addition of CUDA and GPU computing to the capabilities of the GPU,
      it is now possible to use the GPU as both a graphics processor and a computing
      processor at the same time, and to combine these uses in visual computing
      applications. The underlying processor architecture of the GPU is exposed in two
      ways: first, as implementing the programmable graphics APIs, and second, as a
      massively parallel processor array programmable in C/C++ with CUDA.
          Although the underlying processors of the GPU are unified, it is not necessary
      that all of the SPMD thread programs are the same. The GPU can run graphics
      shader programs for the graphics aspect of the GPU, processing geometry, vertices,
      and pixels, and also run thread programs in CUDA.
          The GPU is truly a versatile multiprocessor architecture, supporting a variety of
      processing tasks. GPUs are excellent at graphics and visual computing as they were
      specifically designed for these applications. GPUs are also excellent at many general-
      purpose throughput applications that are “first cousins” of graphics, in that they
      perform a lot of parallel work, as well as having a lot of regular problem structure.
      In general, they are a good match to data-parallel problems (see Chapter 6),
      particularly large problems, but less so for less regular, smaller problems.

      GPU Visual Computing Applications
      Visual computing includes the traditional types of graphics applications plus many
      new applications. The original purview of a GPU was “anything with pixels,” but it
      now includes many problems without pixels but with regular computation and/or
      data structure. GPUs are effective at 2D and 3D graphics, since that is the purpose
      for which they are designed. Failure to deliver this application performance would
      be fatal. 2D and 3D graphics use the GPU in its “graphics mode,” accessing the
      processing power of the GPU through the graphics APIs, OpenGL™, and DirectX™.
      Games are built on the 3D graphics processing capability.
          Beyond 2D and 3D graphics, image processing and video are important
      applications for GPUs. These can be implemented using the graphics APIs or as
      computational programs, using CUDA to program the GPU in computing mode.
      Using CUDA, image processing is simply another data-parallel array program. To
      the extent that the data access is regular and there is good locality, the program
      will be efficient. In practice, image processing is a very good application for GPUs.
      Video processing, especially encode and decode (compression and decompression
      according to some standard algorithms), is quite efficient.
          The greatest opportunity for visual computing applications on GPUs is to “break
      the graphics pipeline.” Early GPUs implemented only specific graphics APIs, albeit at
      very high performance. This was wonderful if the API supported the operations that
      you wanted to do. If not, the GPU could not accelerate your task, because early GPU
      functionality was immutable. Now, with the advent of GPU computing and CUDA,
      these GPUs can be programmed to implement a different virtual pipeline by simply
      writing a CUDA program to describe the computation and data flow that is desired. So,
      all applications are now possible, which will stimulate new visual computing approaches.
                                                              B.2   GPU System Architectures   B-7

  B.2            GPU System Architectures

In this section, we survey GPU system architectures in common use today. We
discuss system configurations, GPU functions and services, standard programming
interfaces, and a basic GPU internal architecture.

Heterogeneous CPU–GPU System Architecture
A heterogeneous computer system architecture using a GPU and a CPU can be
described at a high level by two primary characteristics: first, how many functional
subsystems and/or chips are used and what are their interconnection technologies
and topology; and second, what memory subsystems are available to these
functional subsystems. See Chapter 6 for background on the PC I/O systems and
chip sets.

The Historical PC (circa 1990)
Figure B.2.1 shows a high-level block diagram of a legacy PC, circa 1990. The north
bridge (see Chapter 6) contains high-bandwidth interfaces, connecting the CPU,
memory, and PCI bus. The south bridge contains legacy interfaces and devices:
ISA bus (audio, LAN), interrupt controller; DMA controller; time/counter. In
this system, the display was driven by a simple framebuffer subsystem known

                         CPU

                           Front Side Bus

                      North
                                            Memory
                      Bridge

                           PCI Bus

                      South                   VGA               Framebuffer
                      Bridge                Controller            Memory

                                              VGA
                   LAN     UART              Display

FIGURE B.2.1 Historical PC. VGA controller drives graphics display from framebuffer memory.
B-8                         Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                            as a VGA (video graphics array) which was attached to the PCI bus. Graphics
                            subsystems with built-in processing elements (GPUs) did not exist in the PC
PCI-Express (PCIe)          landscape of 1990.
A standard system I/O          Figure B.2.2 illustrates two confgurations in common use today. These are
interconnect that uses      characterized by a separate GPU (discrete GPU) and CPU with respective memory
point-to-point links.
                            subsystems. In Figure B.2.2a, with an Intel CPU, we see the GPU attached via a
Links have a configurable
number of lanes and         16-lane PCI-Express 2.0 link to provide a peak 16 GB/s transfer rate (peak of
bandwidth.                  8 GB/s in each direction). Similarly, in Figure B.2.2b, with an AMD CPU, the GPU

                                                                                    Intel
                                                                                    CPU

                                                                                        Front Side Bus
                                                          x16 PCI-Express Link

                                                                                   North                  DDR2
                                                       GPU
                                          display                                  Bridge                Memory

                                                               x4 PCI-Express Link             128-bit
                                                                        derivative            667 MT/s

                                                       GPU
                                                                                   South
                                                      Memory
                                                                                   Bridge
                                          (a)

                                                                  AMD
                                                                  CPU
                                                                                 CPU
                                                                                 core
                                                                                                    128-bit
                                                                     internal bus
                                                                                                   667 MT/s

                                                                                 North                    DDR2
                                                                                 Bridge                  Memory

                                                            x16 PCI-Express Link      HyperTransport 1.03

                                                       GPU                    Chipset
                                          display

                                                       GPU
                                                      Memory
                                          (b)

                            FIGURE B.2.2 Contemporary PCs with Intel and AMD CPUs. See Chapter 6 for an explanation of
                            the components and interconnects in this figure.
                                                     B.2   GPU System Architectures                          B-9

is attached to the chipset, also via PCI-Express with the same available bandwidth.
In both cases, the GPUs and CPUs may access each other’s memory, albeit with less
available bandwidth than their access to the more directly attached memories. In
the case of the AMD system, the north bridge or memory controller is integrated
into the same die as the CPU.
    A low-cost variation on these systems, a unified memory architecture (UMA)        unified memory
system, uses only CPU system memory, omitting GPU memory from the system.             architecture (UMA)
These systems have relatively low-performance GPUs, since their achieved              A system architecture in
performance is limited by the available system memory bandwidth and increased         which the CPU and GPU
                                                                                      share a common system
latency of memory access, whereas dedicated GPU memory provides high                  memory.
bandwidth and low latency.
    A high-performance system variation uses multiple attached GPUs, typically
two to four working in parallel, with their displays daisy-chained. An example
is the NVIDIA SLI (scalable link interconnect) multi-GPU system, designed for
high-performance gaming and workstations.
    The next system category integrates the GPU with the north bridge (Intel) or
chipset (AMD) with and without dedicated graphics memory.
    Chapter 5 explains how caches maintain coherence in a shared address space.
With CPUs and GPUs, there are multiple address spaces. GPUs can access their
own physical local memory and the CPU system’s physical memory using virtual
addresses that are translated by an MMU on the GPU. The operating system kernel
manages the GPU’s page tables. A system physical page can be accessed using either
coherent or noncoherent PCI-Express transactions, determined by an attribute in
the GPU’s page table. The CPU can access GPU’s local memory through an address
range (also called aperture) in the PCI-Express address space.

Game Consoles
Console systems such as the Sony PlayStation 3 and the Microsoft Xbox 360
resemble the PC system architectures previously described. Console systems are
designed to be shipped with identical performance and functionality over a lifespan
that can last five years or more. During this time, a system may be reimplemented
many times to exploit more advanced silicon manufacturing processes and thereby
to provide constant capability at ever lower costs. Console systems do not need
to have their subsystems expanded and upgraded the way PC systems do, so the
major internal system buses tend to be customized rather than standardized.           AGP An extended
                                                                                      version of the original PCI
                                                                                      I/O bus, which provided
GPU Interfaces and Drivers                                                            up to eight times the
                                                                                      bandwidth of the original
In a PC today, GPUs are attached to a CPU via PCI-Express. Earlier generations
                                                                                      PCI bus to a single card
used AGP. Graphics applications call OpenGL [Segal and Akeley, 2006] or Direct3D      slot. Its primary purpose
[Microsoft DirectX Specifcation] API functions that use the GPU as a coprocessor.     was to connect graphics
The APIs send commands, programs, and data to the GPU via a graphics device           subsystems into PC
driver optimized for the particular GPU.                                              systems.
B-10                          Appendix B     Graphics and Computing GPUs

                              Graphics Logical Pipeline
                              The graphics logical pipeline is described in Section B.3. Figure B.2.3 illustrates
                              the major processing stages, and highlights the important programmable stages
                              (vertex, geometry, and pixel shader stages).

         Input             Vertex             Geometry              Setup &                Pixel             Raster Operations/
       Assembler           Shader              Shader              Rasterizer             Shader              Output Merger

FIGURE B.2.3 Graphics logical pipeline. Programmable graphics shader stages are blue, and fixed-function blocks are white.

                              Mapping Graphics Pipeline to Unified GPU Processors
                              Figure B.2.4 shows how the logical pipeline comprising separate independent
                              programmable stages is mapped onto a physical distributed array of processors.

                              Basic Unified GPU Architecture
                              Unified GPU architectures are based on a parallel array of many programmable
                              processors. They unify vertex, geometry, and pixel shader processing and parallel
                              computing on the same processors, unlike earlier GPUs which had separate
                              processors dedicated to each processing type. The programmable processor array is
                              tightly integrated with fixed function processors for texture filtering, rasterization,
                              raster operations, anti-aliasing, compression, decompression, display, video
                              decoding, and high-definition video processing. Although the fixed-function
                              processors significantly outperform more general programmable processors in
                              terms of absolute performance constrained by an area, cost, or power budget, we
                              will focus on the programmable processors here.
                                 Compared with multicore CPUs, manycore GPUs have a different architectural
                              design point, one focused on executing many parallel threads efficiently on many

                                                   Input                    Vertex
                                                 Assembler                  Shader

                                                                          Geometry
                                                                           Shader

                                                 Setup &                     Pixel                   Raster Operations/
                                                Rasterizer                  Shader                    Output Merger

                                                                      Unified Processor
                                                                            Array

                              FIGURE B.2.4 Logical pipeline mapped to physical processors. The programmable shader
                              stages execute on the array of unified processors, and the logical graphics pipeline dataflow recirculates
                              through the processors.
                                                                                                     B.2         GPU System Architectures                                       B-11

processor cores. By using many simpler cores and optimizing for data-parallel
behavior among groups of threads, more of the per-chip transistor budget is
devoted to computation, and less to on-chip caches and overhead.

Processor Array
A unified GPU processor array contains many processor cores, typically organized
into multithreaded multiprocessors. Figure B.2.5 shows a GPU with an array of
112 streaming processor (SP) cores, organized as 14 multithreaded streaming
multiprocessors (SMs). Each SP core is highly multithreaded, managing 96
concurrent threads and their state in hardware. The processors connect with
four 64-bit-wide DRAM partitions via an interconnection network. Each SM
has eight SP cores, two special function units (SFUs), instruction and constant
caches, a multithreaded instruction unit, and a shared memory. This is the basic
Tesla architecture implemented by the NVIDIA GeForce 8800. It has a unified
architecture in which the traditional graphics programs for vertex, geometry, and
pixel shading run on the unified SMs and their SP cores, and computing programs
run on the same processors.

           Host CPU                           Bridge                       System Memory

                                                                               GPU
                                        Host Interface
                                                                             Viewport/Clip/
                                                                                                                                           High-Definition
                                                                                                                                                                      SM
                                                                             Setup/Raster/
                                       Input Assembler                                                                                    Video Processors
                                                                                 ZCull                                                                            I-Cache
                                         Vertex Work                          Pixel Work                    Compute Work
                                         Distribution                         Distribution                   Distribution                                        MT Issue

                                                                                                                                                                 C-Cache
            TPC                  TPC                        TPC                   TPC                 TPC                  TPC                     TPC

                                                                                                                                                                 SP        SP
       SM         SM       SM           SM             SM          SM        SM         SM       SM         SM       SM           SM          SM         SM

                                                                                                                                                                 SP        SP
      SP SP      SP SP    SP SP       SP SP         SP SP         SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP       SP SP       SP SP     SP SP
      SP SP      SP SP    SP SP       SP SP         SP SP         SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP       SP SP       SP SP     SP SP
                                                                                                                                                                 SP        SP
      SP SP      SP SP    SP SP       SP SP         SP SP         SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP       SP SP       SP SP     SP SP
      SP SP      SP SP    SP SP       SP SP         SP SP         SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP     SP SP       SP SP       SP SP     SP SP

                                                                                                                                                                 SP        SP
       Shared    Shared   Shared       Shared       Shared        Shared     Shared    Shared   Shared     Shared    Shared      Shared      Shared     Shared
       Memory    Memory   Memory       Memory       Memory        Memory     Memory    Memory   Memory     Memory    Memory      Memory      Memory     Memory

         Texture Unit          Texture Unit            Texture Unit            Texture Unit       Texture Unit           Texture Unit          Texture Unit
           Tex L1                Tex L1                  Tex L1                  Tex L1             Tex L1                 Tex L1                Tex L1          SFU   SFU

                                                                           Interconnection Network                                                                Shared
                                                                                                                                                                  Memory
                ROP       L2                  ROP            L2             ROP           L2             ROP        L2              Display Interface

                 DRAM                           DRAM                           DRAM                       DRAM                            Display

FIGURE B.2.5 Basic unified GPU architecture. Example GPU with 112 streaming processor (SP) cores organized in 14 streaming
multiprocessors (SMs); the cores are highly multithreaded. It has the basic Tesla architecture of an NVIDIA GeForce 8800. The processors
connect with four 64-bit-wide DRAM partitions via an interconnection network. Each SM has eight SP cores, two special function units (SFUs),
instruction and constant caches, a multithreaded instruction unit, and a shared memory.
B-12   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          The processor array architecture is scalable to smaller and larger GPU
       configurations by scaling the number of multiprocessors and the number of
       memory partitions. Figure B.2.5 shows seven clusters of two SMs sharing a texture
       unit and a texture L1 cache. The texture unit delivers filtered results to the SM
       given a set of coordinates into a texture map. Because filter regions of support
       often overlap for successive texture requests, a small streaming L1 texture cache is
       effective to reduce the number of requests to the memory system. The processor
       array connects with raster operation processors (ROPs), L2 texture caches, external
       DRAM memories, and system memory via a GPU-wide interconnection network.
       The number of processors and number of memories can scale to design balanced
       GPU systems for different performance and market segments.

         B.3          Programming GPUs

       Programming multiprocessor GPUs is qualitatively different than programming
       other multiprocessors like multicore CPUs. GPUs provide two to three orders of
       magnitude more thread and data parallelism than CPUs, scaling to hundreds of
       processor cores and tens of thousands of concurrent threads. GPUs continue
       to increase their parallelism, doubling it about every 12 to 18 months, enabled
       by Moore’s law [1965] of increasing integrated circuit density and by improving
       architectural efficiency. To span the wide price and performance range of different
       market segments, different GPU products implement widely varying numbers of
       processors and threads. Yet users expect games, graphics, imaging, and computing
       applications to work on any GPU, regardless of how many parallel threads it
       executes or how many parallel processor cores it has, and they expect more
       expensive GPUs (with more threads and cores) to run applications faster. As a
       result, GPU programming models and application programs are designed to scale
       transparently to a wide range of parallelism.
          The driving force behind the large number of parallel threads and cores in a
       GPU is real-time graphics performance—the need to render complex 3D scenes
       with high resolution at interactive frame rates, at least 60 frames per second.
       Correspondingly, the scalable programming models of graphics shading languages
       such as Cg (C for graphics) and HLSL (high-level shading language) are designed to
       exploit large degrees of parallelism via many independent parallel threads and to
       scale to any number of processor cores. The CUDA scalable parallel programming
       model similarly enables general parallel computing applications to leverage large
       numbers of parallel threads and scale to any number of parallel processor cores,
       transparently to the application.
          In these scalable programming models, the programmer writes code for a single
       thread, and the GPU runs myriad thread instances in parallel. Programs thus scale
       transparently over a wide range of hardware parallelism. This simple paradigm
       arose from graphics APIs and shading languages that describe how to shade one
                                                                            B.3    Programming GPUs                                  B-13

vertex or one pixel. It has remained an effective paradigm as GPUs have rapidly
increased their parallelism and performance since the late 1990s.
   This section briefly describes programming GPUs for real-time graphics
applications using graphics APIs and programming languages. It then describes
programming GPUs for visual computing and general parallel computing
applications using the C language and the CUDA programming model.

Programming Real-Time Graphics
APIs have played an important role in the rapid, successful development of GPUs
and processors. There are two primary standard graphics APIs: OpenGL and                                     OpenGL An open-
Direct3D, one of the Microsoft DirectX multimedia programming interfaces.                                    standard graphics API.
OpenGL, an open standard, was originally proposed and defined by Silicon                                     Direct3D A graphics
Graphics Incorporated. The ongoing development and extension of the OpenGL                                   API defined by Microsoft
standard [Segal and Akeley, 2006; Kessenich, 2006] is managed by Khronos, an                                 and partners.
industry consortium. Direct3D [Blythe, 2006], a de facto standard, is defined
and evolved forward by Microsoft and partners. OpenGL and Direct3D are
similarly structured, and continue to evolve rapidly with GPU hardware advances.
They define a logical graphics processing pipeline that is mapped onto the GPU
hardware and processors, along with programming models and languages for the
programmable pipeline stages.

Logical Graphics Pipeline
Figure B.3.1 illustrates the Direct3D 10 logical graphics pipeline. OpenGL has a
similar graphics pipeline structure. The API and logical pipeline provide a streaming
dataflow infrastructure and plumbing for the programmable shader stages, shown in
blue. The 3D application sends the GPU a sequence of vertices grouped into geometric
primitives—points, lines, triangles, and polygons. The input assembler collects
vertices and primitives. The vertex shader program executes per-vertex processing,

           Input               Vertex             Geometry               Setup &             Pixel            Raster Operations/
         Assembler             Shader              Shader               Rasterizer          Shader             Output Merger

                                                                   Stream
                            Sampler            Sampler                                  Sampler
                                                                    Out
                                                                              GPU

       Vertex                                                      Stream                                     Depth        Render
                            Texture             Texture                                  Texture
       Buffer                                                      Buffer                                    Z-Buffer      Target

             Index Buffer          Constant             Constant                                Constant             Stencil
                                                                            Memory

FIGURE B.3.1 Direct3D 10 graphics pipeline. Each logical pipeline stage maps to GPU hardware or to a GPU processor.
Programmable shader stages are blue, fixed-function blocks are white, and memory objects are gray. Each stage processes a vertex, geometric
primitive, or pixel in a streaming dataflow fashion.
B-14                          Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                              including transforming the vertex 3D position into a screen position and lighting the
                              vertex to determine its color. The geometry shader program executes per-primitive
                              processing and can add or drop primitives. The setup and rasterizer unit generates
                              pixel fragments (fragments are potential contributions to pixels) that are covered by
                              a geometric primitive. The pixel shader program performs per-fragment processing,
                              including interpolating per-fragment parameters, texturing, and coloring. Pixel
                              shaders make extensive use of sampled and filtered lookups into large 1D, 2D, or
texture A 1D, 2D, or          3D arrays called textures, using interpolated floating-point coordinates. Shaders use
3D array that supports        texture accesses for maps, functions, decals, images, and data. The raster operations
sampled and filtered          processing (or output merger) stage performs Z-buffer depth testing and stencil
lookups with interpolated     testing, which may discard a hidden pixel fragment or replace the pixel’s depth with
coordinates.
                              the fragment’s depth, and performs a color blending operation that combines the
                              fragment color with the pixel color and writes the pixel with the blended color.
                                 The graphics API and graphics pipeline provide input, output, memory objects,
                              and infrastructure for the shader programs that process each vertex, primitive, and
                              pixel fragment.

                              Graphics Shader Programs
shader A program that         Real-time graphics applications use many different shader programs to model
operates on graphics data     how light interacts with different materials and to render complex lighting and
such as a vertex or a pixel   shadows. Shading languages are based on a dataflow or streaming programming
fragment.                     model that corresponds with the logical graphics pipeline. Vertex shader programs
                              map the position of triangle vertices onto the screen, altering their position, color,
shading language              or orientation. Typically a vertex shader thread inputs a floating-point (x, y, z, w)
A graphics rendering          vertex position and computes a floating-point (x, y, z) screen position. Geometry
language, usually having      shader programs operate on geometric primitives (such as lines and triangles)
a dataflow or streaming       defined by multiple vertices, changing them or generating additional primitives.
programming model.            Pixel fragment shaders each “shade” one pixel, computing a floating-point red,
                              green, blue, alpha (RGBA) color contribution to the rendered image at its pixel
                              sample (x, y) image position. Shaders (and GPUs) use floating-point arithmetic
                              for all pixel color calculations to eliminate visible artifacts while computing the
                              extreme range of pixel contribution values encountered while rendering scenes with
                              complex lighting, shadows, and high dynamic range. For all three types of graphics
                              shaders, many program instances can be run in parallel, as independent parallel
                              threads, because each works on independent data, produces independent results,
                              and has no side effects. Independent vertices, primitives, and pixels further enable
                              the same graphics program to run on differently sized GPUs that process different
                              numbers of vertices, primitives, and pixels in parallel. Graphics programs thus scale
                              transparently to GPUs with different amounts of parallelism and performance.
                                 Users program all three logical graphics threads with a common targeted high-
                              level language. HLSL (high-level shading language) and Cg (C for graphics) are
                              commonly used. They have C-like syntax and a rich set of library functions for
                              matrix operations, trigonometry, interpolation, and texture access and filtering,
                              but are far from general computing languages: they currently lack general memory
                                                            B.3   Programming GPUs     B-15

access, pointers, file I/O, and recursion. HLSL and Cg assume that programs live
within a logical graphics pipeline, and thus I/O is implicit. For example, a pixel
fragment shader may expect the geometric normal and multiple texture coordinates
to have been interpolated from vertex values by upstream fixed-function stages and
can simply assign a value to the COLOR output parameter to pass it downstream to
be blended with a pixel at an implied (x, y) position.
   The GPU hardware creates a new independent thread to execute a vertex,
geometry, or pixel shader program for every vertex, every primitive, and every pixel
fragment. In video games, the bulk of threads execute pixel shader programs, as
there are typically 10 to 20 times more pixel fragments than vertices, and complex
lighting and shadows require even larger ratios of pixel to vertex shader threads.
The graphics shader programming model drove the GPU architecture to efficiently
execute thousands of independent fine-grained threads on many parallel processor
cores.

Pixel Shader Example
Consider the following Cg pixel shader program that implements the “environment
mapping” rendering technique. For each pixel thread, this shader is passed five
parameters, including 2D floating-point texture image coordinates needed to
sample the surface color, and a 3D floating-point vector giving the refection of
the view direction off the surface. The other three “uniform” parameters do not
vary from one pixel instance (thread) to the next. The shader looks up color in
two texture images: a 2D texture access for the surface color, and a 3D texture
access into a cube map (six images corresponding to the faces of a cube) to obtain
the external world color corresponding to the refection direction. Then the final
four-component (red, green, blue, alpha) floating-point color is computed using a
weighted average called a “lerp” or linear interpolation function.

void refection(
   float2 	              texCoord 	      : TEXCOORD0,
   float3 	              refection_dir 	 : TEXCOORD1,
   out float4 	          color 	         : COLOR,
   uniform float 	       shiny,
   uniform sampler2D 	   surfaceMap,
   uniform samplerCUBE 	 envMap)
{
// Fetch the surface color from a texture
   float4 surfaceColor = tex2D(surfaceMap, texCoord);

// Fetch reflected color by sampling a cube map
   float4 reflectedColor = texCUBE(environmentMap, refection_dir);

// Output is weighted average of the two colors
   color = lerp(surfaceColor, refectedColor, shiny);
}
B-16   Appendix B      Graphics and Computing GPUs

          Although this shader program is only three lines long, it activates a lot of GPU
       hardware. For each texture fetch, the GPU texture subsystem makes multiple
       memory accesses to sample image colors in the vicinity of the sampling coordinates,
       and then interpolates the final result with floating-point filtering arithmetic. The
       multithreaded GPU executes thousands of these lightweight Cg pixel shader threads
       in parallel, deeply interleaving them to hide texture fetch and memory latency.
          Cg focuses the programmer’s view to a single vertex or primitive or pixel,
       which the GPU implements as a single thread; the shader program transparently
       scales to exploit thread parallelism on the available processors. Being application-
       specific, Cg provides a rich set of useful data types, library functions, and language
       constructs to express diverse rendering techniques.
          Figure B.3.2 shows skin rendered by a fragment pixel shader. Real skin appears
       quite different from flesh-color paint because light bounces around a lot before
       re-emerging. In this complex shader, three separate skin layers, each with unique
       subsurface scattering behavior, are modeled to give the skin a visual depth and
       translucency. Scattering can be modeled by a blurring convolution in a fattened
       “texture” space, with red being blurred more than green, and blue blurred less. The
       compiled Cg shader executes 1400 instructions to compute the color of one skin pixel.

       FIGURE B.3.2 GPU-rendered image. To give the skin visual depth and translucency, the pixel shader
       program models three separate skin layers, each with unique subsurface scattering behavior. It executes 1400
       instructions to render the red, green, blue, and alpha color components of each skin pixel fragment.
                                                               B.3   Programming GPUs     B-17

   As GPUs have evolved superior floating-point performance and very high
streaming memory bandwidth for real-time graphics, they have attracted highly
parallel applications beyond traditional graphics. At first, access to this power
was available only by couching an application as a graphics-rendering algorithm,
but this GPGPU approach was often awkward and limiting. More recently, the
CUDA programming model has provided a far easier way to exploit the scalable
high-performance floating-point and memory bandwidth of GPUs with the C
programming language.

Programming Parallel Computing Applications
CUDA, Brook, and CAL are programming interfaces for GPUs that are focused
on data parallel computation rather than on graphics. CAL (Compute Abstraction
Layer) is a low-level assembler language interface for AMD GPUs. Brook is a
streaming language adapted for GPUs by Buck et al. [2004]. CUDA, developed
by NVIDIA [2007], is an extension to the C and C+ + languages for scalable
parallel programming of manycore GPUs and multicore CPUs. The CUDA
programming model is described below, adapted from an article by Nickolls et al.
[2008].
   With the new model the GPU excels in data parallel and throughput computing,
executing high-performance computing applications as well as graphics applications.

Data Parallel Problem Decomposition
To map large computing problems effectively to a highly parallel processing
architecture, the programmer or compiler decomposes the problem into many
small problems that can be solved in parallel. For example, the programmer
partitions a large result data array into blocks and further partitions each block into
elements, such that the result blocks can be computed independently in parallel,
and the elements within each block are computed in parallel. Figure B.3.3 shows
a decomposition of a result data array into a 3 × 2 grid of blocks, where each
block is further decomposed into a 5 × 3 array of elements. The two-level parallel
decomposition maps naturally to the GPU architecture: parallel multiprocessors
compute result blocks, and parallel threads compute result elements.
   The programmer writes a program that computes a sequence of result data
grids, partitioning each result grid into coarse-grained result blocks that can be
computed independently in parallel. T0he program computes each result block
with an array of fine-grained parallel threads, partitioning the work among threads
so that each computes one or more result elements.

Scalable Parallel Programming with CUDA
The CUDA scalable parallel programming model extends the C and C++
languages to exploit large degrees of parallelism for general applications on highly
parallel multiprocessors, particularly GPUs. Early experience with CUDA shows
that many sophisticated programs can be readily expressed with a few easily
understood abstractions. Since NVIDIA released CUDA in 2007, developers have
B-18   Appendix B     Graphics and Computing GPUs

                         Sequence

                               Step 1:                  Result Data Grid 1
                                                   Block      Block     Block
                                                   (0,0)      (1, 0)    (2, 0)
                                                   Block      Block     Block
                                                   (0,1)      (1, 1)    (2, 1)

                               Step 2:                  Result Data Grid 2

                                         Block (1, 1)

                                         Elem Elem Elem Elem Elem
                                         (0, 0) (1, 0) (2, 0) (3, 0) (4, 0)
                                         Elem Elem Elem Elem Elem
                                         (0, 1) (1, 1) (2, 1) (3, 1) (4, 1)
                                         Elem Elem Elem Elem Elem
                                         (0, 2) (1, 2) (2, 2) (3, 2) (4, 2)

       FIGURE B.3.3    Decomposing result data into a grid of blocks of elements to be computed
       in parallel.

       rapidly developed scalable parallel programs for a wide range of applications,
       including seismic data processing, computational chemistry, linear algebra, sparse
       matrix solvers, sorting, searching, physics models, and visual computing. These
       applications scale transparently to hundreds of processor cores and thousands of
       concurrent threads. NVIDIA GPUs with the Tesla unified graphics and computing
       architecture (described in Sections B.4 and B.7) run CUDA C programs, and are
       widely available in laptops, PCs, workstations, and servers. The CUDA model is
       also applicable to other shared memory parallel processing architectures, including
       multicore CPUs.
          CUDA provides three key abstractions—a hierarchy of thread groups, shared
       memories, and barrier synchronization—that provide a clear parallel structure to
       conventional C code for one thread of the hierarchy. Multiple levels of threads,
       memory, and synchronization provide fine-grained data parallelism and thread
       parallelism, nested within coarse-grained data parallelism and task parallelism. The
       abstractions guide the programmer to partition the problem into coarse subproblems
       that can be solved independently in parallel, and then into finer pieces that can be
       solved in parallel. The programming model scales transparently to large numbers of
       processor cores: a compiled CUDA program executes on any number of processors,
       and only the runtime system needs to know the physical processor count.
                                                               B.3   Programming GPUs                             B-19

The CUDA Paradigm
CUDA is a minimal extension of the C and C++ programming languages. The
programmer writes a serial program that calls parallel kernels, which may be simple        kernel A program or
functions or full programs. A kernel executes in parallel across a set of parallel         function for one thread,
threads. The programmer organizes these threads into a hierarchy of thread blocks          designed to be executed
                                                                                           by many threads.
and grids of thread blocks. A thread block is a set of concurrent threads that can
cooperate among themselves through barrier synchronization and through shared              thread block A set
access to a memory space private to the block. A grid is a set of thread blocks that       of concurrent threads
may each be executed independently and thus may execute in parallel.                       that execute the same
   When invoking a kernel, the programmer specifies the number of threads per              thread program and may
block and the number of blocks comprising the grid. Each thread is given a unique          cooperate to compute a
                                                                                           result.
thread ID number threadIdx within its thread block, numbered 0, 1, 2, …,
blockDim-1, and each thread block is given a unique block ID number blockIdx               grid A set of thread
within its grid. CUDA supports thread blocks containing up to 512 threads. For             blocks that execute the
convenience, thread blocks and grids may have one, two, or three dimensions,               same kernel program.
accessed via .x, .y, and .z index fields.
   As a very simple example of parallel programming, suppose that we are given
two vectors x and y of n floating-point numbers each and that we wish to compute
the result of y = ax + y for some scalar value a. This is the so-called SAXPY kernel
defined by the BLAS linear algebra library. Figure B.3.4 shows C code for performing
this computation on both a serial processor and in parallel using CUDA.
   The __global__ declaration specifier indicates that the procedure is a kernel
entry point. CUDA programs launch parallel kernels with the extended function
call syntax:
      kernel<<<dimGrid, dimBlock>>>(… parameter list …);
where dimGrid and dimBlock are three-element vectors of type dim3 that specify
the dimensions of the grid in blocks and the dimensions of the blocks in threads,
respectively. Unspecified dimensions default to one.
   In Figure B.3.4, we launch a grid of n threads that assigns one thread to each
element of the vectors and puts 256 threads in each block. Each individual thread
computes an element index from its thread and block IDs and then performs the
desired calculation on the corresponding vector elements. Comparing the serial and
parallel versions of this code, we see that they are strikingly similar. This represents
a fairly common pattern. The serial code consists of a loop where each iteration is
independent of all the others. Such loops can be mechanically transformed into
parallel kernels: each loop iteration becomes an independent thread. By assigning
a single thread to each output element, we avoid the need for any synchronization
among threads when writing results to memory.
   The text of a CUDA kernel is simply a C function for one sequential thread.
Thus, it is generally straightforward to write and is typically simpler than writing
parallel code for vector operations. Parallelism is determined clearly and explicitly
by specifying the dimensions of a grid and its thread blocks when launching a
kernel.
B-20                         Appendix B      Graphics and Computing GPUs

                             Computing y = ax + y with a serial loop:

                             void saxpy_serial(int n, float alpha, float *x, float *y)
                             {
                                  for(int i = 0; i<n; ++i)
                                       y[i] = alpha*x[i] + y[i];
                             }
                             // Invoke serial SAXPY kernel
                             saxpy_serial(n, 2.0, x, y);

                             Computing y = ax + y in parallel using CUDA:

                             __global__
                             void saxpy_parallel(int n, float alpha, float *x, float *y)
                             {
                                  int i = blockIdx.x*blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

                                      if( i<n ) y[i] = alpha*x[i] + y[i];
                             }

                             // Invoke parallel SAXPY kernel (256 threads per block)
                             int nblocks = (n + 255) / 256;
                             saxpy_parallel<<<nblocks, 256>>>(n, 2.0, x, y);

                             FIGURE B.3.4 Sequential code (top) in C versus parallel code (bottom) in CUDA for SAXPY
                             (see Chapter 6). CUDA parallel threads replace the C serial loop—each thread computes the same result
                             as one loop iteration. The parallel code computes n results with n threads organized in blocks of 256 threads.

                                 Parallel execution and thread management is automatic. All thread creation,
                             scheduling, and termination is handled for the programmer by the underlying
                             system. Indeed, a Tesla architecture GPU performs all thread management directly
                             in hardware. The threads of a block execute concurrently and may synchronize
synchronization              at a synchronization barrier by calling the __syncthreads() intrinsic. This
barrier Threads wait at      guarantees that no thread in the block can proceed until all threads in the block
a synchronization barrier    have reached the barrier. After passing the barrier, these threads are also guaranteed
until all threads in the     to see all writes to memory performed by threads in the block before the barrier.
thread block arrive at the
                             Thus, threads in a block may communicate with each other by writing and reading
barrier.
                             per-block shared memory at a synchronization barrier.
                                 Since threads in a block may share memory and synchronize via barriers, they
                             will reside together on the same physical processor or multiprocessor. The number
                             of thread blocks can, however, greatly exceed the number of processors. The CUDA
                             thread programming model virtualizes the processors and gives the programmer the
                             flexibility to parallelize at whatever granularity is most convenient. Virtualization
                                                               B.3   Programming GPUs                               B-21

into threads and thread blocks allows intuitive problem decompositions, as the
number of blocks can be dictated by the size of the data being processed rather than
by the number of processors in the system. It also allows the same CUDA program
to scale to widely varying numbers of processor cores.
    To manage this processing element virtualization and provide scalability, CUDA
requires that thread blocks be able to execute independently. It must be possible to
execute blocks in any order, in parallel or in series. Different blocks have no means of
direct communication, although they may coordinate their activities using atomic           atomic memory
memory operations on the global memory visible to all threads—by atomically                operation A memory
incrementing queue pointers, for example. This independence requirement allows             read, modify, write
thread blocks to be scheduled in any order across any number of cores, making              operation sequence that
                                                                                           completes without any
the CUDA model scalable across an arbitrary number of cores as well as across a            intervening access.
variety of parallel architectures. It also helps to avoid the possibility of deadlock.
An application may execute multiple grids either independently or dependently.
Independent grids may execute concurrently, given sufficient hardware resources.
Dependent grids execute sequentially, with an implicit interkernel barrier between
them, thus guaranteeing that all blocks of the first grid complete before any block
of the second, dependent grid begins.
    Threads may access data from multiple memory spaces during their execution.
Each thread has a private local memory. CUDA uses local memory for thread-                 global memory Per-
private variables that do not fit in the thread’s registers, as well as for stack frames   application memory
and register spilling. Each thread block has a shared memory, visible to all threads       shared by all threads.
of the block, which has the same lifetime as the block. Finally, all threads have          shared memory Per-
access to the same global memory. Programs declare variables in shared and                 block memory shared by
global memory with the __shared__ and __device__ type qualifers. On a                      all threads of the block.
Tesla architecture GPU, these memory spaces correspond to physically separate
                                                                                           local memory Per-
memories: per-block shared memory is a low-latency on-chip RAM, while global               thread local memory
memory resides in the fast DRAM on the graphics board.                                     private to the thread.
    Shared memory is expected to be a low-latency memory near each processor,
much like an L1 cache. It can therefore provide high-performance communication
and data sharing among the threads of a thread block. Since it has the same lifetime
as its corresponding thread block, kernel code will typically initialize data in shared
variables, compute using shared variables, and copy shared memory results to
global memory. Thread blocks of sequentially dependent grids communicate via
global memory, using it to read input and write results.
    Figure B.3.5 shows diagrams of the nested levels of threads, thread blocks,
and grids of thread blocks. It further shows the corresponding levels of memory
sharing: local, shared, and global memories for per-thread, per-thread-block, and
per-application data sharing.
    A program manages the global memory space visible to kernels through calls
to the CUDA runtime, such as cudaMalloc() and cudaFree(). Kernels may
execute on a physically separate device, as is the case when running kernels on
the GPU. Consequently, the application must use cudaMemcpy() to copy data
between the allocated space and the host system memory.
B-22                        Appendix B      Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                     Thread

                                                   per-Thread Local Memory

                                  Thread Block

                                                            per-Block
                                                          Shared Memory

                                     Grid 0                                                                           Sequence

                                                                       ...

                                               Inter-Grid Synchronization                           Global Memory
                                     Grid 1

                                                                       ...

                            FIGURE B.3.5 Nested granularity levels—thread, thread block, and grid—have
                            corresponding memory sharing levels—local, shared, and global. Per-thread local memory is
                            private to the thread. Per-block shared memory is shared by all threads of the block. Per-application global
                            memory is shared by all threads.

single-program                  The CUDA programming model is similar in style to the familiar single-
multiple data
                            program multiple data (SPMD) model—it expresses parallelism explicitly, and
(SPMD) A style of
parallel programming        each kernel executes on a fixed number of threads. However, CUDA is more flexible
model in which all          than most realizations of SPMD, because each kernel call dynamically creates a
threads execute the same    new grid with the right number of thread blocks and threads for that application
program. SPMD threads       step. The programmer can use a convenient degree of parallelism for each kernel,
typically coordinate with   rather than having to design all phases of the computation to use the same number
barrier synchronization.    of threads. Figure B.3.6 shows an example of an SPMD-like CUDA code sequence.
                            It first instantiates kernelF on a 2D grid of 3 × 2 blocks where each 2D thread
                            block consists of 5 × 3 threads. It then instantiates kernelG on a 1D grid of four
                            1D thread blocks with six threads each. Because kernelG depends on the results
                            of kernelF, they are separated by an interkernel synchronization barrier.
                                The concurrent threads of a thread block express fine-grained data parallelism and
                            thread parallelism. The independent thread blocks of a grid express coarse-grained
                            data parallelism. Independent grids express coarse-grained task parallelism. A
                            kernel is simply C code for one thread of the hierarchy.
                                                                                      B.3    Programming GPUs            B-23

 Sequence                          kernelF 2D Grid is 3         2 thread blocks; each block is 5             3 threads

                                                                           Block 0, 0       Block 1, 0      Block 2, 0

 kernelF<<<(3, 2), (5, 3)>>>(params);
                                                                           Block 0, 1       Block 1, 1      Block 2, 1

                                                                                        Block 1, 1
                                       Thread 0, 0      Thread 1, 0   Thread 2, 0     Thread 3, 0     Thread 4, 0

                                       Thread 0, 1      Thread 1, 1   Thread 2, 1     Thread 3, 1     Thread 4, 1

                                       Thread 0, 2      Thread 1, 2   Thread 2, 2     Thread 3, 2     Thread 4, 2

                              Interkernel Synchronization Barrier

                             kernelG 1D Grid is 4 thread blocks; each block is 6 threads

                                                            Block 0        Block 1          Block 2          Block 3

 kernelG<<<4, 6>>>(params);

                                                                                      Block 2
                                       Thread 0      Thread 1   Thread 2   Thread 3     Thread 4      Thread 5

FIGURE B.3.6 Sequence of kernel F instantiated on a 2D grid of 2D thread blocks, an interkernel
synchronization barrier, followed by kernel G on a 1D grid of 1D thread blocks.

Restrictions
For efficiency, and to simplify its implementation, the CUDA programming model
has some restrictions. Threads and thread blocks may only be created by invoking
a parallel kernel, not from within a parallel kernel. Together with the required
independence of thread blocks, this makes it possible to execute CUDA programs
with a simple scheduler that introduces minimal runtime overhead. In fact, the
Tesla GPU architecture implements hardware management and scheduling of
threads and thread blocks.
B-24   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

           Task parallelism can be expressed at the thread block level but is difficult to
       express within a thread block because thread synchronization barriers operate on
       all the threads of the block. To enable CUDA programs to run on any number of
       processors, dependencies among thread blocks within the same kernel grid are not
       allowed—blocks must execute independently. Since CUDA requires that thread
       blocks be independent and allows blocks to be executed in any order, combining
       results generated by multiple blocks must in general be done by launching a second
       kernel on a new grid of thread blocks (although thread blocks may coordinate their
       activities using atomic memory operations on the global memory visible to all
       threads—by atomically incrementing queue pointers, for example).
           Recursive function calls are not currently allowed in CUDA kernels. Recursion
       is unattractive in a massively parallel kernel, because providing stack space for the
       tens of thousands of threads that may be active would require substantial amounts
       of memory. Serial algorithms that are normally expressed using recursion, such as
       quicksort, are typically best implemented using nested data parallelism rather than
       explicit recursion.
           To support a heterogeneous system architecture combining a CPU and a
       GPU, each with its own memory system, CUDA programs must copy data and
       results between host memory and device memory. The overhead of CPU–GPU
       interaction and data transfers is minimized by using DMA block transfer engines
       and fast interconnects. Compute-intensive problems large enough to need a GPU
       performance boost amortize the overhead better than small problems.

       Implications for Architecture
       The parallel programming models for graphics and computing have driven
       GPU architecture to be different than CPU architecture. The key aspects of GPU
       programs driving GPU processor architecture are:
         ■   Extensive use of fine-grained data parallelism: Shader programs describe how
             to process a single pixel or vertex, and CUDA programs describe how to
             compute an individual result.
         ■   Highly threaded programming model: A shader thread program processes a
             single pixel or vertex, and a CUDA thread program may generate a single
             result. A GPU must create and execute millions of such thread programs per
             frame, at 60 frames per second.
         ■   Scalability: A program must automatically increase its performance when
             provided with additional processors, without recompiling.
         ■   Intensive floating-point (or integer) computation.
         ■   Support of high-throughput computations.
                                       B.4 Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture    B-25

  B.4          Multithreaded Multiprocessor
               Architecture

To address different market segments, GPUs implement scalable numbers of multi-
processors—in fact, GPUs are multiprocessors composed of multiprocessors.
Furthermore, each multiprocessor is highly multithreaded to execute many fine-
grained vertex and pixel shader threads efficiently. A quality basic GPU has two to
four multiprocessors, while a gaming enthusiast’s GPU or computing platform has
dozens of them. This section looks at the architecture of one such multithreaded
multiprocessor, a simplified version of the NVIDIA Tesla streaming multiprocessor
(SM) described in Section B.7.
   Why use a multiprocessor, rather than several independent processors? The
parallelism within each multiprocessor provides localized high performance and
supports extensive multithreading for the fine-grained parallel programming
models described in Section B.3. The individual threads of a thread block execute
together within a multiprocessor to share data. The multithreaded multiprocessor
design we describe here has eight scalar processor cores in a tightly coupled
architecture, and executes up to 512 threads (the SM described in Section B.7
executes up to 768 threads). For area and power efficiency, the multiprocessor shares
large complex units among the eight processor cores, including the instruction
cache, the multithreaded instruction unit, and the shared memory RAM.

Massive Multithreading
GPU processors are highly multithreaded to achieve several goals:
  ■   Cover the latency of memory loads and texture fetches from DRAM
  ■   Support fine-grained parallel graphics shader programming models
  ■   Support fine-grained parallel computing programming models
  ■   Virtualize the physical processors as threads and thread blocks to provide
      transparent scalability
  ■   Simplify the parallel programming model to writing a serial program for one
      thread
   Memory and texture fetch latency can require hundreds of processor clocks,
because GPUs typically have small streaming caches rather than large working-set
caches like CPUs. A fetch request generally requires a full DRAM access latency
plus interconnect and buffering latency. Multithreading helps cover the latency with
useful computing—while one thread is waiting for a load or texture fetch to complete,
the processor can execute another thread. The fine-grained parallel programming
models provide literally thousands of independent threads that can keep many
processors busy despite the long memory latency seen by individual threads.
B-26   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          A graphics vertex or pixel shader program is a program for a single thread that
       processes a vertex or a pixel. Similarly, a CUDA program is a C program for a
       single thread that computes a result. Graphics and computing programs instantiate
       many parallel threads to render complex images and compute large result arrays.
       To dynamically balance shifting vertex and pixel shader thread workloads, each
       multiprocessor concurrently executes multiple different thread programs and
       different types of shader programs.
          To support the independent vertex, primitive, and pixel programming model of
       graphics shading languages and the single-thread programming model of CUDA
       C/C+ +, each GPU thread has its own private registers, private per-thread memory,
       program counter, and thread execution state, and can execute an independent code
       path. To efficiently execute hundreds of concurrent lightweight threads, the GPU
       multiprocessor is hardware multithreaded—it manages and executes hundreds
       of concurrent threads in hardware without scheduling overhead. Concurrent
       threads within thread blocks can synchronize at a barrier with a single instruction.
       Lightweight thread creation, zero-overhead thread scheduling, and fast barrier
       synchronization efficiently support very fine-grained parallelism.

       Multiprocessor Architecture
       A unified graphics and computing multiprocessor executes vertex, geometry, and
       pixel fragment shader programs, and parallel computing programs. As Figure B.4.1
       shows, the example multiprocessor consists of eight scalar processor (SP) cores each
       with a large multithreaded register file (RF), two special function units (SFUs), a
       multithreaded instruction unit, an instruction cache, a read-only constant cache,
       and a shared memory.
          The 16 KB shared memory holds graphics data buffers and shared computing
       data. CUDA variables declared as __shared__ reside in the shared memory. To
       map the logical graphics pipeline workload through the multiprocessor multiple
       times, as shown in Section B.2, vertex, geometry, and pixel threads have independent
       input and output buffers, and workloads arrive and depart independently of thread
       execution.
          Each SP core contains scalar integer and floating-point arithmetic units that
       execute most instructions. The SP is hardware multithreaded, supporting up to
       64 threads. Each pipelined SP core executes one scalar instruction per thread per
       clock, which ranges from 1.2 GHz to 1.6 GHz in different GPU products. Each SP
       core has a large RF of 1024 general-purpose 32-bit registers, partitioned among its
       assigned threads. Programs declare their register demand, typically 16 to 64 scalar
       32-bit registers per thread. The SP can concurrently run many threads that use
       a few registers or fewer threads that use more registers. The compiler optimizes
       register allocation to balance the cost of spilling registers versus the cost of fewer
       threads. Pixel shader programs often use 16 or fewer registers, enabling each SP to
       run up to 64 pixel shader threads to cover long-latency texture fetches. Compiled
       CUDA programs often need 32 registers per thread, limiting each SP to 32 threads,
       which limits such a kernel program to 256 threads per thread block on this example
       multiprocessor, rather than its maximum of 512 threads.
                                                   B.4 Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture                                        B-27

                                     Multithreaded Multiprocessor

                                Instruction Cache

                                                                                            Multiprocessor
                        Multithreaded Instruction Unit
                                                                                             Controller

                                Constant Cache
                                                                                            Work Interface

          SP       SP      SP      SP      SP       SP     SP      SP
 SFU                                                                       SFU

          RF       RF      RF      RF      RF       RF     RF      RF
                                                                                                 Input
                                                                                               Interface
                              Interconnection Network
                                                                                                Output
                                                                                               Interface

                                                                                                Texture
                                Shared Memory                                                  Interface

                                                                                                Memory
                                                                                               Interface

FIGURE B.4.1 Multithreaded multiprocessor with eight scalar processor (SP) cores. The
eight SP cores each have a large multithreaded register file (RF) and share an instruction cache, multithreaded
instruction issue unit, constant cache, two special function units (SFUs), interconnection network, and a
multibank shared memory.

   The pipelined SFUs execute thread instructions that compute special functions
and interpolate pixel attributes from primitive vertex attributes. These instructions
can execute concurrently with instructions on the SPs. The SFU is described later.
   The multiprocessor executes texture fetch instructions on the texture unit via the
texture interface, and uses the memory interface for external memory load, store,
and atomic access instructions. These instructions can execute concurrently with
instructions on the SPs. Shared memory access uses a low-latency interconnection
network between the SP processors and the shared memory banks.                                                    single-instruction
                                                                                                                  multiple-thread
Single-Instruction Multiple-Thread (SIMT)                                                                         (SIMT) A processor
                                                                                                                  architecture that applies
To manage and execute hundreds of threads running several different programs                                      one instruction to
efficiently, the multiprocessor employs a single-instruction multiple-thread                                      multiple independent
(SIMT) architecture. It creates, manages, schedules, and executes concurrent threads                              threads in parallel.
in groups of parallel threads called warps. The term warp originates from weaving,                                warp The set of parallel
the first parallel thread technology. The photograph in Figure B.4.2 shows a warp of                              threads that execute the
parallel threads emerging from a loom. This example multiprocessor uses a SIMT                                    same instruction together
warp size of 32 threads, executing four threads in each of the eight SP cores over four                           in a SIMT architecture.
B-28   Appendix B     Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                                                               Photo: Judy Schoonmaker
                                                  SIMT multithreaded
                                                 instruction scheduler

                                    time
                                                 warp 8 instruction 11

                                                 warp 1 instruction 42

                                                 warp 3 instruction 95

                                                 warp 8 instruction 12

                                                 warp 3 instruction 96

                                                 warp 1 instruction 43

       FIGURE B.4.2 SIMT multithreaded warp scheduling. The scheduler selects a ready warp and issues
       an instruction synchronously to the parallel threads composing the warp. Because warps are independent,
       the scheduler may select a different warp each time.

       clocks. The Tesla SM multiprocessor described in Section B.7 also uses a warp size
       of 32 parallel threads, executing four threads per SP core for efficiency on plentiful
       pixel threads and computing threads. Thread blocks consist of one or more warps.
          This example SIMT multiprocessor manages a pool of 16 warps, a total of 512
       threads. Individual parallel threads composing a warp are the same type and start
       together at the same program address, but are otherwise free to branch and execute
       independently. At each instruction issue time, the SIMT multithreaded instruction
       unit selects a warp that is ready to execute its next instruction, and then issues that
       instruction to the active threads of that warp. A SIMT instruction is broadcast
       synchronously to the active parallel threads of a warp; individual threads may be
       inactive due to independent branching or predication. In this multiprocessor, each
       SP scalar processor core executes an instruction for four individual threads of a
       warp using four clocks, reflecting the 4:1 ratio of warp threads to cores.
          SIMT processor architecture is akin to single-instruction multiple data (SIMD)
       design, which applies one instruction to multiple data lanes, but differs in that
       SIMT applies one instruction to multiple independent threads in parallel, not just
                                        B.4 Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture     B-29

to multiple data lanes. An instruction for a SIMD processor controls a vector of
multiple data lanes together, whereas an instruction for a SIMT processor controls
an individual thread, and the SIMT instruction unit issues an instruction to a warp
of independent parallel threads for efficiency. The SIMT processor finds data-level
parallelism among threads at runtime, analogous to the way a superscalar processor
finds instruction-level parallelism among instructions at runtime.
   A SIMT processor realizes full efficiency and performance when all threads
of a warp take the same execution path. If threads of a warp diverge via a data-
dependent conditional branch, execution serializes for each branch path taken, and
when all paths complete, the threads converge to the same execution path. For equal
length paths, a divergent if-else code block is 50% efficient. The multiprocessor
uses a branch synchronization stack to manage independent threads that diverge
and converge. Different warps execute independently at full speed regardless of
whether they are executing common or disjoint code paths. As a result, SIMT
GPUs are dramatically more efficient and flexible on branching code than earlier
GPUs, as their warps are much narrower than the SIMD width of prior GPUs.
   In contrast with SIMD vector architectures, SIMT enables programmers
to write thread-level parallel code for individual independent threads, as well
as data-parallel code for many coordinated threads. For program correctness,
the programmer can essentially ignore the SIMT execution attributes of warps;
however, substantial performance improvements can be realized by taking care that
the code seldom requires threads in a warp to diverge. In practice, this is analogous
to the role of cache lines in traditional codes: cache line size can be safely ignored
when designing for correctness but must be considered in the code structure when
designing for peak performance.

SIMT Warp Execution and Divergence
The SIMT approach of scheduling independent warps is more flexible than the
scheduling of previous GPU architectures. A warp comprises parallel threads of
the same type: vertex, geometry, pixel, or compute. The basic unit of pixel fragment
shader processing is the 2-by-2 pixel quad implemented as four pixel shader threads.
The multiprocessor controller packs the pixel quads into a warp. It similarly groups
vertices and primitives into warps, and packs computing threads into a warp. A
thread block comprises one or more warps. The SIMT design shares the instruction
fetch and issue unit efficiently across parallel threads of a warp, but requires a full
warp of active threads to get full performance efficiency.
   This unified multiprocessor schedules and executes multiple warp types
concurrently, allowing it to concurrently execute vertex and pixel warps. Its warp
scheduler operates at less than the processor clock rate, because there are four thread
lanes per processor core. During each scheduling cycle, it selects a warp to execute
a SIMT warp instruction, as shown in Figure B.4.2. An issued warp-instruction
executes as four sets of eight threads over four processor cycles of throughput.
The processor pipeline uses several clocks of latency to complete each instruction.
If the number of active warps times the clocks per warp exceeds the pipeline
B-30                     Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                         latency, the programmer can ignore the pipeline latency. For this multiprocessor, a
                         round-robin schedule of eight warps has a period of 32 cycles between successive
                         instructions for the same warp. If the program can keep 256 threads active per
                         multiprocessor, instruction latencies up to 32 cycles can be hidden from an
                         individual sequential thread. However, with few active warps, the processor pipeline
                         depth becomes visible and may cause processors to stall.
                            A challenging design problem is implementing zero-overhead warp scheduling
                         for a dynamic mix of different warp programs and program types. The instruction
                         scheduler must select a warp every four clocks to issue one instruction per clock
                         per thread, equivalent to an IPC of 1.0 per processor core. Because warps are
                         independent, the only dependences are among sequential instructions from the
                         same warp. The scheduler uses a register dependency scoreboard to qualify warps
                         whose active threads are ready to execute an instruction. It prioritizes all such ready
                         warps and selects the highest priority one for issue. Prioritization must consider
                         warp type, instruction type, and the desire to be fair to all active warps.

                         Managing Threads and Thread Blocks
                         The multiprocessor controller and instruction unit manage threads and thread
                         blocks. The controller accepts work requests and input data and arbitrates access
                         to shared resources, including the texture unit, memory access path, and I/O
                         paths. For graphics workloads, it creates and manages three types of graphics
                         threads concurrently: vertex, geometry, and pixel. Each of the graphics work
                         types has independent input and output paths. It accumulates and packs each of
                         these input work types into SIMT warps of parallel threads executing the same
                         thread program. It allocates a free warp, allocates registers for the warp threads,
                         and starts warp execution in the multiprocessor. Every program declares its per-
                         thread register demand; the controller starts a warp only when it can allocate the
                         requested register count for the warp threads. When all the threads of the warp
                         exit, the controller unpacks the results and frees the warp registers and resources.
cooperative thread
                            The controller creates cooperative thread arrays (CTAs) which implement
array (CTA) A set
of concurrent threads    CUDA thread blocks as one or more warps of parallel threads. It creates a CTA
that executes the same   when it can create all CTA warps and allocate all CTA resources. In addition to
thread program and may   threads and registers, a CTA requires allocating shared memory and barriers.
cooperate to compute     The program declares the required capacities, and the controller waits until it can
a result. A GPU CTA      allocate those amounts before launching the CTA. Then it creates CTA warps at the
implements a CUDA        warp scheduling rate, so that a CTA program starts executing immediately at full
thread block.
                         multiprocessor performance. The controller monitors when all threads of a CTA
                         have exited, and frees the CTA shared resources and its warp resources.

                         Thread Instructions
                         The SP thread processors execute scalar instructions for individual threads, unlike
                         earlier GPU vector instruction architectures, which executed four-component
                         vector instructions for each vertex or pixel shader program. Vertex programs
                                          B.4 Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture   B-31

generally compute (x, y, z, w) position vectors, while pixel shader programs compute
(red, green, blue, alpha) color vectors. However, shader programs are becoming
longer and more scalar, and it is increasingly difficult to fully occupy even two
components of a legacy GPU four-component vector architecture. In effect, the
SIMT architecture parallelizes across 32 independent pixel threads, rather than
parallelizing the four vector components within a pixel. CUDA C/C++ programs
have predominantly scalar code per thread. Previous GPUs employed vector
packing (e.g., combining subvectors of work to gain efficiency) but that complicated
the scheduling hardware as well as the compiler. Scalar instructions are simpler
and compiler-friendly. Texture instructions remain vector-based, taking a source
coordinate vector and returning a filtered color vector.
   To support multiple GPUs with different binary microinstruction formats, high-
level graphics and computing language compilers generate intermediate assembler-
level instructions (e.g., Direct3D vector instructions or PTX scalar instructions),
which are then optimized and translated to binary GPU microinstructions.
The NVIDIA PTX (parallel thread execution) instruction set definition [2007]
provides a stable target ISA for compilers, and provides compatibility over several
generations of GPUs with evolving binary microinstruction-set architectures. The
optimizer readily expands Direct3D vector instructions to multiple scalar binary
microinstructions. PTX scalar instructions translate nearly one to one with scalar
binary microinstructions, although some PTX instructions expand to multiple
binary microinstructions, and multiple PTX instructions may fold into one binary
microinstruction. Because the intermediate assembler-level instructions use virtual
registers, the optimizer analyzes data dependencies and allocates real registers. The
optimizer eliminates dead code, folds instructions together when feasible, and
optimizes SIMT branch diverge and converge points.

Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)
The thread ISA described here is a simplified version of the Tesla architecture
PTX ISA, a register-based scalar instruction set comprising floating-point, integer,
logical, conversion, special functions, flow control, memory access, and texture
operations. Figure B.4.3 lists the basic PTX GPU thread instructions; see the
NVIDIA PTX specification [2007] for details. The instruction format is:

      opcode.type d, a, b, c;

where d is the destination operand, a, b, c are source operands, and .type is
one of:
                       Type                                    .type Specifer
Untyped bits 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits              .b8, .b16, .b32, .b64
Unsigned integer 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits          .u8, .u16, .u32, .u64
Signed integer 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits            .s8, .s16, .s32, .s64
Floating-point 16, 32, and 64 bits               .f16, .f32, .f64
B-32                           Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                            Basic PTX GPU Thread Instructions

  Group         Instruction                   Example                           Meaning             Comments
             arithmetic .type = .s32, .u32, .f32, .s64, .u64, .f64
             add.type              add.f32 d, a, b                   d = a + b;
             sub.type              sub.f32 d, a, b                   d = a – b;
             mul.type              mul.f32 d, a, b                   d = a * b;
             mad.type              mad.f32 d, a, b, c                d = a * b + c;       multiply-add
             div.type              div.f32 d, a, b                   d = a / b;           multiple microinstructions
             rem.type              rem.u32 d, a, b                   d = a % b;           integer remainder
             abs.type              abs.f32 d, a                      d = |a|;
Arithmetic
             neg.type              neg.f32 d, a                      d = 0 - a;
             min.type              min.f32 d, a, b                   d = (a < b)? a:b;    floating selects non-NaN
             max.type              max.f32 d, a, b                   d = (a > b)? a:b;    floating selects non-NaN
             setp.cmp.type         setp.lt.f32 p, a, b               p = (a < b);         compare and set predicate
             numeric .cmp = eq, ne, lt, le, gt, ge; unordered cmp = equ, neu, ltu, leu, gtu, geu, num, nan
             mov.type            mov.b32 d, a                      d = a;               move
             selp.type           selp.f32 d, a, b, p               d = p? a: b;         select with predicate
             cvt.dtype.atype     cvt.f32.s32 d, a                  d = convert(a);      convert atype to dtype
             special .type = .f32 (some .f64)
             rcp.type            rcp.f32 d, a                      d = 1/a;             reciprocal
             sqrt.type           sqrt.f32 d, a                     d = sqrt(a);         square root
Special      rsqrt.type          rsqrt.f32 d, a                    d = 1/sqrt(a);       reciprocal square root
Function     sin.type            sin.f32 d, a                      d = sin(a);          sine
             cos.type            cos.f32 d, a                      d = cos(a);          cosine
             lg2.type            lg2.f32 d, a                      d = log(a)/log(2)    binary logarithm
             ex2.type            ex2.f32 d, a                      d = 2 ** a;          binary exponential
             logic. type = .pred, .b32, .b64
             and.type            and.b32 d, a, b                   d = a & b;
             or.type             or.b32 d, a, b                    d = a | b;
             xor.type            xor.b32 d, a, b                   d = a ^ b;
Logical
             not.type            not.b32 d, a, b                   d = ~a;              one’s complement
             cnot.type           cnot.b32 d, a, b                  d = (a==0)? 1:0;     C logical not
             shl.type            shl.b32 d, a, b                   d = a << b;          shift left
             shr.type            shr.s32 d, a, b                   d = a >> b;          shift right
             memory .space = .global, .shared, .local, .const; .type = .b8, .u8, .s8, .b16, .b32, .b64
             ld.space.type       ld.global.b32 d, [a+off]          d = *(a+off);        load from memory space
             st.space.type       st.shared.b32 [d+off], a          *(d+off) = a;        store to memory space
Memory
             tex.nd.dtyp.btype   tex.2d.v4.f32.f32 d, a, b         d = tex2d(a, b);     texture lookup
Access
             atom.spc.op.type    atom.global.add.u32 d,[a], b      atomic { d = *a;     atomic read-modify-write
                                 atom.global.cas.b32 d,[a], b, c     *a = op(*a, b); } operation
             atom .op = and, or, xor, add, min, max, exch, cas; .spc = .global; .type = .b32
             branch            @p bra target                      if (p) goto              conditional branch
                                                                  target;
Control      call              call (ret), func, (params)         ret = func(params); call function
Flow         ret               ret                                return;                  return from function call
             bar.sync          bar.sync d                         wait for threads         barrier synchronization
             exit              exit                               exit;                    terminate thread execution

FIGURE B.4.3 Basic PTX GPU thread instructions.
                                         B.4 Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture      B-33

   Source operands are scalar 32-bit or 64-bit values in registers, an immediate
value, or a constant; predicate operands are 1-bit Boolean values. Destinations are
registers, except for store to memory. Instructions are predicated by prefixing them
with @p or @!p, where p is a predicate register. Memory and texture instructions
transfer scalars or vectors of two to four components, up to 128 bits in total. PTX
instructions specify the behavior of one thread.
   The PTX arithmetic instructions operate on 32-bit and 64-bit floating-point,
signed integer, and unsigned integer types. Recent GPUs support 64-bit double-
precision floating-point; see Section B.6. On current GPUs, PTX 64-bit integer
and logical instructions are translated to two or more binary microinstructions
that perform 32-bit operations. The GPU special function instructions are limited
to 32-bit floating-point. The thread control flow instructions are conditional
branch, function call and return, thread exit, and bar.sync (barrier
synchronization). The conditional branch instruction @p bra target uses a
predicate register p (or !p) previously set by a compare and set predicate setp
instruction to determine whether the thread takes the branch or not. Other
instructions can also be predicated on a predicate register being true or false.

Memory Access Instructions
The tex instruction fetches and filters texture samples from 1D, 2D, and 3D
texture arrays in memory via the texture subsystem. Texture fetches generally use
interpolated floating-point coordinates to address a texture. Once a graphics pixel
shader thread computes its pixel fragment color, the raster operations processor
blends it with the pixel color at its assigned (x, y) pixel position and writes the final
color to memory.
    To support computing and C/C++ language needs, the Tesla PTX ISA
implements memory load/store instructions. It uses integer byte addressing with
register plus offset address arithmetic to facilitate conventional compiler code
optimizations. Memory load/store instructions are common in processors, but are
a significant new capability in the Tesla architecture GPUs, as prior GPUs provided
only the texture and pixel accesses required by the graphics APIs.
    For computing, the load/store instructions access three read/write memory
spaces that implement the corresponding CUDA memory spaces in Section B.3:
   ■   Local memory for per-thread private addressable temporary data
       (implemented in external DRAM)
   ■   Shared memory for low-latency access to data shared by cooperating threads
       in the same CTA/thread block (implemented in on-chip SRAM)
   ■   Global memory for large data sets shared by all threads of a computing
       application (implemented in external DRAM)
   The memory load/store instructions ld.global, st.global, ld.shared, st.
shared, ld.local, and st.local access the global, shared, and local memory
spaces. Computing programs use the fast barrier synchronization instruction bar.
sync to synchronize threads within a CTA/thread block that communicate with
each other via shared and global memory.
B-34   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          To improve memory bandwidth and reduce overhead, the local and global load/
       store instructions coalesce individual parallel thread requests from the same SIMT
       warp together into a single memory block request when the addresses fall in the
       same block and meet alignment criteria. Coalescing memory requests provides a
       significant performance boost over separate requests from individual threads. The
       multiprocessor’s large thread count, together with support for many outstanding
       load requests, helps cover load-to-use latency for local and global memory
       implemented in external DRAM.
          The latest Tesla architecture GPUs also provide efficient atomic memory operations
       on memory with the atom.op.u32 instructions, including integer operations add,
       min, max, and, or, xor, exchange, and cas (compare-and-swap) operations,
       facilitating parallel reductions and parallel data structure management.

       Barrier Synchronization for Thread Communication
       Fast barrier synchronization permits CUDA programs to communicate frequently
       via shared memory and global memory by simply calling __syncthreads(); as
       part of each interthread communication step. The synchronization intrinsic function
       generates a single bar.sync instruction. However, implementing fast barrier
       synchronization among up to 512 threads per CUDA thread block is a challenge.
          Grouping threads into SIMT warps of 32 threads reduces the synchronization
       difficulty by a factor of 32. Threads wait at a barrier in the SIMT thread scheduler so
       they do not consume any processor cycles while waiting. When a thread executes
       a bar.sync instruction, it increments the barrier’s thread arrival counter and the
       scheduler marks the thread as waiting at the barrier. Once all the CTA threads
       arrive, the barrier counter matches the expected terminal count, and the scheduler
       releases all the threads waiting at the barrier and resumes executing threads.

       Streaming Processor (SP)
       The multithreaded streaming processor (SP) core is the primary thread instruction
       processor in the multiprocessor. Its register file (RF) provides 1024 scalar 32-
       bit registers for up to 64 threads. It executes all the fundamental floating-point
       operations, including add.f32, mul.f32, mad.f32 (floating multiply-add), min.
       f32, max.f32, and setp.f32 (floating compare and set predicate). The floating-
       point add and multiply operations are compatible with the IEEE 754 standard
       for single-precision FP numbers, including not-a-number (NaN) and infinity
       values. The SP core also implements all of the 32-bit and 64-bit integer arithmetic,
       comparison, conversion, and logical PTX instructions shown in Figure B.4.3.
          The floating-point add and mul operations employ IEEE round-to-nearest-even
       as the default rounding mode. The mad.f32 floating-point multiply-add operation
       performs a multiplication with truncation, followed by an addition with round-
       to-nearest-even. The SP flushes input denormal operands to sign-preserved-zero.
       Results that underflow the target output exponent range are flushed to sign-
       preserved-zero after rounding.
                                       B.4 Multithreaded Multiprocessor Architecture    B-35

Special Function Unit (SFU)
Certain thread instructions can execute on the SFUs, concurrently with other
thread instructions executing on the SPs. The SFU implements the special function
instructions of Figure B.4.3, which compute 32-bit floating-point approximations
to reciprocal, reciprocal square root, and key transcendental functions. It also
implements 32-bit floating-point planar attribute interpolation for pixel shaders,
providing accurate interpolation of attributes such as color, depth, and texture
coordinates.
   Each pipelined SFU generates one 32-bit floating-point special function result
per cycle; the two SFUs per multiprocessor execute special function instructions
at a quarter the simple instruction rate of the eight SPs. The SFUs also execute the
mul.f32 multiply instruction concurrently with the eight SPs, increasing the peak
computation rate up to 50% for threads with a suitable instruction mixture.
   For functional evaluation, the Tesla architecture SFU employs quadratic
interpolation based on enhanced minimax approximations for approximating the
reciprocal, reciprocal square-root, log2x, 2x, and sin/cos functions. The accuracy of
the function estimates ranges from 22 to 24 mantissa bits. See Section B.6 for more
details on SFU arithmetic.

Comparing with Other Multiprocessors
Compared with SIMD vector architectures such as x86 SSE, the SIMT multiprocessor
can execute individual threads independently, rather than always executing them
together in synchronous groups. SIMT hardware finds data parallelism among
independent threads, whereas SIMD hardware requires the software to express
data parallelism explicitly in each vector instruction. A SIMT machine executes a
warp of 32 threads synchronously when the threads take the same execution path,
yet can execute each thread independently when they diverge. The advantage is
significant because SIMT programs and instructions simply describe the behavior
of a single independent thread, rather than a SIMD data vector of four or more
data lanes. Yet the SIMT multiprocessor has SIMD-like efficiency, spreading the
area and cost of one instruction unit across the 32 threads of a warp and across the
eight streaming processor cores. SIMT provides the performance of SIMD together
with the productivity of multithreading, avoiding the need to explicitly code SIMD
vectors for edge conditions and partial divergence.
    The SIMT multiprocessor imposes little overhead because it is hardware
multithreaded with hardware barrier synchronization. That allows graphics
shaders and CUDA threads to express very fine-grained parallelism. Graphics and
CUDA programs use threads to express fine-grained data parallelism in a per-
thread program, rather than forcing the programmer to express it as SIMD vector
instructions. It is simpler and more productive to develop scalar single-thread code
than vector code, and the SIMT multiprocessor executes the code with SIMD-like
efficiency.
B-36   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          Coupling eight streaming processor cores together closely into a multiprocessor
       and then implementing a scalable number of such multiprocessors makes a two-
       level multiprocessor composed of multiprocessors. The CUDA programming model
       exploits the two-level hierarchy by providing individual threads for fine-grained
       parallel computations, and by providing grids of thread blocks for coarse-grained
       parallel operations. The same thread program can provide both fine-grained and
       coarse-grained operations. In contrast, CPUs with SIMD vector instructions must
       use two different programming models to provide fine-grained and coarse-grained
       operations: coarse-grained parallel threads on different cores, and SIMD vector
       instructions for fine-grained data parallelism.

       Multithreaded Multiprocessor Conclusion
       The example GPU multiprocessor based on the Tesla architecture is highly
       multithreaded, executing a total of up to 512 lightweight threads concurrently to
       support fine-grained pixel shaders and CUDA threads. It uses a variation on SIMD
       architecture and multithreading called SIMT (single-instruction multiple-thread)
       to efficiently broadcast one instruction to a warp of 32 parallel threads, while
       permitting each thread to branch and execute independently. Each thread executes
       its instruction stream on one of the eight streaming processor (SP) cores, which are
       multithreaded up to 64 threads.
           The PTX ISA is a register-based load/store scalar ISA that describes the execution
       of a single thread. Because PTX instructions are optimized and translated to binary
       microinstructions for a specific GPU, the hardware instructions can evolve rapidly
       without disrupting compilers and software tools that generate PTX instructions.

         B.5          Parallel Memory System

       Outside of the GPU itself, the memory subsystem is the most important
       determiner of the performance of a graphics system. Graphics workloads demand
       very high transfer rates to and from memory. Pixel write and blend (read-modify-
       write) operations, depth buffer reads and writes, and texture map reads, as well
       as command and object vertex and attribute data reads, comprise the majority of
       memory traffic.
          Modern GPUs are highly parallel, as shown in Figure B.2.5. For example, the
       GeForce 8800 can process 32 pixels per clock, at 600 MHz. Each pixel typically
       requires a color read and write and a depth read and write of a 4-byte pixel. Usually
       an average of two or three texels of four bytes each are read to generate the pixel’s
       color. So for a typical case, there is a demand of 28 bytes times 32 pixels = 896 bytes
       per clock. Clearly the bandwidth demand on the memory system is enormous.
                                                         B.5   Parallel Memory System    B-37

  To supply these requirements, GPU memory systems have the following
characteristics:
  ■   They are wide, meaning there are a large number of pins to convey data
      between the GPU and its memory devices, and the memory array itself
      comprises many DRAM chips to provide the full total data bus width.
  ■   They are fast, meaning aggressive signaling techniques are used to maximize
      the data rate (bits/second) per pin.
  ■   GPUs seek to use every available cycle to transfer data to or from the memory
      array. To achieve this, GPUs specifically do not aim to minimize latency to the
      memory system. High throughput (utilization efficiency) and short latency
      are fundamentally in conflict.
  ■   Compression techniques are used, both lossy, of which the programmer must
      be aware, and lossless, which is invisible to the application and opportunistic.
  ■   Caches and work coalescing structures are used to reduce the amount of off-
      chip traffic needed and to ensure that cycles spent moving data are used as
      fully as possible.

DRAM Considerations
GPUs must take into account the unique characteristics of DRAM. DRAM chips
are internally arranged as multiple (typically four to eight) banks, where each bank
includes a power-of-2 number of rows (typically around 16,384), and each row
contains a power-of-2 number of bits (typically 8192). DRAMs impose a variety of
timing requirements on their controlling processor. For example, dozens of cycles
are required to activate one row, but once activated, the bits within that row are
randomly accessible with a new column address every four clocks. Double-data
rate (DDR) synchronous DRAMs transfer data on both rising and falling edges
of the interface clock (see Chapter 5). So a 1 GHz clocked DDR DRAM transfers
data at 2 gigabits per second per data pin. Graphics DDR DRAMs usually have 32
bidirectional data pins, so eight bytes can be read or written from the DRAM per
clock.
   GPUs internally have a large number of generators of memory traffic. Different
stages of the logical graphics pipeline each have their own request streams: command
and vertex attribute fetch, shader texture fetch and load/store, and pixel depth and
color read-write. At each logical stage, there are often multiple independent units
to deliver the parallel throughput. These are each independent memory requestors.
When viewed at the memory system, there is an enormous number of uncorrelated
requests in flight. This is a natural mismatch to the reference pattern preferred by
the DRAMs. A solution is for the GPU’s memory controller to maintain separate
heaps of traffic bound for different DRAM banks, and wait until enough traffic for
B-38   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

       a particular DRAM row is pending before activating that row and transferring all
       the traffic at once. Note that accumulating pending requests, while good for DRAM
       row locality and thus efficient use of the data bus, leads to longer average latency
       as seen by the requestors whose requests spend time waiting for others. The design
       must take care that no particular request waits too long, otherwise some processing
       units can starve waiting for data and ultimately cause neighboring processors to
       become idle.
          GPU memory subsystems are arranged as multiple memory partitions, each of
       which comprises a fully independent memory controller and one or two DRAM
       devices that are fully and exclusively owned by that partition. To achieve the best
       load balance and therefore approach the theoretical performance of n partitions,
       addresses are finely interleaved evenly across all memory partitions. The partition
       interleaving stride is typically a block of a few hundred bytes. The number of
       memory partitions is designed to balance the number of processors and other
       memory requesters.

       Caches
       GPU workloads typically have very large working sets—on the order of hundreds
       of megabytes to generate a single graphics frame. Unlike with CPUs, it is not
       practical to construct caches on chips large enough to hold anything close to the
       full working set of a graphics application. Whereas CPUs can assume very high
       cache hit rates (99.9% or more), GPUs experience hit rates closer to 90% and must
       therefore cope with many misses in flight. While a CPU can reasonably be designed
       to halt while waiting for a rare cache miss, a GPU needs to proceed with misses and
       hits intermingled. We call this a streaming cache architecture.
           GPU caches must deliver very high-bandwidth to their clients. Consider the case
       of a texture cache. A typical texture unit may evaluate two bilinear interpolations for
       each of four pixels per clock cycle, and a GPU may have many such texture units all
       operating independently. Each bilinear interpolation requires four separate texels,
       and each texel might be a 64-bit value. Four 16-bit components are typical. Thus,
       total bandwidth is 2 × 4 × 4 × 64 = 2048 bits per clock. Each separate 64-bit texel
       is independently addressed, so the cache needs to handle 32 unique addresses per
       clock. This naturally favors a multibank and/or multiport arrangement of SRAM
       arrays.

       MMU
       Modern GPUs are capable of translating virtual addresses to physical addresses.
       On the GeForce 8800, all processing units generate memory addresses in a
       40-bit virtual address space. For computing, load and store thread instructions use
       32-bit byte addresses, which are extended to a 40-bit virtual address by adding a
       40-bit offset. A memory management unit performs virtual to physical address
                                                      B.5   Parallel Memory System   B-39

translation; hardware reads the page tables from local memory to respond to
misses on behalf of a hierarchy of translation lookaside buffers spread out among
the processors and rendering engines. In addition to physical page bits, GPU page
table entries specify the compression algorithm for each page. Page sizes range
from 4 to 128 kilobytes.

Memory Spaces
As introduced in Section B.3, CUDA exposes different memory spaces to allow the
programmer to store data values in the most performance-optimal way. For the
following discussion, NVIDIA Tesla architecture GPUs are assumed.

Global memory
Global memory is stored in external DRAM; it is not local to any one physical
streaming multiprocessor (SM) because it is meant for communication among
different CTAs (thread blocks) in different grids. In fact, the many CTAs that
reference a location in global memory may not be executing in the GPU at the
same time; by design, in CUDA a programmer does not know the relative order
in which CTAs are executed. Because the address space is evenly distributed
among all memory partitions, there must be a read/write path from any streaming
multiprocessor to any DRAM partition.
   Access to global memory by different threads (and different processors) is not
guaranteed to have sequential consistency. Thread programs see a relaxed memory
ordering model. Within a thread, the order of memory reads and writes to the same
address is preserved, but the order of accesses to different addresses may not be
preserved. Memory reads and writes requested by different threads are unordered.
Within a CTA, the barrier synchronization instruction bar.sync can be used
to obtain strict memory ordering among the threads of the CTA. The membar
thread instruction provides a memory barrier/fence operation that commits prior
memory accesses and makes them visible to other threads before proceeding.
Threads can also use the atomic memory operations described in Section B.4 to
coordinate work on memory they share.

Shared memory
Per-CTA shared memory is only visible to the threads that belong to that CTA,
and shared memory only occupies storage from the time a CTA is created to the
time it terminates. Shared memory can therefore reside on-chip. This approach has
many benefits. First, shared memory traffc does not need to compete with limited
off-chip bandwidth needed for global memory references. Second, it is practical to
build very high-bandwidth memory structures on-chip to support the read/write
demands of each streaming multiprocessor. In fact, the shared memory is closely
coupled to the streaming multiprocessor.
B-40   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          Each streaming multiprocessor contains eight physical thread processors. During
       one shared memory clock cycle, each thread processor can process two threads’
       worth of instructions, so 16 threads’ worth of shared memory requests must be
       handled in each clock. Because each thread can generate its own addresses, and the
       addresses are typically unique, the shared memory is built using 16 independently
       addressable SRAM banks. For common access patterns, 16 banks are sufficient
       to maintain throughput, but pathological cases are possible; for example, all 16
       threads might happen to access a different address on one SRAM bank. It must be
       possible to route a request from any thread lane to any bank of SRAM, so a 16-by-
       16 interconnection network is required.

       Local Memory
       Per-thread local memory is private memory visible only to a single thread. Local
       memory is architecturally larger than the thread’s register file, and a program
       can compute addresses into local memory. To support large allocations of local
       memory (recall the total allocation is the per-thread allocation times the number
       of active threads), local memory is allocated in external DRAM.
          Although global and per-thread local memory reside off-chip, they are well-
       suited to being cached on-chip.

       Constant Memory
       Constant memory is read-only to a program running on the SM (it can be written
       via commands to the GPU). It is stored in external DRAM and cached in the SM.
       Because commonly most or all threads in a SIMT warp read from the same address
       in constant memory, a single address lookup per clock is sufficient. The constant
       cache is designed to broadcast scalar values to threads in each warp.

       Texture Memory
       Texture memory holds large read-only arrays of data. Textures for computing have
       the same attributes and capabilities as textures used with 3D graphics. Although
       textures are commonly two-dimensional images (2D arrays of pixel values), 1D
       (linear) and 3D (volume) textures are also available.
           A compute program references a texture using a tex instruction. Operands
       include an identifier to name the texture, and one, two, or three coordinates
       based on the texture dimensionality. The floating-point coordinates include a
       fractional portion that specifies a sample location, often in-between texel locations.
       Noninteger coordinates invoke a bilinear weighted interpolation of the four closest
       values (for a 2D texture) before the result is returned to the program.
           Texture fetches are cached in a streaming cache hierarchy designed to optimize
       throughput of texture fetches from thousands of concurrent threads. Some
       programs use texture fetches as a way to cache global memory.
                                                      B.6   Floating-point Arithmetic   B-41

Surfaces
Surface is a generic term for a one-dimensional, two-dimensional, or three-
dimensional array of pixel values and an associated format. A variety of formats
are defined; for example, a pixel may be defined as four 8-bit RGBA integer
components, or four 16-bit floating-point components. A program kernel does
not need to know the surface type. A tex instruction recasts its result values as
floating-point, depending on the surface format.

Load/Store Access
Load/store instructions with integer byte addressing enable the writing and
compiling of programs in conventional languages like C and C++. CUDA
programs use load/store instructions to access memory.
   To improve memory bandwidth and reduce overhead, the local and global load/
store instructions coalesce individual parallel thread requests from the same warp
together into a single memory block request when the addresses fall in the same
block and meet alignment criteria. Coalescing individual small memory requests
into large block requests provides a significant performance boost over separate
requests. The large thread count, together with support for many outstanding load
requests, helps cover load-to-use latency for local and global memory implemented
in external DRAM.

ROP
As shown in Figure B.2.5, NVIDIA Tesla architecture GPUs comprise a scalable
streaming processor array (SPA), which performs all of the GPU’s programmable
calculations, and a scalable memory system, which comprises external DRAM
control and fixed function Raster Operation Processors (ROPs) that perform color
and depth framebuffer operations directly on memory. Each ROP unit is paired
with a specific memory partition. ROP partitions are fed from the SMs via an
interconnection network. Each ROP is responsible for depth and stencil tests and
updates, as well as color blending. The ROP and memory controllers cooperate
to implement lossless color and depth compression (up to 8:1) to reduce external
bandwidth demand. ROP units also perform atomic operations on memory.

  B.6         Floating-point Arithmetic

GPUs today perform most arithmetic operations in the programmable processor
cores using IEEE 754-compatible single precision 32-bit floating-point operations
(see Chapter 3). The fixed-point arithmetic of early GPUs was succeeded by 16-bit,
24-bit, and 32-bit floating-point, then IEEE 754-compatible 32-bit floating-point.
B-42                         Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                             Some fixed-function logic within a GPU, such as texture-filtering hardware,
                             continues to use proprietary numeric formats. Recent GPUs also provide IEEE 754-
                             compatible double-precision 64-bit floating-point instructions.

                             Supported Formats
                             The IEEE 754 standard for floating-point arithmetic specifies basic and storage
                             formats. GPUs use two of the basic formats for computation, 32-bit and 64-bit
                             binary floating-point, commonly called single precision and double precision. The
half precision A 16-bit      standard also specifies a 16-bit binary storage floating-point format, half precision.
binary floating-point        GPUs and the Cg shading language employ the narrow 16-bit half data format for
format, with 1 sign bit,     efficient data storage and movement, while maintaining high dynamic range. GPUs
5-bit exponent, 10-bit       perform many texture filtering and pixel blending computations at half precision
fraction, and an implied
integer bit.
                             within the texture filtering unit and the raster operations unit. The OpenEXR high
                             dynamic-range image file format developed by Industrial Light and Magic [2003]
                             uses the identical half format for color component values in computer imaging and
                             motion picture applications.

                             Basic Arithmetic
                             Common single-precision floating-point operations in GPU programmable cores
multiply-add (MAD)           include addition, multiplication, multiply-add, minimum, maximum, compare,
A single floating-point      set predicate, and conversions between integer and floating-point numbers.
instruction that performs    Floating-point instructions often provide source operand modifiers for negation
a compound operation:        and absolute value.
multiplication followed by
addition.
                                The floating-point addition and multiplication operations of most GPUs today
                             are compatible with the IEEE 754 standard for single precision FP numbers,
                             including not-a-number (NaN) and infinity values. The FP addition and
                             multiplication operations use IEEE round-to-nearest-even as the default rounding
                             mode. To increase floating-point instruction throughput, GPUs often use a
                             compound multiply-add instruction (mad). The multiply-add operation performs
                             FP multiplication with truncation, followed by FP addition with round-to-nearest-
                             even. It provides two floating-point operations in one issuing cycle, without
                             requiring the instruction scheduler to dispatch two separate instructions, but the
                             computation is not fused and truncates the product before the addition. This makes
                             it different from the fused multiply-add instruction discussed in Chapter 3 and
                             later in this section. GPUs typically flush denormalized source operands to sign-
                             preserved zero, and they flush results that underflow the target output exponent
                             range to sign-preserved zero after rounding.

                             Specialized Arithmetic
                             GPUs provide hardware to accelerate special function computation, attribute
                             interpolation, and texture filtering. Special function instructions include cosine,
                                                                      B.6   Floating-point Arithmetic                        B-43

sine, binary exponential, binary logarithm, reciprocal, and reciprocal square root.
Attribute interpolation instructions provide efficient generation of pixel attributes,
derived from plane equation evaluation. The special function unit (SFU)                                 special function unit
introduced in Section B.4 computes special functions and interpolates planar                            (SFU) A hardware unit
attributes [Oberman and Siu, 2005].                                                                     that computes special
                                                                                                        functions and interpolates
   Several methods exist for evaluating special functions in hardware. It has been                      planar attributes.
shown that quadratic interpolation based on Enhanced Minimax Approximations
is a very efficient method for approximating functions in hardware, including
reciprocal, reciprocal square-root, log2x, 2x, sin, and cos.
   We can summarize the method of SFU quadratic interpolation. For a binary
input operand X with n-bit significand, the significand is divided into two parts:
Xu is the upper part containing m bits, and Xl is the lower part containing n-m bits.
The upper m bits Xu are used to consult a set of three lookup tables to return three
finite-word coefficients C0, C1, and C2. Each function to be approximated requires
a unique set of tables. These coefficients are used to approximate a given function
f(X) in the range Xu ≤ X < Xu + 2−m by evaluating the expression:

                                f (X )      C0   C1 X1      C 2 X12

   The accuracy of each of the function estimates ranges from 22 to 24 significand
bits. Example function statistics are shown in Figure B.6.1.
   The IEEE 754 standard specifies exact-rounding requirements for division
and square root; however, for many GPU applications, exact compliance is not
required. Rather, for those applications, higher computational throughput is more
important than last-bit accuracy. For the SFU special functions, the CUDA math
library provides both a full accuracy function and a fast function with the SFU
instruction accuracy.
   Another specialized arithmetic operation in a GPU is attribute interpolation.
Key attributes are usually specified for vertices of primitives that make up a scene
to be rendered. Example attributes are color, depth, and texture coordinates. These
attributes must be interpolated in the (x,y) screen space as needed to determine the

                      Input         Accuracy         ULP*               % exactly
         Function   interval       (good bits)       error              rounded         Monotonic

    1/x               [1, 2)             24.02           0.98                87            Yes
    1/sqrt(x)         [1, 4)             23.40           1.52                78            Yes
    2x
                      [0, 1)             22.51           1.41                74            Yes
    log2x             [1, 2)             22.57       N/A**                  N/A            Yes

    sin/cos         [0, /2)              22.47           N/A                N/A             No

ULP: unit in the last place.**N/A: not applicable.
*

FIGURE B.6.1 Special function approximation statistics. For the NVIDIA GeForce 8800 special
function unit (SFU).
B-44                          Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                              values of the attributes at each pixel location. The value of a given attribute U in an
                              (x, y) plane can be expressed using plane equations of the form:

                                                          U(x,y )    Au x    Bu Y    Cu

                              where A, B, and C are interpolation parameters associated with each attribute U.
                              The interpolation parameters A, B, and C are all represented as single-precision
                              floating-point numbers.
                                 Given the need for both a function evaluator and an attribute interpolator in a
                              pixel shader processor, a single SFU that performs both functions for efficiency can
                              be designed. Both functions use a sum of products operation to interpolate results,
                              and the number of terms to be summed in both functions is very similar.

                              Texture Operations
                              Texture mapping and filtering is another key set of specialized floating-point
                              arithmetic operations in a GPU. The operations used for texture mapping include:
                                 1. Receive texture address (s, t) for the current screen pixel (x, y), where s and
                                    t are single-precision floating-point numbers.
MIP-map A Latin                  2. Compute the level of detail to identify the correct texture MIP-map level.
phrase multum in parvo,
or much in a small space.        3. Compute the trilinear interpolation fraction.
A MIP-map contains
precalculated images of
                                 4. Scale texture address (s, t) for the selected MIP-map level.
different resolutions, used      5. Access memory and retrieve desired texels (texture elements).
to increase rendering
speed and reduce                 6. Perform filtering operation on texels.
artifacts.
                              Texture mapping requires a significant amount of floating-point computation
                              for full-speed operation, much of which is done at 16-bit half precision. As an
                              example, the GeForce 8800 Ultra delivers about 500 GFLOPS of proprietary format
                              floating-point computation for texture mapping instructions, in addition to its
                              conventional IEEE single-precision floating-point instructions. For more details
                              on texture mapping and filtering, see Foley and van Dam [1995].

                              Performance
                              The floating-point addition and multiplication arithmetic hardware is fully
                              pipelined, and latency is optimized to balance delay and area. While pipelined,
                              the throughput of the special functions is less than the floating-point addition
                              and multiplication operations. Quarter-speed throughput for the special functions
                              is typical performance in modern GPUs, with one SFU shared by four SP cores.
                              In contrast, CPUs typically have significantly lower throughput for similar
                              functions, such as division and square root, albeit with more accurate results. The
                              attribute interpolation hardware is typically fully pipelined to enable full-speed
                              pixel shaders.
                                                                           B.6   Floating-point Arithmetic   B-45

Double precision
Newer GPUs such as the Tesla T10P also support IEEE 754 64-bit double-precision
operations in hardware. Standard floating-point arithmetic operations in double
precision include addition, multiplication, and conversions between different
floating-point and integer formats. The 2008 IEEE 754 floating-point standard
includes specification for the fused-multiply-add (FMA) operation, as discussed
in Chapter 3. The FMA operation performs a floating-point multiplication
followed by an addition, with a single rounding. The fused multiplication and
addition operations retain full accuracy in intermediate calculations. This behavior
enables more accurate floating-point computations involving the accumulation
of products, including dot products, matrix multiplication, and polynomial
evaluation. The FMA instruction also enables efficient software implementations
of exactly rounded division and square root, removing the need for a hardware
division or square root unit.
   A double-precision hardware FMA unit implements 64-bit addition,
multiplication, conversions, and the FMA operation itself. The architecture of a

               64                    64                    64

                    A                      B                     C
               53                    53                    53

                                                         Inversion
                        Multiplier Array
                           53 x 53                       Alignment                  Exp
                                                          shifter                   Diff
                    Sum          Carry                 Shifted       161
                                                             C
                                 3-2 CSA 161 bits
                               Sum             Carry

                              Carry Propagate Adder

                                   Complementer

                                     Normalizer

                                      Rounder

FIGURE B.6.2 Double-precision fused-multiply-add (FMA) unit. Hardware to implement
floating-point A× B+ C for double precision.
B-46   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

       double-precision FMA unit enables full-speed denormalized number support on
       both inputs and outputs. Figure B.6.2 shows a block diagram of an FMA unit.
           As shown in Figure B.6.2, the significands of A and B are multiplied to form a 106-
       bit product, with the results left in carry-save form. In parallel, the 53-bit addend C is
       conditionally inverted and aligned to the 106-bit product. The sum and carry results
       of the 106-bit product are summed with the aligned addend through a 161-bit-
       wide carry-save adder (CSA). The carry-save output is then summed together in
       a carry-propagate adder to produce an unrounded result in nonredundant, two’s
       complement form. The result is conditionally recomplemented, so as to return a
       result in sign-magnitude form. The complemented result is normalized, and then it
       is rounded to fit within the target format.

         B.7           Real Stuff: The NVIDIA GeForce 8800

       The NVIDIA GeForce 8800 GPU, introduced in November 2006, is a unified vertex
       and pixel processor design that also supports parallel computing applications written
       in C using the CUDA parallel programming model. It is the first implementation
       of the Tesla unified graphics and computing architecture described in Section B.4
       and in Lindholm et al. [2008]. A family of Tesla architecture GPUs addresses the
       different needs of laptops, desktops, workstations, and servers.

       Streaming Processor Array (SPA)
       The GeForce 8800 GPU shown in Figure B.7.1 contains 128 streaming processor (SP)
       cores organized as 16 streaming multiprocessors (SMs). Two SMs share a texture
       unit in each texture/processor cluster (TPC). An array of eight TPCs makes up the
       streaming processor array (SPA), which executes all graphics shader programs and
       computing programs.
          The host interface unit communicates with the host CPU via the PCI-Express
       bus, checks command consistency, and performs context switching. The input
       assembler collects geometric primitives (points, lines, triangles). The work
       distribution blocks dispatch vertices, pixels, and compute thread arrays to the
       TPCs in the SPA. The TPCs execute vertex and geometry shader programs and
       computing programs. Output geometric data are sent to the viewport/clip/setup/
       raster/zcull block to be rasterized into pixel fragments that are then redistributed
       back into the SPA to execute pixel shader programs. Shaded pixels are sent across
       the interconnection network for processing by the ROP units. The network also
       routes texture memory read requests from the SPA to DRAM and reads data from
       DRAM through a level-2 cache back to the SPA.
                                                                                  B.7 Real Stuff: The NVIDIA GeForce 8800                                                                            B-47

                Host CPU                         Bridge                    System Memory

                                                                                                       GPU
                                            Host Interface
                                                                                           Viewport/Clip/                                                           High-Definition
                                                                                           Setup/Raster/                                                           Video Processors
                                           Input Assembler
                                                                                               ZCull

                                            Vertex Work                                      Pixel Work                             Compute Work
                SPA                         Distribution                                     Distribution                            Distribution

                TPC                  TPC                     TPC                 TPC                        TPC              TPC                    TPC                   TPC

             SM      SM           SM        SM            SM      SM         SM            SM          SM       SM        SM        SM        SM          SM           SM       SM

           SP SP SP SP           SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP            SP SP SP SP              SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP             SP SP SP SP
           SP SP SP SP           SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP            SP SP SP SP              SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP             SP SP SP SP
           SP SP SP SP           SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP            SP SP SP SP              SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP             SP SP SP SP
           SP SP SP SP           SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP            SP SP SP SP              SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP         SP SP SP SP             SP SP SP SP

            Shared   Shared      Shared    Shared     Shared      Shared     Shared        Shared     Shared    Shared   Shared     Shared    Shared      Shared      Shared    Shared
            Memory   Memory      Memory    Memory     Memory      Memory     Memory        Memory     Memory    Memory   Memory     Memory    Memory      Memory      Memory    Memory

             Texture Unit         Texture Unit            Texture Unit        Texture Unit              Texture Unit      Texture Unit            Texture Unit         Texture Unit
               Tex L1               Tex L1                  Tex L1              Tex L1                    Tex L1            Tex L1                  Tex L1               Tex L1

                                                                                           Interconnection Network

            ROP             L2            ROP        L2              ROP              L2             ROP           L2             ROP        L2             ROP            L2            Interface

               DRAM                        DRAM                            DRAM                         DRAM                       DRAM                            DRAM                  Display

FIGURE B.7.1 NVIDIA Tesla unified graphics and computing GPU architecture. This GeForce 8800 has 128 streaming processor
(SP) cores in 16 streaming multiprocessors (SMs), arranged in eight texture/processor clusters (TPCs). The processors connect with six 64-bit-
wide DRAM partitions via an interconnection network. Other GPUs implementing the Tesla architecture vary the number of SP cores, SMs,
DRAM partitions, and other units.

Texture/Processor Cluster (TPC)
Each TPC contains a geometry controller, an SMC, two SMs, and a texture unit as
shown in Figure B.7.2.
   The geometry controller maps the logical graphics vertex pipeline into recir-
culation on the physical SMs by directing all primitive and vertex attribute and
topology flow in the TPC.
   The SMC controls multiple SMs, arbitrating the shared texture unit, load/store
path, and I/O path. The SMC serves three graphics workloads simultaneously:
vertex, geometry, and pixel.
   The texture unit processes a texture instruction for one vertex, geometry, or pixel
quad, or four compute threads per cycle. Texture instruction sources are texture
coordinates, and the outputs are weighted samples, typically a four-component
(RGBA) floating-point color. The texture unit is deeply pipelined. Although it
contains a streaming cache to capture filtering locality, it streams hits mixed with
misses without stalling.
B-48                        Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                                                        TPC                             SM
                                                           Geometry Controller
                                                                                                    I-Cache
                                                                        SMC
                                                                                                    MT Issue
                                                              SM                   SM
                                                          I-Cache             I-Cache               C-Cache
                                                         MT Issue             MT Issue
                                                         C-Cache              C-Cache             SP         SP

                                                         SP        SP         SP        SP
                                                                                                  SP         SP
                                                         SP        SP         SP        SP

                                                         SP        SP         SP        SP        SP         SP

                                                         SP        SP         SP        SP
                                                                                                  SP         SP
                                                        SFU SFU           SFU SFU

                                                         Shared               Shared
                                                         Memory               Memory              SFU        SFU

                                                               Texture Unit
                                                                                                    Shared
                                                                    Tex L1                          Memory

FIGURE B.7.2 Texture/processor cluster (TPC) and a streaming multiprocessor (SM). Each SM has eight streaming processor
(SP) cores, two SFUs, and a shared memory.

                            Streaming Multiprocessor (SM)
                            The SM is a unified graphics and computing multiprocessor that executes vertex,
                            geometry, and pixel-fragment shader programs and parallel computing programs.
                            The SM consists of eight SP thread processor cores, two SFUs, a multithreaded
                            instruction fetch and issue unit (MT issue), an instruction cache, a read-only
                            constant cache, and a 16 KB read/write shared memory. It executes scalar
                            instructions for individual threads.
                               The GeForce 8800 Ultra clocks the SP cores and SFUs at 1.5 GHz, for a peak of
                            36 GFLOPS per SM. To optimize power and area efficiency, some SM nondatapath
                            units operate at half the SP clock rate.
                                              B.7 Real Stuff: The NVIDIA GeForce 8800       B-49

   To efficiently execute hundreds of parallel threads while running several different
programs, the SM is hardware multithreaded. It manages and executes up to 768
concurrent threads in hardware with zero scheduling overhead. Each thread has its
own thread execution state and can execute an independent code path.
   A warp consists of up to 32 threads of the same type—vertex, geometry, pixel,
or compute. The SIMT design, previously described in Section B.4, shares the SM
instruction fetch and issue unit efficiently across 32 threads but requires a full warp
of active threads for full performance efficiency.
   The SM schedules and executes multiple warp types concurrently. Each issue
cycle, the scheduler selects one of the 24 warps to execute a SIMT warp instruction.
An issued warp instruction executes as four sets of eight threads over four processor
cycles. The SP and SFU units execute instructions independently, and by issuing
instructions between them on alternate cycles, the scheduler can keep both fully
occupied. A scoreboard qualifies each warp for issue each cycle. The instruction
scheduler prioritizes all ready warps and selects the one with highest priority for
issue. Prioritization considers warp type, instruction type, and “fairness” to all
warps executing in the SM.
   The SM executes cooperative thread arrays (CTAs) as multiple concurrent warps
which access a shared memory region allocated dynamically for the CTA.

Instruction Set
Threads execute scalar instructions, unlike previous GPU vector instruction
architectures. Scalar instructions are simpler and compiler-friendly. Texture
instructions remain vector-based, taking a source coordinate vector and returning
a filtered color vector.
    The register-based instruction set includes all the floating-point and integer
arithmetic, transcendental, logical, flow control, memory load/store, and texture
instructions listed in the PTX instruction table of Figure B.4.3. Memory load/store
instructions use integer byte addressing with register-plus-offset address arithmetic.
For computing, the load/store instructions access three read-write memory spaces:
local memory for per-thread, private, temporary data; shared memory for low-
latency per-CTA data shared by the threads of the CTA; and global memory for data
shared by all threads. Computing programs use the fast barrier synchronization
bar.sync instruction to synchronize threads within a CTA that communicate
with each other via shared and global memory. The latest Tesla architecture GPUs
implement PTX atomic memory operations, which facilitate parallel reductions
and parallel data structure management.

Streaming Processor (SP)
The multithreaded SP core is the primary thread processor, as introduced in
Section B.4. Its register file provides 1024 scalar 32-bit registers for up to 96 threads
(more threads than in the example SP of Section B.4). Its floating-point add and
B-50   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

       multiply operations are compatible with the IEEE 754 standard for single-precision
       FP numbers, including not-a-number (NaN) and infinity. The add and multiply
       operations use IEEE round-to-nearest-even as the default rounding mode. The SP
       core also implements all of the 32-bit and 64-bit integer arithmetic, comparison,
       conversion, and logical PTX instructions in Figure B.4.3. The processor is fully
       pipelined, and latency is optimized to balance delay and area.

       Special Function Unit (SFU)
       The SFU supports computation of both transcendental functions and planar
       attribute interpolation. As described in Section B.6, it uses quadratic interpolation
       based on enhanced minimax approximations to approximate the reciprocal,
       reciprocal square root, log2x, 2x, and sin/cos functions at one result per cycle. The
       SFU also supports pixel attribute interpolation such as color, depth, and texture
       coordinates at four samples per cycle.

       Rasterization
       Geometry primitives from the SMs go in their original round-robin input order
       to the viewport/clip/setup/raster/zcull block. The viewport and clip units clip
       the primitives to the view frustum and to any enabled user clip planes, and then
       transform the vertices into screen (pixel) space.
          Surviving primitives then go to the setup unit, which generates edge equations
       for the rasterizer. A coarse-rasterization stage generates all pixel tiles that are at
       least partially inside the primitive. The zcull unit maintains a hierarchical z surface,
       rejecting pixel tiles if they are conservatively known to be occluded by previously
       drawn pixels. The rejection rate is up to 256 pixels per clock. Pixels that survive zcull
       then go to a fine-rasterization stage that generates detailed coverage information
       and depth values.
          The depth test and update can be performed ahead of the fragment shader, or
       after, depending on current state. The SMC assembles surviving pixels into warps
       to be processed by an SM running the current pixel shader. The SMC then sends
       surviving pixel and associated data to the ROP.

       Raster Operations Processor (ROP) and Memory System
       Each ROP is paired with a specific memory partition. For each pixel fragment
       emitted by a pixel shader program, ROPs perform depth and stencil testing and
       updates, and in parallel, color blending and updates. Lossless color compression
       (up to 8:1) and depth compression (up to 8:1) are used to reduce DRAM bandwidth.
       Each ROP has a peak rate of four pixels per clock and supports 16-bit floating-
       point and 32-bit floating-point HDR formats. ROPs support double-rate-depth
       processing when color writes are disabled.
                                             B.7 Real Stuff: The NVIDIA GeForce 8800     B-51

   Antialiasing support includes up to 16× multisampling and supersampling. The
coverage-sampling antialiasing (CSAA) algorithm computes and stores Boolean
coverage at up to 16 samples and compresses redundant color, depth, and stencil
information into the memory footprint and a bandwidth of four or eight samples
for improved performance.
   The DRAM memory data bus width is 384 pins, arranged in six independent
partitions of 64 pins each. Each partition supports double-data-rate DDR2 and
graphics-oriented GDDR3 protocols at up to 1.0 GHz, yielding a bandwidth of
about 16 GB/s per partition, or 96 GB/s.
   The memory controllers support a wide range of DRAM clock rates, protocols,
device densities, and data bus widths. Texture and load/store requests can occur
between any TPC and any memory partition, so an interconnection network routes
requests and responses.

Scalability
The Tesla unified architecture is designed for scalability. Varying the number of
SMs, TPCs, ROPs, caches, and memory partitions provides the right balance for
different performance and cost targets in GPU market segments. Scalable link
interconnect (SLI) connects multiple GPUs, providing further scalability.

Performance
The GeForce 8800 Ultra clocks the SP thread processor cores and SFUs at 1.5 GHz,
for a theoretical operation peak of 576 GFLOPS. The GeForce 8800 GTX has a 1.35 GHz
processor clock and a corresponding peak of 518 GFLOPS.
   The following three sections compare the performance of a GeForce 8800 GPU
with a multicore CPU on three different applications—dense linear algebra, fast
Fourier transforms, and sorting. The GPU programs and libraries are compiled
CUDA C code. The CPU code uses the single-precision multithreaded Intel MKL
10.0 library to leverage SSE instructions and multiple cores.

Dense Linear Algebra Performance
Dense linear algebra computations are fundamental in many applications. Volkov
and Demmel [2008] present GPU and CPU performance results for single-
precision dense matrix-matrix multiplication (the SGEMM routine) and LU,
QR, and Cholesky matrix factorizations. Figure B.7.3 compares GFLOPS rates on
SGEMM dense matrix-matrix multiplication for a GeForce 8800 GTX GPU with a
quad-core CPU. Figure B.7.4 compares GFLOPS rates on matrix factorization for a
GPU with a quad-core CPU.
   Because SGEMM matrix-matrix multiply and similar BLAS3 routines are the
bulk of the work in matrix factorization, their performance sets an upper bound on
factorization rate. As the matrix order increases beyond 200 to 400, the factorization
B-52   Appendix B            Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                                  A:N?N, B:N?N             A:N?64, B:64?N
                      210
                                                                                 GeForce 8800 GTX
                      180

                      150

             GFLOPS   120

                       90

                       60
                                                                                            Core2 Quad

                       30

                        0
                            64      128     256          512          1024         2048           4096    8192
                                                                 N

       FIGURE B.7.3 SGEMM dense matrix-matrix multiplication performance rates. The graph
       shows single-precision GFLOPS rates achieved in multiplying square N×N matrices (solid lines) and thin
       N ×64 and 64×N matrices (dashed lines). Adapted from Figure 6 of Volkov and Demmel [2008]. The black
       lines are a 1.35 GHz GeForce 8800 GTX using Volkov’s SGEMM code (now in NVIDIA CUBLAS 2.0) on
       matrices in GPU memory. The blue lines are a quad-core 2.4 GHz Intel Core2 Quad Q6600, 64-bit Linux,
       Intel MKL 10.0 on matrices in CPU memory.

                                                   LU           Cholesky               QR
                      210

                      180
                                                                                       o

                      150
                                                                                  Du
                                                                                   2
                                                                                re
                                                                             Co

                      120
            GFLOPS

                                                                            +
                                                                       TX
                                                                       G

                       90
                                                                      00
                                                                 88
                                                                ce
                                                              or

                       60                                                                   uad
                                                                                  Core2 Q
                                                            eF
                                                           G

                       30

                        0
                            64    128     256      512         1024        2048        4096       8192   16,384
                                                         Order of Matrix

       FIGURE B.7.4 Dense matrix factorization performance rates. The graph shows GFLOPS rates
       achieved in matrix factorizations using the GPU and using the CPU alone. Adapted from Figure 7 of Volkov
       and Demmel [2008]. The black lines are for a 1.35 GHz NVIDIA GeForce 8800 GTX, CUDA 1.1, Windows
       XP attached to a 2.67 GHz Intel Core2 Duo E6700 Windows XP, including all CPU–GPU data transfer times.
       The blue lines are for a quad-core 2.4 GHz Intel Core2 Quad Q6600, 64-bit Linux, Intel MKL 10.0.
                                                               B.7 Real Stuff: The NVIDIA GeForce 8800    B-53

problem becomes large enough that SGEMM can leverage the GPU parallelism and
overcome the CPU–GPU system and copy overhead. Volkov’s SGEMM matrix-
matrix multiply achieves 206 GFLOPS, about 60% of the GeForce 8800 GTX peak
multiply-add rate, while the QR factorization reached 192 GFLOPS, about 4.3
times the quad-core CPU.

FFT Performance
Fast Fourier Transforms (FFTs) are used in many applications. Large transforms
and multidimensional transforms are partitioned into batches of smaller 1D
transforms.
   Figure B.7.5 compares the in-place 1D complex single-precision FFT
performance of a 1.35 GHz GeForce 8800 GTX (dating from late 2006) with a
2.8 GHz quad-Core Intel Xeon E5462 series (code named “Harpertown,” dating
from late 2007). CPU performance was measured using the Intel Math Kernel
Library (MKL) 10.0 FFT with four threads. GPU performance was measured using
the NVIDIA CUFFT 2.1 library and batched 1D radix-16 decimation-in-frequency
FFTs. Both CPU and GPU throughput performance was measured using batched
FFTs; batch size was 224/n, where n is the transform size. Thus, the workload for
every transform size was 128 MB. To determine GFLOPS rate, the number of
operations per transform was taken as 5n log2 n.

                                                   GeForce 8800GTX     Xeon 5462
           80

           70

           60

           50
  GFLOPS

           40

           30

           20

           10

            0
            12
                8
                    25
                      6
                          51
                            2     24     48     96   92    84   68    36    72   44   88   76   52   04
                                10     20     40  81 16,3 32,7 65,5 31,0 62,1 4, 2 48,5 97,1 94,3
                                                                       1     2    5 2    0    0    1
                                                                                      1,   2,   4,
                                              Number of Elements in One Transform

FIGURE B.7.5 Fast Fourier transform throughput performance. The graph compares the
performance of batched one-dimensional in-place complex FFTs on a 1.35 GHz GeForce 8800 GTX with a
quad-core 2.8 GHz Intel Xeon E5462 series (code named “Harpertown”), 6MB L2 Cache, 4GB Memory, 1600
FSB, Red Hat Linux, Intel MKL 10.0.
B-54                                         Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                             Sorting Performance
                                             In contrast to the applications just discussed, sort requires far more substantial
                                             coordination among parallel threads, and parallel scaling is correspondingly
                                             harder to obtain. Nevertheless, a variety of well-known sorting algorithms can
                                             be efficiently parallelized to run well on the GPU. Satish et al. [2008] detail the
                                             design of sorting algorithms in CUDA, and the results they report for radix sort
                                             are summarized below.
                                                Figure B.7.6 compares the parallel sorting performance of a GeForce 8800 Ultra
                                             with an 8-core Intel Clovertown system, both of which date to early 2007. The
                                             CPU cores are distributed between two physical sockets. Each socket contains a
                                             multichip module with twin Core2 chips, and each chip has a 4MB L2 cache. All
                                             sorting routines were designed to sort key-value pairs where both keys and values
                                             are 32-bit integers. The primary algorithm being studied is radix sort, although
                                             the quicksort-based parallel_sort() procedure provided by Intel’s Threading
                                             Building Blocks is also included for comparison. Of the two CPU-based radix sort
                                             codes, one was implemented using only the scalar instruction set and the other
                                             utilizes carefully hand-tuned assembly language routines that take advantage of the
                                             SSE2 SIMD vector instructions.
                                                The graph itself shows the achieved sorting rate—defined as the number of
                                             elements sorted divided by the time to sort—for a range of sequence sizes. It is

                                                                      CPU quick sort       CPU radix sort (scalar)
                                                                      GPU radix sort       CPU radix sort (SIMD)
                                             80
                                  Millions

                                             70

                                             60
       Sorting Rate (pairs/sec)

                                             50

                                             40

                                             30

                                             20

                                             10

                                              0
                                              1000          10,000         100,000        1,000,000        10,000,000   100,000,000
                                                                                  Sequence Size

       FIGURE B.7.6 Parallel sorting performance. This graph compares sorting rates for parallel radix sort
       implementations on a 1.5 GHz GeForce 8800 Ultra and an 8-core 2.33 GHz Intel Core2 Xeon E5345 system.
                                        B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs    B-55

apparent from this graph that the GPU radix sort achieved the highest sorting
rate for all sequences of 8K-elements and larger. In this range, it is on average 2.6
times faster than the quicksort-based routine and roughly two times faster than the
radix sort routines, all of which were using the eight available CPU cores. The CPU
radix sort performance varies widely, likely due to poor cache locality of its global
permutations.

  B.8          Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs

The advent of multicore CPUs and manycore GPUs means that mainstream
processor chips are now parallel systems. Furthermore, their parallelism continues
to scale with Moore’s law. The challenge is to develop mainstream visual computing
and high-performance computing applications that transparently scale their
parallelism to leverage the increasing number of processor cores, much as 3D
graphics applications transparently scale their parallelism to GPUs with widely
varying numbers of cores.
   This section presents examples of mapping scalable parallel computing
applications to the GPU using CUDA.

Sparse Matrices
A wide variety of parallel algorithms can be written in CUDA in a fairly
straightforward manner, even when the data structures involved are not simple
regular grids. Sparse matrix-vector multiplication (SpMV) is a good example of an
important numerical building block that can be parallelized quite directly using the
abstractions provided by CUDA. The kernels we discuss below, when combined
with the provided CUBLAS vector routines, make writing iterative solvers such as
the conjugate gradient method straightforward.
   A sparse n × n matrix is one in which the number of nonzero entries m is only
a small fraction of the total. Sparse matrix representations seek to store only the
nonzero elements of a matrix. Since it is fairly typical that a sparse n × n matrix
will contain only m= O(n) nonzero elements, this represents a substantial saving
in storage space and processing time.
   One of the most common representations for general unstructured sparse
matrices is the compressed sparse row (CSR) representation. The m nonzero
elements of the matrix A are stored in row-major order in an array Av. A second
array Aj records the corresponding column index for each entry of Av. Finally, an
array Ap of n+ 1 elements records the extent of each row in the previous arrays; the
entries for row i in Aj and Av extend from index Ap[i] up to, but not including,
index Ap[i + 1]. This implies that Ap[0] will always be 0 and Ap[n] will always
be the number of nonzero elements in the matrix. Figure B.8.1 shows an example
of the CSR representation of a simple matrix.
B-56       Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                                         Row 0 Row 2             Row 3
                            3 0 1 0            Av[7] = { 3 1 2 4 1               1 1 }
                            0 0 0 0            Aj[7] = { 0
                        A = 0 2 4 1                              2   1   2   3   0   3 }
                            1 0 0 1            Ap[5] = { 0       2   2   5   7         }

                        a. Sample matrix A     b. CSR representation of matrix

           FIGURE B.8.1 Compressed sparse row (CSR) matrix.

       float multiply_row(unsigned int rowsize,
                          unsigned int *Aj, // column indices for row
                          float *Av,        // nonzero entries for row
                          float *x)         // the RHS vector
       {
           float sum = 0;

            for(unsigned int column=0; column<rowsize; ++column)
                sum += Av[column] * x[Aj[column]];

            return sum;
       }

       FIGURE B.8.2 Serial C code for a single row of sparse matrix-vector multiply.

              Given a matrix A in CSR form and a vector x, we can compute a single row of
           the product y = Ax using the multiply_row() procedure shown in Figure B.8.2.
           Computing the full product is then simply a matter of looping over all rows and
           computing the result for that row using multiply_row(), as in the serial C code
           shown in Figure B.8.3.
              This algorithm can be translated into a parallel CUDA kernel quite easily. We
           simply spread the loop in csrmul_serial() over many parallel threads. Each
           thread will compute exactly one row of the output vector y. The code for this kernel
           is shown in Figure B.8.4. Note that it looks extremely similar to the serial loop
           used in the csrmul_serial() procedure. There are really only two points of
           difference. First, the row index for each thread is computed from the block and
           thread indices assigned to each thread, eliminating the for-loop. Second, we have a
           conditional that only evaluates a row product if the row index is within the bounds
           of the matrix (this is necessary since the number of rows n need not be a multiple
           of the block size used in launching the kernel).
                                         B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs   B-57

void csrmul_serial(unsigned int *Ap, unsigned int *Aj,
                   float *Av, unsigned int num_rows,
                   float *x, float *y)
{
    for(unsigned int row=0; row<num_rows; ++row)
    {
        unsigned int row_begin = Ap[row];
        unsigned int row_end   = Ap[row+1];

           y[row] = multiply_row(row_end-row_begin, Aj+row_begin,
                                 Av+row_begin, x);
     }
}

FIGURE B.8.3 Serial code for sparse matrix-vector multiply.

__global__
void csrmul_kernel(unsigned int *Ap, unsigned int *Aj,
                   float *Av, unsigned int num_rows,
                   float *x, float *y)
{
    unsigned int row = blockIdx.x*blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

      if( row<num_rows )
      {
          unsigned int row_begin = Ap[row];
          unsigned int row_end   = Ap[row+1];

           y[row] = multiply_row(row_end-row_begin, Aj+row_begin,
                                 Av+row_begin, x);
      }
}

FIGURE B.8.4 CUDA version of sparse matrix-vector multiply.

  Assuming that the matrix data structures have already been copied to the GPU
device memory, launching this kernel will look like:
unsigned int blocksize = 128; // or any size up to 512
unsigned int nblocks = (num_rows + blocksize - 1) / blocksize;
csrmul_kernel<<<nblocks,blocksize>>>(Ap, Aj, Av, num_rows, x, y);
B-58   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          The pattern that we see here is a very common one. The original serial
       algorithm is a loop whose iterations are independent of each other. Such loops
       can be parallelized quite easily by simply assigning one or more iterations of the
       loop to each parallel thread. The programming model provided by CUDA makes
       expressing this type of parallelism particularly straightforward.
          This general strategy of decomposing computations into blocks of independent
       work, and more specifically breaking up independent loop iterations, is not unique
       to CUDA. This is a common approach used in one form or another by various
       parallel programming systems, including OpenMP and Intel’s Threading Building
       Blocks.

       Caching in Shared Memory
       The SpMV algorithms outlined above are fairly simplistic. There are a number of
       optimizations that can be made in both the CPU and GPU codes that can improve
       performance, including loop unrolling, matrix reordering, and register blocking.
       The parallel kernels can also be reimplemented in terms of data parallel scan
       operations presented by Sengupta et al. [2007].
          One of the important architectural features exposed by CUDA is the presence of
       the per-block shared memory, a small on-chip memory with very low latency. Taking
       advantage of this memory can deliver substantial performance improvements. One
       common way of doing this is to use shared memory as a software-managed cache
       to hold frequently reused data. Modifcations using shared memory are shown in
       Figure B.8.5.
          In the context of sparse matrix multiplication, we observe that several rows of A
       may use a particular array element x[i]. In many common cases, and particularly
       when the matrix has been reordered, the rows using x[i] will be rows near row i.
       We can therefore implement a simple caching scheme and expect to achieve some
       performance benefit. The block of threads processing rows i through j will load
       x[i] through x[j] into its shared memory. We will unroll the multiply_row()
       loop and fetch elements of x from the cache whenever possible. The resulting
       code is shown in Figure B.8.5. Shared memory can also be used to make other
       optimizations, such as fetching Ap[row+1] from an adjacent thread rather than
       refetching it from memory.
          Because the Tesla architecture provides an explicitly managed on-chip shared
       memory, rather than an implicitly active hardware cache, it is fairly common to add
       this sort of optimization. Although this can impose some additional development
       burden on the programmer, it is relatively minor, and the potential performance
       benefits can be substantial. In the example shown above, even this fairly simple
       use of shared memory returns a roughly 20% performance improvement on
       representative matrices derived from 3D surface meshes. The availability of an
       explicitly managed memory in lieu of an implicit cache also has the advantage
       that caching and prefetching policies can be specifically tailored to the application
       needs.
                                       B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs   B-59

 __global__
 void csrmul_cached(unsigned int *Ap, unsigned int *Aj,
                    float *Av, unsigned int num_rows,
                    const float *x, float *y)
 {
     // Cache the rows of x[] corresponding to this block.
     __shared__ float cache[blocksize];

       unsigned int block_begin = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x;
       unsigned int block_end   = block_begin + blockDim.x;
       unsigned int row         = block_begin + threadIdx.x;

       // Fetch and cache our window of x[].
       if( row<num_rows) cache[threadIdx.x] = x[row];
       __syncthreads();

       if( row<num_rows )
       {
           unsigned int row_begin = Ap[row];
           unsigned int row_end   = Ap[row+1];
           float sum = 0, x_j;

            for(unsigned int col=row_begin; col<row_end; ++col)
            {
                unsigned int j = Aj[col];

                  // Fetch x_j from our cache when possible
                  if( j>=block_begin && j<block_end )
                       x_j = cache[j-block_begin];
                  else
                       x_j = x[j];

                  sum += Av[col] * x_j;
            }

            y[row] = sum;
       }
 }

FIGURE B.8.5 Shared memory version of sparse matrix-vector multiply.
B-60   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          These are fairly simple kernels whose purpose is to illustrate basic techniques
       in writing CUDA programs, rather than how to achieve maximal performance.
       Numerous possible avenues for optimization are available, several of which are
       explored by Williams et al. [2007] on a handful of different multicore architectures.
       Nevertheless, it is still instructive to examine the comparative performance of even
       these simplistic kernels. On a 2 GHz Intel Core2 Xeon E5335 processor, the csrmul_
       serial() kernel runs at roughly 202 million nonzeros processed per second, for
       a collection of Laplacian matrices derived from 3D triangulated surface meshes.
       Parallelizing this kernel with the parallel_for construct provided by Intel’s
       Threading Building Blocks produces parallel speed-ups of 2.0, 2.1, and 2.3 running
       on two, four, and eight cores of the machine, respectively. On a GeForce 8800 Ultra,
       the csrmul_kernel() and csrmul_cached() kernels achieve processing rates
       of roughly 772 and 920 million nonzeros per second, corresponding to parallel
       speed-ups of 3.8 and 4.6 times over the serial performance of a single CPU core.

       Scan and Reduction
       Parallel scan, also known as parallel prefix sum, is one of the most important
       building blocks for data-parallel algorithms [Blelloch, 1990]. Given a sequence a
       of n elements:

                                          [a0 , a1 , …, an?1 ]

       and a binary associative operator ⊕, the scan function computes the sequence:

                     scan(a, ⊕)     [a0 ,(a0 ⊕ a1 ), …,(a0 ⊕ a1 ⊕ … ⊕ an 1 )]

       As an example, if we take ⊕ to be the usual addition operator, then applying scan
       to the input array

                                        a ? [31 7 0 4 1 6 3]

       will produce the sequence of partial sums:

                                  scan(a, )    [3 4 11111516 22 25]

       This scan operator is an inclusive scan, in the sense that element i of the output
       sequence incorporates element ai of the input. Incorporating only previous elements
       would yield an exclusive scan operator, also known as a prefix-sum operation.
           The serial implementation of this operation is extremely simple. It is simply a
       loop that iterates once over the entire sequence, as shown in Figure B.8.6.
           At first glance, it might appear that this operation is inherently serial. However,
       it can actually be implemented in parallel efficiently. The key observation is that
                                        B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs   B-61

             template<class T>
             __host__ T plus_scan(T *x, unsigned int n)
             {
                 for(unsigned int i=1; i<n; ++i)
                     x[i] = x[i-1] + x[i];
             }

FIGURE B.8.6 Template for serial plus-scan.

         template<class T>
         __device__ T plus_scan(T *x)
         {
             unsigned int i = threadIdx.x;
             unsigned int n = blockDim.x;

              for(unsigned int offset=1; offset<n; offset *= 2)
              {
                  T t;

                   if(i>=offset) t = x[i-offset];
                   __syncthreads();

                   if(i>=offset) x[i] = t + x[i];
                   __syncthreads();
              }
              return x[i];
         }

FIGURE B.8.7 CUDA template for parallel plus-scan.

because addition is associative, we are free to change the order in which elements
are added together. For instance, we can imagine adding pairs of consecutive
elements in parallel, and then adding these partial sums, and so on.
   One simple scheme for doing this is from Hillis and Steele [1989]. An
implementation of their algorithm in CUDA is shown in Figure B.8.7. It assumes
that the input array x[ ] contains exactly one element per thread of the thread
block. It performs log2 n iterations of a loop collecting partial sums together.
   To understand the action of this loop, consider Figure B.8.8, which illustrates
the simple case for n=8 threads and elements. Each level of the diagram represents
one step of the loop. The lines indicate the location from which the data are being
fetched. For each element of the output (i.e., the final row of the diagram) we are
building a summation tree over the input elements. The edges highlighted in blue
show the form of this summation tree for the final element. The leaves of this tree
are all the initial elements. Tracing back from any output element shows that it
incorporates all input values up to and including itself.
B-62   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

        x[0]     x[1]     x[2]     x[3]     x[4]     x[5]     x[6]     x[7]

        x[0]     x[1]     x[2]     x[3]     x[4]     x[5]     x[6]     x[7]      x[i] + = x[i –1];

        x[0]     x[1]     x[2]     x[3]     x[4]     x[5]     x[6]     x[7]      x[i] + = x[i –2];

        x[0]     x[1]     x[2]     x[3]     x[4]     x[5]     x[6]     x[7]      x[i] + = x[i –4];

       FIGURE B.8.8 Tree-based parallel scan data references.

           While simple, this algorithm is not as efficient as we would like. Examining
       the serial implementation, we see that it performs O(n) additions. The parallel
       implementation, in contrast, performs O(n log n) additions. For this reason, it
       is not work efficient, since it does more work than the serial implementation to
       compute the same result. Fortunately, there are other techniques for implementing
       scan that are work-efficient. Details on more efficient implementation techniques
       and the extension of this per-block procedure to multiblock arrays are provided by
       Sengupta et al. [2007].
           In some instances, we may only be interested in computing the sum of all
       elements in an array, rather than the sequence of all prefix sums returned by scan.
       This is the parallel reduction problem. We could simply use a scan algorithm to
       perform this computation, but reduction can generally be implemented more
       efficiently than scan.
           Figure B.8.9 shows the code for computing a reduction using addition. In this
       example, each thread simply loads one element of the input sequence (i.e., it initially
       sums a subsequence of length 1). At the end of the reduction, we want thread 0 to
       hold the sum of all elements initially loaded by the threads of its block. The loop in
       this kernel implicitly builds a summation tree over the input elements, much like
       the scan algorithm above.
           At the end of this loop, thread 0 holds the sum of all the values loaded by this block.
       If we want the final value of the location pointed to by total to contain the total of all
       elements in the array, we must combine the partial sums of all the blocks in the grid.
       One strategy to do this would be to have each block write its partial sum into a second
       array and then launch the reduction kernel again, repeating the process until we had
       reduced the sequence to a single value. A more attractive alternative supported by
       the Tesla GPU architecture is to use the atomicAdd() primitive, an efficient atomic
                                         B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs     B-63

__global__
void plus_reduce(int *input, unsigned int N, int *total)
{
    unsigned int tid = threadIdx.x;
    unsigned int i   = blockIdx.x*blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

     // Each block loads its elements into shared memory, padding
     // with 0 if N is not a multiple of blocksize
     __shared__ int x[blocksize];
     x[tid] = (i<N) ? input[i] : 0;
     __syncthreads();

     // Every thread now holds 1 input value in x[]
     //
     // Build summation tree over elements.
     for(int s=blockDim.x/2; s>0; s=s/2)
     {
         if(tid < s) x[tid] += x[tid + s];
         __syncthreads();
     }

     // Thread 0 now holds the sum of all input values
     // to this block. Have it add that sum to the running total
     if( tid == 0 ) atomicAdd(total, x[tid]);
}

FIGURE B.8.9 CUDA implementation of plus-reduction.

read-modify-write primitive supported by the memory subsystem. This eliminates
the need for additional temporary arrays and repeated kernel launches.
   Parallel reduction is an essential primitive for parallel programming and
highlights the importance of per-block shared memory and low-cost barriers in
making cooperation among threads efficient. This degree of data shuffling among
threads would be prohibitively expensive if done in off-chip global memory.

Radix Sort
One important application of scan primitives is in the implementation of sorting
routines. The code in Figure B.8.10 implements a radix sort of integers across a
single thread block. It accepts as input an array values containing one 32-bit
integer for each thread of the block. For efficiency, this array should be stored in
per-block shared memory, but this is not required for the sort to behave correctly.
   This is a fairly simple implementation of radix sort. It assumes the availability of
a procedure partition_by_bit() that will partition the given array such that
B-64   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

                __device__ void radix_sort(unsigned int *values)
                {
                    for(int bit=0; bit<32; ++bit)
                    {
                        partition_by_bit(values, bit);
                        __syncthreads();
                    }
                }

       FIGURE B.8.10 CUDA code for radix sort.

          __device__ void partition_by_bit(unsigned int *values,
                                           unsigned int bit)
          {
              unsigned int i    = threadIdx.x;
              unsigned int size = blockDim.x;
              unsigned int x_i = values[i];
              unsigned int p_i = (x_i >> bit) & 1;

                values[i] = p_i;
                __syncthreads();

                // Compute number of T bits up to and including p_i.
                // Record the total number of F bits as well.
                unsigned int T_before = plus_scan(values);
                unsigned int T_total = values[size-1];
                unsigned int F_total = size - T_total;
                __syncthreads();

                // Write every x_i to its proper place
                if( p_i )
                     values[T_before-1 + F_total] = x_i;
                else
                     values[i - T_before] = x_i;
          }

       FIGURE B.8.11 CUDA code to partition data on a bit-by-bit basis, as part of radix sort.

       all values with a 0 in the designated bit will come before all values with a 1 in that
       bit. To produce the correct output, this partitioning must be stable.
           Implementing the partitioning procedure is a simple application of scan. Thread
       i holds the value xi and must calculate the correct output index at which to write
       this value. To do so, it needs to calculate (1) the number of threads j < i for which
       the designated bit is 1 and (2) the total number of bits for which the designated bit
       is 0. The CUDA code for partition_by_bit() is shown in Figure B.8.11.
                                           B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs    B-65

   A similar strategy can be applied for implementing a radix sort kernel that sorts
an array of large length, rather than just a one-block array. The fundamental step
remains the scan procedure, although when the computation is partitioned across
multiple kernels, we must double-buffer the array of values rather than doing the
partitioning in place. Details on performing radix sorts on large arrays efficiently
are provided by Satish et al. [2008].

N-Body Applications on a GPU1
Nyland et al. [2007] describe a simple yet useful computational kernel with excellent
GPU performance—the all-pairs N-body algorithm. It is a time-consuming
component of many scientific applications. N-body simulations calculate the
evolution of a system of bodies in which each body continuously interacts with
every other body. One example is an astrophysical simulation in which each body
represents an individual star, and the bodies gravitationally attract each other.
Other examples are protein folding, where N-body simulation is used to calculate
electrostatic and van der Waals forces; turbulent fluid flow simulation; and global
illumination in computer graphics.
    The all-pairs N-body algorithm calculates the total force on each body in the
system by computing each pair-wise force in the system, summing for each body.
Many scientists consider this method to be the most accurate, with the only loss of
precision coming from the floating-point hardware operations. The drawback is its
O(n2) computational complexity, which is far too large for systems with more than
10 bodies. To overcome this high cost, several simplifications have been proposed
to yield O(n log n) and O(n) algorithms; examples are the Barnes-Hut algorithm,
the Fast Multipole Method and Particle-Mesh-Ewald summation. All of the fast
methods still rely on the all-pairs method as a kernel for accurate computation of
short-range forces; thus it continues to be important.

N-Body Mathematics
For gravitational simulation, calculate the body-body force using elementary
physics. Between two bodies indexed by i and j, the 3D force vector is:

                                         mi m j         rij
                              fij   G             2
                                        || rij ||     || rij ||

   The force magnitude is calculated in the left term, while the direction is computed
in the right (unit vector pointing from one body to the other).
   Given a list of interacting bodies (an entire system or a subset), the calculation is
simple: for all pairs of interactions, compute the force and sum for each body. Once
the total forces are calculated, they are used to update each body’s position and
velocity, based on the previous position and velocity. The calculation of the forces
has complexity O(n2), while the update is O(n).

  Adapted from Nyland et al. [2007], “Fast N-Body Simulation with CUDA,” Chapter 31 of
1

GPU Gems 3.
B-66   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          The serial force-calculation code uses two nested for-loops iterating over pairs of
       bodies. The outer loop selects the body for which the total force is being calculated,
       and the inner loop iterates over all the bodies. The inner loop calls a function that
       computes the pair-wise force, then adds the force into a running sum.
          To compute the forces in parallel, we assign one thread to each body, since the
       calculation of force on each body is independent of the calculation on all other
       bodies. Once all of the forces are computed, the positions and velocities of the
       bodies can be updated.
          The code for the serial and parallel versions is shown in Figure B.8.12 and Figure
       B.8.13. The serial version has two nested for-loops. The conversion to CUDA,
       like many other examples, converts the serial outer loop to a per-thread kernel
       where each thread computes the total force on a single body. The CUDA kernel
       computes a global thread ID for each thread, replacing the iterator variable of the
       serial outer loop. Both kernels finish by storing the total acceleration in a global
       array used to compute the new position and velocity values in a subsequent step.
       The outer loop is replaced by a CUDA kernel grid that launches N threads, one
       for each body.

       void accel_on_all_bodies()
       {
           int i, j;
           float3 acc(0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f);

            for (i = 0; i < N; i++) {
               for (j = 0; j < N; j++) {
                  acc = body_body_interaction(acc, body[i], body[j]);
               }
               accel[i] = acc;
            }
       }

       FIGURE B.8.12 Serial code to compute all pair-wise forces on N bodies.

       __global__ void accel_on_one_body()
       {
            int i = threadIdx.x + blockDim.x * blockIdx.x;
            int j;
            float3 acc(0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f);

              for (j = 0; j < N; j++) {
                  acc = body_body_interaction(acc, body[i], body[j]);
              }
              accel[i] = acc;
       }

       FIGURE B.8.13 CUDA thread code to compute the total force on a single body.
                                       B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs                     B-67

Optimization for GPU Execution
The CUDA code shown is functionally correct, but is not efficient, as it ignores
key architectural features. Better performance can be achieved with three main
optimizations. First, shared memory can be used to avoid identical memory reads
between threads. Second, using multiple threads per body improves performance
for small values of N. Third, loop unrolling reduces loop overhead.

Using Shared Memory
Shared memory can hold a subset of body positions, much like a cache, eliminating
redundant global memory requests between threads. We optimize the code shown
above to have each of p threads in a thread-block load one position into shared
memory (for a total of p positions). Once all the threads have loaded a value into
shared memory, ensured by __syncthreads(), each thread can then perform
p interactions (using the data in shared memory). This is repeated N/p times to
complete the force calculation for each body, which reduces the number of requests
to memory by a factor of p (typically in the range 32–128).
   The function called accel_on_one_body() requires a few changes to support
this optimization. The modified code is shown in Figure B.8.14.

__shared__ float4 shPosition[256];
…
__global__ void accel_on_one_body()
{
   int i = threadIdx.x + blockDim.x * blockIdx.x;
   int j, k;
   int p = blockDim.x;
   float3 acc(0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f);
   float4 myBody = body[i];

    for (j = 0; j < N; j += p) { // Outer loops jumps by p each time
        shPosition[threadIdx.x] = body[j+threadIdx.x];
        __syncthreads();
        for (k = 0; k < p; k++) { // Inner loop accesses p positions
            acc = body_body_interaction(acc, myBody, shPosition[k]);
        }
        __syncthreads();
    }
    accel[i] = acc;
}

FIGURE B.8.14 CUDA code to compute the total force on each body, using shared memory to improve performance.
B-68   Appendix B           Graphics and Computing GPUs

                                         N-Body Performance on GPUs
                250

                200

                150
       GFLOPS
                                                                                                                       1 thread, 8800
                                                                                                                       2 threads, 8800
                100                                                                                                    4 threads, 8800
                                                                                                                       1 thread, 9600
                 50
                                                                                                                       2 threads, 9600
                                                                                                                       4 threads, 9600
                  0

                                                                                                     24,576
                      512

                            768

                                  1024

                                         1536

                                                2048

                                                       3072

                                                              4096

                                                                     6144

                                                                            8192

                                                                                   12,288

                                                                                            16,384

                                                                                                              32,768
                                                  Number of Bodies

       FIGURE B.8.15 Performance measurements of the N-body application on a GeForce 8800
       GTX and a GeForce 9600. The 8800 has 128 stream processors at 1.35 GHz, while the 9600 has 64 at
       0.80 GHz (about 30% of the 8800). The peak performance is 242 GFLOPS. For a GPU with more processors,
       the problem needs to be bigger to achieve full performance (the 9600 peak is around 2048 bodies, while the
       8800 doesn’t reach its peak until 16,384 bodies). For small N, more than one thread per body can significantly
       improve performance, but eventually incurs a performance penalty as N grows.

          The loop that formerly iterated over all bodies now jumps by the block dimension
       p. Each iteration of the outer loop loads p successive positions into shared memory
       (one position per thread). The threads synchronize, and then p force calculations
       are computed by each thread. A second synchronization is required to ensure that
       new values are not loaded into shared memory prior to all threads completing the
       force calculations with the current data.
          Using shared memory reduces the memory bandwidth required to less than
       10% of the total bandwidth that the GPU can sustain (using less than 5 GB/s).
       This optimization keeps the application busy performing computation rather than
       waiting on memory accesses, as it would have done without the use of shared
       memory. The performance for varying values of N is shown in Figure B.8.15.

       Using Multiple Threads per Body
       Figure B.8.15 shows performance degradation for problems with small values of N
       (N< 4096) on the GeForce 8800 GTX. Many research efforts that rely on N-body
       calculations focus on small N (for long simulation times), making it a target of
       our optimization efforts. Our presumption to explain the lower performance was
       that there was simply not enough work to keep the GPU busy when N is small.
       The solution is to allocate more threads per body. We change the thread-block
       dimensions from (p, 1, 1) to (p, q, 1), where q threads divide the work of a single body
       into equal parts. By allocating the additional threads within the same thread block,
       partial results can be stored in shared memory. When all the force calculations are
                                                              B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs                    B-69

done, the q partial results can be collected and summed to compute the final result.
Using two or four threads per body leads to large improvements for small N.
   As an example, the performance on the 8800 GTX jumps by 110% when
N = 1024 (one thread achieves 90 GFLOPS, where four achieve 190 GFLOPS).
Performance degrades slightly on large N, so we only use this optimization for N
smaller than 4096. The performance increases are shown in Figure B.8.15 for a
GPU with 128 processors and a smaller GPU with 64 processors clocked at two-
thirds the speed.

Performance Comparison
The performance of the N-body code is shown in Figure B.8.15 and Figure B.8.16.
In Figure B.8.15, performance of high- and medium-performance GPUs is shown,
along with the performance improvements achieved by using multiple threads per
body. The performance on the faster GPU ranges from 90 to just under 250 GFLOPS.
   Figure B.8.16 shows nearly identical code (C++ versus CUDA) running on
Intel Core2 CPUs. The CPU performance is about 1% of the GPU, in the range of
0.2 to 2 GFLOPS, remaining nearly constant over the wide range of problem sizes.

                              N-Body Performance on Intel CPUs
          2
         1.8
         1.6
         1.4
GFLOPS

         1.2
           1
         0.8                                                                                                     T2400
         0.6                                                                                                     E8200
         0.4                                                                                                     X9775
         0.2
                                                                                                                 X9775-Cuda
           0
               512

                     768

                           1024

                                  1536

                                         2048

                                                3072

                                                       4096

                                                               6144

                                                                      8192

                                                                             12,288

                                                                                      16,384

                                                                                               24,576

                                                                                                        32,768

                                            Number of Bodies

FIGURE B.8.16 Performance measurements on the N-body code on a CPU. The graph shows
single precision N-body performance using Intel Core2 CPUs, denoted by their CPU model number. Note
the dramatic reduction in GFLOPS performance (shown in GFLOPS on the y-axis), demonstrating how
much faster the GPU is compared to the CPU. The performance on the CPU is generally independent of
problem size, except for an anomalously low performance when N = 16,384 on the X9775 CPU. The graph
also shows the results of running the CUDA version of the code (using the CUDA-for-CPU compiler)
on a single CPU core, where it outperforms the C++ code by 24%. As a programming language, CUDA
exposes parallelism and locality that a compiler can exploit. The Intel CPUs are a 3.2 GHz Extreme X9775
(code named “Penryn”), a 2.66 GHz E8200 (code named “Wolfdale”), a desktop, pre-Penryn CPU, and a
1.83 GHz T2400 (code named “Yonah”), a 2007 laptop CPU. The Penryn version of the Core 2 architecture
is particularly interesting for N-body calculations with its 4-bit divider, allowing division and square root
operations to execute four times faster than previous Intel CPUs.
B-70   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

          The graph also shows the results of compiling the CUDA version of the code
       for a CPU, where the performance improves by 24%. CUDA, as a programming
       language, exposes parallelism, allowing the compiler to make better use of the SSE
       vector unit on a single core. The CUDA version of the N-body code naturally maps
       to multicore CPUs as well (with grids of blocks), where it achieves nearly perfect
       scaling on an eight-core system with N = 4096 (ratios of 2.0, 3.97, and 7.94 on two,
       four, and eight cores, respectively).

       Results
       With a modest effort, we developed a computational kernel that improves GPU
       performance over multicore CPUs by a factor of up to 157. Execution time for
       the N-body code running on a recent CPU from Intel (Penryn X9775 at 3.2 GHz,
       single core) took more than 3 seconds per frame to run the same code that runs at a
       44 Hz frame rate on a GeForce 8800 GPU. On pre-Penryn CPUs, the code requires
       6–16 seconds, and on older Core2 processors and Pentium IV processor, the time
       is about 25 seconds. We must divide the apparent increase in performance in half,
       as the CPU requires only half as many calculations to compute the same result
       (using the optimization that the forces on a pair of bodies are equal in strength and
       opposite in direction).
           How can the GPU speed up the code by such a large amount? The answer
       requires inspecting architectural details. The pair-wise force calculation requires
       20 floating-point operations, comprised mostly of addition and multiplication
       instructions (some of which can be combined using a multiply-add instruction),
       but there are also division and square root instructions for vector normalization.
       Intel CPUs take many cycles for single-precision division and square root
       instructions,2 although this has improved in the latest Penryn CPU family with its
       faster 4-bit divider.3 Additionally, the limitations in register capacity lead to many
       MOV instructions in the x86 code (presumably to/from L1 cache). In contrast, the
       GeForce 8800 executes a reciprocal square-root thread instruction in four clocks;
       see Section B.6 for special function accuracy. It has a larger register file (per thread)
       and shared memory that can be accessed as an instruction operand. Finally, the
       CUDA compiler emits 15 instructions for one iteration of the loop, compared
       with more than 40 instructions from a variety of x86 CPU compilers. Greater
       parallelism, faster execution of complex instructions, more register space, and an
       efficient compiler all combine to explain the dramatic performance improvement
       of the N-body code between the CPU and the GPU.

       2
          The x86 SSE instructions reciprocal-square-root (RSQRT*) and reciprocal (RCP*) were
       not considered, as their accuracy is too low to be comparable.
       3
          Intel Corporation, Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual.
       November 2007. Order Number: 248966-016. Also available at www.intel.com/design/
       processor/manuals/248966.pdf.
                                          B.8 Real Stuff: Mapping Applications to GPUs              B-71

   On a GeForce 8800, the all-pairs N-body algorithm delivers more than 240
GFLOPS of performance, compared to less than 2 GFLOPS on recent sequential
processors. Compiling and executing the CUDA version of the code on a CPU
demonstrates that the problem scales well to multicore CPUs, but is still significantly
slower than a single GPU.
   We coupled the GPU N-body simulation with a graphical display of the motion,
and can interactively display 16K bodies interacting at 44 frames per second.
This allows astrophysical and biophysical events to be displayed and navigated at
interactive rates. Additionally, we can parameterize many settings, such as noise
reduction, damping, and integration techniques, immediately displaying their
effects on the dynamics of the system. This provides scientists with stunning visual
imagery, boosting their insights on otherwise invisible systems (too large or small,
too fast or too slow), allowing them to create better models of physical phenomena.
   Figure B.8.17 shows a time-series display of an astrophysical simulation of 16K
bodies, with each body acting as a galaxy. The initial configuration is a spherical shell

FIGURE B.8.17 Twelve images captured during the evolution of an N-body system with 16,384 bodies.
B-72   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

       of bodies rotating about the z-axis. One phenomenon of interest to astrophysicists
       is the clustering that occurs, along with the merging of galaxies over time. For the
       interested reader, the CUDA code for this application is available in the CUDA
       SDK from www.nvidia.com/CUDA.

         B.9          Fallacies and Pitfalls

       GPUs have evolved and changed so rapidly that many fallacies and pitfalls have
       arisen. We cover a few here.
         Fallacy GPUs are just SIMD vector multiprocessors.
       It is easy to draw the false conclusion that GPUs are simply SIMD vector
       multiprocessors. GPUs do have a SPMD-style programming model, in that
       a programmer can write a single program that is executed in multiple thread
       instances with multiple data. The execution of these threads is not purely SIMD
       or vector, however; it is single-instruction multiple-thread (SIMT), described in
       Section B.4. Each GPU thread has its own scalar registers, thread private memory,
       thread execution state, thread ID, independent execution and branch path, and
       effective program counter, and can address memory independently. Although a
       group of threads (e.g., a warp of 32 threads) executes more efficiently when the PCs
       for the threads are the same, this is not necessary. So, the multiprocessors are not
       purely SIMD. The thread execution model is MIMD with barrier synchronization
       and SIMT optimizations. Execution is more efficient if individual thread load/
       store memory accesses can be coalesced into block accesses, as well. However, this
       is not strictly necessary. In a purely SIMD vector architecture, memory/register
       accesses for different threads must be aligned in a regular vector pattern. A GPU
       has no such restriction for register or memory accesses; however, execution is more
       efficient if warps of threads access local blocks of data.
           In a further departure from a pure SIMD model, an SIMT GPU can execute
       more than one warp of threads concurrently. In graphics applications, there may
       be multiple groups of vertex programs, pixel programs, and geometry programs
       running in the multiprocessor array concurrently. Computing programs may also
       execute different programs concurrently in different warps.
         Fallacy GPU performance cannot grow faster than Moore’s law.
       Moore’s law is simply a rate. It is not a “speed of light” limit for any other rate.
       Moore’s law describes an expectation that, over time, as semiconductor technology
       advances and transistors become smaller, the manufacturing cost per transistor will
       decline exponentially. Put another way, given a constant manufacturing cost, the
                                                              B.9   Fallacies and Pitfalls   B-73

number of transistors will increase exponentially. Gordon Moore [1965] predicted
that this progression would provide roughly two times the number of transistors
for the same manufacturing cost every year, and later revised it to doubling every
2 years. Although Moore made the initial prediction in 1965 when there were just
50 components per integrated circuit, it has proved remarkably consistent. The
reduction of transistor size has historically had other benefits, such as lower power
per transistor and faster clock speeds at constant power.
   This increasing bounty of transistors is used by chip architects to build processors,
memory, and other components. For some time, CPU designers have used the
extra transistors to increase processor performance at a rate similar to Moore’s law,
so much so that many people think that processor performance growth of two
times every 18–24 months is Moore’s law. In fact, it is not.
   Microprocessor designers spend some of the new transistors on processor cores,
improving the architecture and design, and pipelining for more clock speed. The
rest of the new transistors are used for providing more cache, to make memory
access faster. In contrast, GPU designers use almost none of the new transistors to
provide more cache; most of the transistors are used for improving the processor
cores and adding more processor cores.
   GPUs get faster by four mechanisms. First, GPU designers reap the Moore’s law
bounty directly by applying exponentially more transistors to building more parallel,
and thus faster, processors. Second, GPU designers can improve on the architecture
over time, increasing the efficiency of the processing. Third, Moore’s law assumes
constant cost, so the Moore’s law rate can clearly be exceeded by spending more for
larger chips with more transistors. Fourth, GPU memory systems have increased their
effective bandwidth at a pace nearly comparable to the processing rate, by using faster
memories, wider memories, data compression, and better caches. The combination of
these four approaches has historically allowed GPU performance to double regularly,
roughly every 12 to 18 months. This rate, exceeding the rate of Moore’s law, has been
demonstrated on graphics applications for approximately 10 years and shows no sign
of significant slowdown. The most challenging rate limiter appears to be the memory
system, but competitive innovation is advancing that rapidly too.
   Fallacy GPUs only render 3D graphics; they can’t do general computation.
GPUs are built to render 3D graphics as well as 2D graphics and video. To meet
the demands of graphics software developers as expressed in the interfaces and
performance/feature requirements of the graphics APIs, GPUs have become
massively parallel programmable floating-point processors. In the graphics
domain, these processors are programmed through the graphics APIs and with
arcane graphics programming languages (GLSL, Cg, and HLSL, in OpenGL and
Direct3D). However, there is nothing preventing GPU architects from exposing
B-74   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

       the parallel processor cores to programmers without the graphics API or the arcane
       graphics languages.
          In fact, the Tesla architecture family of GPUs exposes the processors through
       a software environment known as CUDA, which allows programmers to develop
       general application programs using the C language and soon C++. GPUs are
       Turing-complete processors, so they can run any program that a CPU can run,
       although perhaps less well. And perhaps faster.
          Fallacy GPUs cannot run double-precision floating-point programs fast.
       In the past, GPUs could not run double-precision floating-point programs at all,
       except through software emulation. And that’s not very fast at all. GPUs have made
       the progression from indexed arithmetic representation (lookup tables for colors)
       to 8-bit integers per color component, to fixed-point arithmetic, to single-precision
       floating-point, and recently added double precision. Modern GPUs perform
       virtually all calculations in single-precision IEEE floating-point arithmetic, and are
       beginning to use double precision in addition.
          For a small additional cost, a GPU can support double-precision floating-point
       as well as single-precision floating-point. Today, double-precision runs more slowly
       than the single-precision speed, about five to ten times slower. For incremental
       additional cost, double-precision performance can be increased relative to single
       precision in stages, as more applications demand it.
          Fallacy GPUs don’t do floating-point correctly.
       GPUs, at least in the Tesla architecture family of processors, perform single-
       precision floating-point processing at a level prescribed by the IEEE 754 floating-
       point standard. So, in terms of accuracy, GPUs are the equal of any other IEEE
       754-compliant processors.
          Today, GPUs do not implement some of the specific features described in the
       standard, such as handling denormalized numbers and providing precise floating-
       point exceptions. However, the recently introduced Tesla T10P GPU provides full
       IEEE rounding, fused-multiply-add, and denormalized number support for double
       precision.
          Pitfall Just use more threads to cover longer memory latencies.
       CPU cores are typically designed to run a single thread at full speed. To run at full
       speed, every instruction and its data need to be available when it is time for that
       instruction to run. If the next instruction is not ready or the data required for that
       instruction is not available, the instruction cannot run and the processor stalls.
       External memory is distant from the processor, so it takes many cycles of wasted
       execution to fetch data from memory. Consequently, CPUs require large local
                                                              B.9   Fallacies and Pitfalls   B-75

caches to keep running without stalling. Memory latency is long, so it is avoided
by striving to run in the cache. At some point, program working set demands may
be larger than any cache. Some CPUs have used multithreading to tolerate latency,
but the number of threads per core has generally been limited to a small number.
    The GPU strategy is different. GPU cores are designed to run many threads
concurrently, but only one instruction from any thread at a time. Another way to
say this is that a GPU runs each thread slowly, but in aggregate runs the threads
efficiently. Each thread can tolerate some amount of memory latency, because
other threads can run.
    The downside of this is that multiple—many multiple threads—are required to
cover the memory latency. In addition, if memory accesses are scattered or not
correlated among threads, the memory system will get progressively slower in
responding to each individual request. Eventually, even the multiple threads will
not be able to cover the latency. So, the pitfall is that for the “just use more threads”
strategy to work for covering latency, you have to have enough threads, and the
threads have to be well-behaved in terms of locality of memory access.
   Fallacy O(n) algorithms are difficult to speed up.
No matter how fast the GPU is at processing data, the steps of transferring data to
and from the device may limit the performance of algorithms with O(n) complexity
(with a small amount of work per datum). The highest transfer rate over the PCIe
bus is approximately 48 GB/second when DMA transfers are used, and slightly less
for nonDMA transfers. The CPU, in contrast, has typical access speeds of 8–12 GB/
second to system memory. Example problems, such as vector addition, will be
limited by the transfer of the inputs to the GPU and the returning output from the
computation.
   There are three ways to overcome the cost of transferring data. First, try to leave
the data on the GPU for as long as possible, instead of moving the data back and
forth for different steps of a complicated algorithm. CUDA deliberately leaves data
alone in the GPU between launches to support this.
   Second, the GPU supports the concurrent operations of copy-in, copy-out and
computation, so data can be streamed in and out of the device while it is computing.
This model is useful for any data stream that can be processed as it arrives. Examples
are video processing, network routing, data compression/decompression, and even
simpler computations such as large vector mathematics.
   The third suggestion is to use the CPU and GPU together, improving performance
by assigning a subset of the work to each, treating the system as a heterogeneous
computing platform. The CUDA programming model supports allocation of work
to one or more GPUs along with continued use of the CPU without the use of
threads (via asynchronous GPU functions), so it is relatively simple to keep all
GPUs and a CPU working concurrently to solve problems even faster.
B-76   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

        B.10          Concluding Remarks

       GPUs are massively parallel processors and have become widely used, not only
       for 3D graphics, but also for many other applications. This wide application was
       made possible by the evolution of graphics devices into programmable processors.
       The graphics application programming model for GPUs is usually an API such
       as DirectX™ or OpenGL™. For more general-purpose computing, the CUDA
       programming model uses an SPMD (single-program multiple data) style, executing
       a program with many parallel threads.
          GPU parallelism will continue to scale with Moore’s law, mainly by increasing
       the number of processors. Only the parallel programming models that can readily
       scale to hundreds of processor cores and thousands of threads will be successful
       in supporting manycore GPUs and CPUs. Also, only those applications that have
       many largely independent parallel tasks will be accelerated by massively parallel
       manycore architectures.
          Parallel programming models for GPUs are becoming more flexible, for both
       graphics and parallel computing. For example, CUDA is evolving rapidly in the
       direction of full C/C++ functionality. Graphics APIs and programming models
       will likely adapt parallel computing capabilities and models from CUDA. Its
       SPMD-style threading model is scalable, and is a convenient, succinct, and easily
       learned model for expressing large amounts of parallelism.
          Driven by these changes in the programming models, GPU architecture is in
       turn becoming more flexible and more programmable. GPU fixed-function units
       are becoming accessible from general programs, along the lines of how CUDA
       programs already use texture intrinsic functions to perform texture lookups using
       the GPU texture instruction and texture unit.
          GPU architecture will continue to adapt to the usage patterns of both graphics
       and other application programmers. GPUs will continue to expand to include
       more processing power through additional processor cores, as well as increasing
       the thread and memory bandwidth available for programs. In addition, the
       programming models must evolve to include programming heterogeneous
       manycore systems including both GPUs and CPUs.

       Acknowledgments
       This appendix is the work of several authors at NVIDIA. We gratefully acknowledge
       the significant contributions of Michael Garland, John Montrym, Doug Voorhies,
       Lars Nyland, Erik Lindholm, Paulius Micikevicius, Massimiliano Fatica, Stuart
       Oberman, and Vasily Volkov.
                                     B.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading    B-77

 B.11          Historical Perspective and Further
               Reading

Graphics Pipeline Evolution
3D graphics pipeline hardware evolved from the large expensive systems of the
early 1980s to small workstations and then to PC accelerators in the mid- to late-
1990s. During this period, three major transitions occurred:
  ■   Performance-leading graphics subsystems declined in price from $50,000 to
      $200.
  ■   Performance increased from 50 million pixels per second to 1 billion pixels per
      second and from 100,000 vertices per second to 10 million vertices per second.
  ■   Native hardware capabilities evolved from wireframe (polygon outlines) to
      flat shaded (constant color) filled polygons, to smooth shaded (interpolated
      color) filled polygons, to full-scene anti-aliasing with texture mapping and
      rudimentary multitexturing.

Fixed-Function Graphics Pipelines
Throughout this period, graphics hardware was configurable, but not programmable
by the application developer. With each generation, incremental improvements
were offered. But developers were growing more sophisticated and asking for
more new features than could be reasonably offered as built-in fixed functions. The
NVIDIA GeForce 3, described by Lindholm et al. [2001], took the first step toward
true general shader programmability. It exposed to the application developer what
had been the private internal instruction set of the floating-point vertex engine.
This coincided with the release of Microsoft’s DirectX 8 and OpenGL’s vertex shader
extensions. Later GPUs, at the time of DirectX 9, extended general programmability
and floating point capability to the pixel fragment stage, and made texture
available at the vertex stage. The ATI Radeon 9700, introduced in 2002, featured
a programmable 24-bit floating-point pixel fragment processor programmed
with DirectX 9 and OpenGL. The GeForce FX added 32-bit floating-point pixel
processors. This was part of a general trend toward unifying the functionality of
the different stages, at least as far as the application programmer was concerned.
NVIDIA’s GeForce 6800 and 7800 series were built with separate processor designs
and separate hardware dedicated to the vertex and to the fragment processing. The
XBox 360 introduced an early unified processor GPU in 2005, allowing vertex and
pixel shaders to execute on the same processor.
B-78   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

       Evolution of Programmable Real-Time Graphics
       During the last 30 years, graphics architecture has evolved from a simple pipeline for
       drawing wireframe diagrams to a highly parallel design consisting of several deep
       parallel pipelines capable of rendering complex interactive imagery that appears
       three-dimensional. Concurrently, many of the calculations involved became far
       more sophisticated and user-programmable.
          In these graphics pipelines, certain stages do a great deal of floating-point
       arithmetic on completely independent data, such as transforming the position
       of triangle vertexes or generating pixel colors. This data independence is a key
       difference between GPUs and CPUs. A single frame, rendered in 1/60th of a
       second, might have 1 million triangles and 6 million pixels. The opportunity to use
       hardware parallelism to exploit this data independence is tremendous.
          The specific functions executed at a few graphics pipeline stages vary with
       rendering algorithms and have evolved to be programmable. Vertex programs
       map the position of triangle vertices on to the screen, altering their position, color,
       or orientation. Typically a vertex shader thread inputs a floating-point (x, y, z, w)
       vertex position and computes a floating-point (x, y, z) screen position. Geometry
       programs operate on primitives defined by multiple vertices, changing them or
       generating additional primitives. Pixel fragment shaders each “shade” one pixel,
       computing a floating-point red, green, blue, alpha (RGBA) color contribution to
       the rendered image at its pixel sample (x, y) image position. For all three types of
       graphics shaders, program instances can be run in parallel, because each works on
       independent data, produces independent results, and has no side effects.
          Between these programmable graphics pipeline stages are dozens of fixed-function
       stages which perform well-defined tasks far more efficiently than a programmable
       processor could and which would benefit far less from programmability. For
       example, between the geometry processing stage and the pixel processing stage is
       a “rasterizer,” a complex state machine that determines exactly which pixels (and
       portions thereof) lie within each geometric primitive’s boundaries. Together, the
       mix of programmable and fixed-function stages is engineered to balance extreme
       performance with user control over the rendering algorithms.
          Common rendering algorithms perform a single pass over input primitives and
       access other memory resources in a highly coherent manner; these algorithms
       provide excellent bandwidth utilization and are largely insensitive to memory
       latency. Combined with a pixel shader workload that is usually compute-limited,
       these characteristics have guided GPUs along a different evolutionary path than
       CPUs. Whereas CPU die area is dominated by cache memory, GPUs are dominated
       by floating-point datapath and fixed-function logic. GPU memory interfaces
       emphasize bandwidth over latency (since latency can be readily hidden by a high
       thread count); indeed, bandwidth is typically many times higher than a CPU,
       exceeding 100 GB/second in some cases. The far-higher number of fine-grained
       lightweight threads effectively exploits the rich parallelism available.
                                     B.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading    B-79

   Beginning with NVIDIA’s GeForce 8800 GPU in 2006, the three programmable
graphics stages are mapped to an array of unified processors; the logical graphics
pipeline is physically a recirculating path that visits these processors three times,
with much fixed-function graphics logic between visits. Since different rendering
algorithms present wildly different loads among the three programmable stages,
this unification provides processor load balancing.

Unified Graphics and Computing Processors
By the DirectX 10 generation, the functionality of vertex and pixel fragment
shaders was to be made identical to the programmer, and in fact a new logical
stage was introduced, the geometry shader, to process all the vertices of a primitive
rather than vertices in isolation. The GeForce 8800 was designed with DirectX 10
in mind. Developers were coming up with more sophisticated shading algorithms,
and this motivated a sharp increase in the available shader operation rate,
particularly floating-point operations. NVIDIA chose to pursue a processor design
with higher operating frequency than standard-cell methodologies had allowed,
to deliver the desired operation throughput as area-efficiently as possible. High-
clock-speed design requires substantially more engineering effort, and this favored
designing one processor, rather than two (or three, given the new geometry stage).
It became worthwhile to take on the engineering challenges of a unified processor
(load balancing and recirculation of a logical pipeline onto threads of the processor
array) to get the benefits of one processor design.

GPGPU: an Intermediate Step
As DirectX 9-capable GPUs became available, some researchers took notice of the
raw performance growth path of GPUs and began to explore the use of GPUs to
solve complex parallel problems. DirectX 9 GPUs had been designed only to match
the features required by the graphics API. To access the computational resources, a
programmer had to cast their problem into native graphics operations. For example,
to run many simultaneous instances of a pixel shader, a triangle had to be issued to
the GPU (with clipping to a rectangle shape if that’s what was desired). Shaders did
not have the means to perform arbitrary scatter operations to memory. The only
way to write a result to memory was to emit it as a pixel color value, and configure
the framebuffer operation stage to write (or blend, if desired) the result to a two-
dimensional framebuffer. Furthermore, the only way to get a result from one pass
of computation to the next was to write all parallel results to a pixel framebuffer,
then use that framebuffer as a texture map as input to the pixel fragment shader of
the next stage of the computation. Mapping general computations to a GPU in this
era was quite awkward. Nevertheless, intrepid researchers demonstrated a handful
of useful applications with painstaking efforts. This field was called “GPGPU” for
general purpose computing on GPUs.
B-80   Appendix B   Graphics and Computing GPUs

       GPU Computing
       While developing the Tesla architecture for the GeForce 8800, NVIDIA realized its
       potential usefulness would be much greater if programmers could think of the GPU
       as a processor. NVIDIA selected a programming approach in which programmers
       would explicitly declare the data-parallel aspects of their workload.
           For the DirectX 10 generation, NVIDIA had already begun work on a high-
       efficiency floating-point and integer processor that could run a variety of
       simultaneous workloads to support the logical graphics pipeline. This processor
       was designed to take advantage of the common case of groups of threads executing
       the same code path. NVIDIA added memory load and store instructions with
       integer byte addressing to support the requirements of compiled C programs. It
       introduced the thread block (cooperative thread array), grid of thread blocks, and
       barrier synchronization to dispatch and manage highly parallel computing work.
       Atomic memory operations were added. NVIDIA developed the CUDA C/C++
       compiler, libraries, and runtime software to enable programmers to readily access
       the new data-parallel computation model and develop applications.

       Scalable GPUs
       Scalability has been an attractive feature of graphics systems from the beginning.
       Workstation graphics systems gave customers a choice in pixel horsepower by
       varying the number of pixel processor circuit boards installed. Prior to the mid-
       1990s PC graphics scaling was almost nonexistent. There was one option—the
       VGA controller. As 3D-capable accelerators appeared, the market had room for a
       range of offerings. 3dfx introduced multiboard scaling with the original SLI (Scan
       Line Interleave) on their Voodoo2, which held the performance crown for its time
       (1998). Also in 1998, NVIDIA introduced distinct products as variants on a single
       architecture with Riva TNT Ultra (high-performance) and Vanta (low-cost), first
       by speed binning and packaging, then with separate chip designs (GeForce 2 GTS &
       GeForce 2 MX). At present, for a given architecture generation, four or five separate
       GPU chip designs are needed to cover the range of desktop PC performance and
       price points. In addition, there are separate segments in notebook and workstation
       systems. After acquiring 3dfx, NVIDIA continued the multi-GPU SLI concept in
       2004, starting with GeForce 6800—providing multi-GPU scalability transparently
       to the programmer and to the user. Functional behavior is identical across the
       scaling range; one application will run unchanged on any implementation of an
       architectural family.
          CPUs are scaling to higher transistor counts by increasing the number of
       constant-performance cores on a die, rather than increasing the performance of
       a single core. At this writing the industry is transitioning from dual-core to quad-
       core, with eight-core not far behind. Programmers are forced to find fourfold to
       eightfold task parallelism to fully utilize these processors, and applications using
       task parallelism must be rewritten frequently to target each successive doubling of
                                               B.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading               B-81

core count. In contrast, the highly multithreaded GPU encourages the use of many-
fold data parallelism and thread parallelism, which readily scales to thousands of
parallel threads on many processors. The GPU scalable parallel programming
model for graphics and parallel computing is designed for transparent and
portable scalability. A graphics program or CUDA program is written once and
runs on a GPU with any number of processors. As shown in Section B.1, a CUDA
programmer explicitly states both fine-grained and coarse-grained parallelism in
a thread program by decomposing the problem into grids of thread blocks—the
same program will run efficiently on GPUs or CPUs of any size in current and
future generations as well.

Recent Developments
Academic and industrial work on applications using CUDA has produced
hundreds of examples of successful CUDA programs. Many of these programs run
the application tens or hundreds of times faster than multicore CPUs are capable
of running them. Examples include n-body simulation, molecular modeling,
computational finance, and oil and gas exploration data processing. Although many
of these use single-precision floating-point arithmetic, some problems require
double precision. The recent arrival of double-precision floating-point in GPUs
enables an even broader range of applications to benefit from GPU acceleration.
   For a comprehensive list and examples of current developments in applications
that are accelerated by GPUs, visit CUDAZone: www.nvidia.com/CUDA.

Future Trends
Naturally, the number of processor cores will continue to increase in proportion to
increases in available transistors as silicon processes improve. In addition, GPUs
will continue to enjoy vigorous architectural evolution. Despite their demonstrated
high performance on data-parallel applications, GPU core processors are still of
relatively simple design. More aggressive techniques will be introduced with each
successive architecture to increase the actual utilization of the calculating units.
Because scalable parallel computing on GPUs is a new field, novel applications
are rapidly being created. By studying them, GPU designers will discover and
implement new machine optimizations.

Further Reading
Akeley, K. and T. Jermoluk [1988]. “High-Performance Polygon Rendering,” Proc. SIGGRAPH 1988 (August),
239–46.

Akeley, K. [1993]. “RealityEngine Graphics.” Proc. SIGGRAPH 1993 (August), 109–16.

Blelloch, G. B. [1990]. “Prefix Sums and Their Applications”. In John H. Reif (Ed.), Synthesis of Parallel
Algorithms, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.

Blythe, D. [2006]. “The Direct3D 10 System”, ACM Trans. Graphics Vol. 25, no. 3 (July), 724–34.
B-82   Appendix B     Graphics and Computing GPUs

       Buck, I., T. Foley, D. Horn, J. Sugerman, K. Fatahlian, M. Houston, and P. Hanrahan [2004]. “Brook for
       GPUs: Stream Computing on Graphics Hardware.” Proc. SIGGRAPH 2004, 777–86, August. http://doi.acm.
       org/10.1145/1186562.1015800.

       Elder, G. [2002] “Radeon 9700.” Eurographics/SIGGRAPH Workshop on Graphics Hardware, Hot3D
       Session, www.graphicshardware.org/previous/www_2002/presentations/Hot3D-RADEON9700.ppt.

       Fernando, R. and M. J. Kilgard [2003]. The Cg Tutorial: The Definitive Guide to Programmable Real-Time
       Graphics, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

       Fernando, R. (Ed.), [2004]. GPU Gems: Programming Techniques, Tips, and Tricks for Real-Time Graphics,
       Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. https://developer.nvidia.com/gpugems/GPUGems/gpugems_pref01.html.

       Foley, J., A. van Dam, S. Feiner, and J. Hughes [1995]. Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice, second
       edition in C, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

       Hillis, W. D. and G. L. Steele [1986]. “Data parallel algorithms.” Commun. ACM 29, 12 (Dec.),1170–83.
       http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/7902.7903.

       IEEE Std 754-2008 [2008]. IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic. ISBN 978-0-7381-5752-8, STD95802,
       http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/servlet/opac?punumber=4610933 (Aug. 29).

       Industrial Light and Magic [2003]. OpenEXR, www.openexr.com.

       Intel Corporation [2007]. Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual. November. Order
       Number: 248966-016. http://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/manuals/64-ia-
       32-architectures-optimization-manual.pdf.

       Kessenich, J. [2006]. The OpenGL Shading Language, Language Version 1.20, Sept. 2006. www.opengl.org/
       documentation/specs/.

       Kirk, D. and D. Voorhies [1990]. “The Rendering Architecture of the DN10000VS.” Proc. SIGGRAPH 1990
       (August), 299–307.

       Lindholm E., M.J. Kilgard, and H. Moreton [2001]. “A User- Programmable Vertex Engine.” Proc. SIGGRAPH
       2001 (August), 149–58.

       Lindholm, E., J. Nickolls, S. Oberman, and J. Montrym [2008]. “NVIDIA Tesla: A Unified Graphics and
       Computing Architecture”, IEEE Micro Vol. 28, no. 2 (March–April), 39–55.

       Microsoft Corporation. Microsoft DirectX Specification, https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/
       windows/apps/hh452744.aspx.

       Microsoft Corporation [2003]. Microsoft DirectX 9 Programmable Graphics Pipeline, Microsoft Press,
       Redmond, WA.

       Montrym, J., D. Baum, D. Dignam, and C. Migdal [1997]. “InfiniteReality: A Real-Time Graphics System.”
       Proc. SIGGRAPH 1997 (August), 293–301.

       Montrym, J. and H. Moreton [2005]. “The GeForce 6800”, IEEE Micro, Vol. 25, no. 2 (March–April), 41–51.

       Moore, G. E. [1965]. “Cramming more components onto integrated circuits”, Electronics, Vol. 38, no. 8
       (April 19).
                                                B.11 Historical Perspective and Further Reading                 B-83

Nguyen, H. (Ed.), [2008]. GPU Gems 3, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Nickolls, J., I. Buck, M. Garland, and K. Skadron [2008]. “Scalable Parallel Programming with CUDA”, ACM
Queue Vol. 6, no. 2 (March–April) 40–53.

NVIDIA [2007]. CUDA Zone. http://www.nvidia.com/object/cuda_home_new.html.

NVIDIA [2007]. CUDA Programming Guide 1.1. https://developer.nvidia.com/nvidia-gpu-programming-
guide.

NVIDIA [2007]. PTX: Parallel Thread Execution ISA version 1.1. www.nvidia.com/object/io_1195170102263.
html.

Nyland, L., M. Harris, and J. Prins [2007]. “Fast N-Body Simulation with CUDA.” In GPU Gems 3, H. Nguyen
(Ed.), Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Oberman, S. F. and M. Y. Siu [2005]. “A High-Performance Area- Efficient Multifunction Interpolator,” Proc.
Seventeenth IEEE Symp. Computer Arithmetic, 272–79.

Patterson, D. A. and J. L. Hennessy [2004]. Computer Organization and Design: The Hardware/Software Inter
face, third edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.

Pharr, M. ed. [2005]. GPU Gems 2: Programming Techniques for High-Performance Graphics and General-
Purpose Computation, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Satish, N., M. Harris, and M. Garland [2008]. “Designing Efficient Sorting Algorithms for Manycore GPUs,”
NVIDIA Technical Report NVR-2008-001.

Segal, M. and K. Akeley [2006]. The OpenGL Graphics System: A Specification, Version 2.1, Dec. 1, 2006. www.
opengl.org/documentation/specs/.

Sengupta, S., M. Harris, Y. Zhang, and J. D. Owens [2007]. “Scan Primitives for GPU Computing.” In Proc. of
Graphics Hardware 2007 (August), 97–106.

Volkov, V. and J. Demmel [2008]. “LU, QR and Cholesky Factorizations using Vector Capabilities of GPUs,”
Technical Report No. UCB/EECS-2008-49, 1–11. http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2008/EECS-
2008-49.pdf.

Williams, S., L. Oliker, R. Vuduc, J. Shalf, K. Yelick, and J. Demmel [2007]. “Optimization of sparse matrix-
vector multiplication on emerging multicore platforms,” In Proc. Supercomputing 2007, November.
This page intentionally left blank
