Preface
Embedded systems are a ubiquitous component of our everyday lives. We interact with hundreds of
tiny computers every day that are embedded into our houses, our cars, our toys, and our work. As our
world has become more complex, so have the capabilities of the microcontrollers embedded into our
devices. The ARM ® Cortex™-M family represents a new class of microcontrollers much more
powerful than the devices available ten years ago. The purpose of this book is to present the design
methodology to train young engineers to understand the basic building blocks that comprise devices
like a cell phone, an MP3 player, a pacemaker, antilock brakes, and an engine controller.
This book is the first in a series of three books that teach the fundamentals of embedded systems as
applied to the ARM ® Cortex™-M family of microcontrollers. This first book is an introduction to
computers and interfacing focusing on assembly language and C programming. The second book
Embedded Systems: Real-Time Interfacing to ARM Cortex-M Microcontrollers focuses on
hardware/software interfacing and the design of embedded systems. The third book Embedded
Systems: Real-Time Operating Systems for ARM Cortex-M Microcontrollers is an advanced book
focusing on operating systems, high-speed interfacing, control systems, and robotics. The third
volume could also be used for professionals wishing to design or deploy a real-time operating system
onto an ARM platform. This first book is an introductory book that could be used at the college level
with little or no prerequisites.
An embedded system is a system that performs a specific task and has a computer embedded inside. A
system is comprised of components and interfaces connected together for a common purpose. This
book is an introduction to embedded systems. Specific topics include microcontrollers, fixed-point
numbers, the design of software in assembly language and C, elementary data structures, programming
input/output including interrupts, analog to digital conversion, digital to analog conversion.
In general, the area of embedded systems is an important and growing discipline within electrical and
computer engineering. In the past, the educational market of embedded systems has been dominated by
simple microcontrollers like the PIC, the 9S12, and the 8051. This is because of their market share,
low cost, and historical dominance. However, as problems become more complex, so must the
systems that solve them. A number of embedded system paradigms must shift in order to accommodate
this growth in complexity. First, the number of calculations per second will increase from
millions/sec to billions/sec. Similarly, the number of lines of software code will also increase from
thousands to millions. Thirdly, systems will involve multiple microcontrollers supporting many
simultaneous operations. Lastly, the need for system verification will continue to grow as these
systems are deployed into safety critical applications. These changes are more than a simple growth
in size and bandwidth. These systems must employ parallel programming, high-speed
synchronization, real-time operating systems, fault tolerant design, priority interrupt handling, and
networking. Consequently, it will be important to provide our students with these types of design
experiences. The ARM platform is both low cost and provides the high-performance features
required in future embedded systems. In addition, the ARM market share is large and will continue to
grow. Furthermore, students trained on the ARM will be equipped to design systems across the
complete spectrum from simple to complex. The purpose of writing these three books at this time is to
bring engineering education into the 21st century.
This book employs many approaches to learning. It will not include an exhaustive recapitulation of
the information in data sheets. First, it begins with basic fundamentals, which allows the reader to
solve new problems with new technology. Second, the book presents many detailed design examples.
These examples illustrate the process of design. There are multiple structural components that assist
learning. Checkpoints, with answers in the back, are short easy to answer questions providing
immediate feedback while reading. Simple homework, with answers to the odd questions on the web,
provides more detailed learning opportunities. The book includes an index and a glossary so that
information can be searched. The most important learning experiences in a class like this are of
course the laboratories. Each chapter has suggested lab assignments. More detailed lab descriptions
are available on the web. Specifically for this volume, look at the lab assignments for EE319K. For
Volume 2, refer to the EE445L labs, and for Volume 3, look at the lab assignments for
EE445M/EE380L.6.
There is a web site accompanying this book http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~valvano/arm. Posted here
are ARM Keil™ uVision® and Texas Instruments Code Composer Studio™ projects for each of the
example programs in the book. You will also find data sheets and Excel spreadsheets relevant to the
material in this book.
The book will cover embedded systems for ARM ® Cortex™-M microcontrollers with specific
details on the TM4C123 and TM4C1294. The web site includes corresponding examples for the
LM3S811, LM3S1968, and LM3S8962. In these books the terms LM3S and TM4C will refer to
families of microcontrollers with the Texas Instruments Stellaris ® and Tiva ® lines. Although the
solutions are specific for the LM3S and TM4C families, it will be possible to use these books for
other ARM derivatives.
Acknowledgements
I owe a wonderful debt of gratitude to Daniel Valvano. He wrote and tested most of the software
examples found in these books. Secondly, he created and maintains the example web site,
http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~valvano/arm. Lastly, he meticulously proofread this manuscript.
Many shared experiences contributed to the development of this book. First I would like to
acknowledge the many excellent teaching assistants I have had the pleasure of working with. Some of
these hard-working, underpaid warriors include Pankaj Bishnoi, Rajeev Sethia, Adson da Rocha,
Bao Hua, Raj Randeri, Santosh Jodh, Naresh Bhavaraju, Ashutosh Kulkarni, Bryan Stiles, V.
Krishnamurthy, Paul Johnson, Craig Kochis, Sean Askew, George Panayi, Jeehyun Kim, Vikram
Godbole, Andres Zambrano, Ann Meyer, Hyunjin Shin, Anand Rajan, Anil Kottam, Chia-ling Wei,
Jignesh Shah, Icaro Santos, David Altman, Nachiket Kharalkar, Robin Tsang, Byung Geun Jun, John
Porterfield, Daniel Fernandez, Deepak Panwar, Jacob Egner, Sandy Hermawan, Usman Tariq,
Sterling Wei, Seil Oh, Antonius Keddis, Lev Shuhatovich, Glen Rhodes, Geoffrey Luke, Karthik
Sankar, Tim Van Ruitenbeek, Raffaele Cetrulo, Harshad Desai, Justin Capogna, Arindam Goswami,
Jungho Jo, Mehmet Basoglu, Kathryn Loeffler, Evgeni Krimer, Nachiappan Valliappan, Razik Ahmed,
Sundeep Korrapati, Peter Garatoni, Manan Kathuria, Jae Hong Min, Pratyusha Nidamaluri, Dayo
Lawal, Aditya Srikanth, Kurt Fellows, James Beecham, Austin Blackstone, Brandon Carson, Kin
Hong Mok, Omar Baca, Sam Oyetunji, Zack Lalanne, Nathan Quang Minh Thai, Paul Fagen, Zhuoran
Zhao, Sparsh Singhai, Saugata Bhattacharyya, Chinmaya Dattathri, Emily Ledbetter, Kevin Gilbert,
Siavash Kamali, Yen-Kai Huang, Michael Xing, Katherine Olin, Mitchell Crooks, Prachi Gupta,
Mark Meserve, Sourabh Shirhatti, Dylan Zika, Kelsey Ball, Greg Cerna, Sabine Francis, Ahmad El
Youssef, and Wooseok Lee. These teaching assistants have contributed greatly to the contents of this
book and particularly to its laboratory assignments. Since 1981, I estimate I have taught embedded
systems to over 5000 students. Spring 2014, Professor Yerraballi and I taught a massive open online
class (MOOC) based on this book. We had over 40,000 students register, and over 5,000 students
finished at least one lab on the hardware platform. We plan to rerun this MOOC Spring 2015. My
students have recharged my energy each semester with their enthusiasm, dedication, and quest for
knowledge. I have decided not to acknowledge them all individually. However, they know I feel
privileged to have had this opportunity.
Next, I appreciate the patience and expertise of my fellow faculty members here at the University of
Texas at Austin. From a personal perspective Dr. John Pearce provided much needed encouragement
and support throughout my career. In addition, Drs. John Cogdell, John Pearce, and Francis Bostick
helped me with analog circuit design. The book and accompanying software include many finite state
machines derived from the digital logic examples explained to me by Dr. Charles Roth. The
educational content presented in this book is result of the combined efforts of the entire teaching staff
of EE319K: Drs. Ramesh Yerraballi, Mattan Erez, Andreas Gerstlauer, Nina Telang, William Bard
and I. This team has created an educationally rich lab course that is both engaging and achievable for
the freshman engineer. Each time we teach EE319K, we create a capstone design experience centered
on a class competition. You can see descriptions and photos of our class design competitions at
http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~valvano/.
I have a special appreciation for all those who reviewed the first edition. Joe Bungo passed chapters
around to fellows at ARM. In particular, the suggestions and corrections from Chris Shore and Drew
Barbier were totally awesome. Cathy Wicks and Larissa Swanland from Texas Instruments supported
these books with money, development kits, and chips. Bill Bard and Ramesh Yerraballi gave valuable
feedback on how to make this book an effective teaching tool for freshmen. Austin Blackstone has
been a constant contributor to these books. In particular, he created and debugged the Code Composer
Studio™ versions of the example programs posted on the web.
Sincerely, I appreciate the valuable lessons of character and commitment taught to me by my parents
and grandparents. I recall how hard my parents and grandparents worked to make the world a better
place for the next generation. Most significantly, I acknowledge the love, patience and support of my
wife, Barbara, and my children, Ben Dan and Liz. In particular, Dan designed and tested most of the
LM3S and TM4C software presented in this book.
By the grace of God, I am truly the happiest man on the planet, because I am surrounded by these fine
people.
Jonathan W. Valvano

  The true engineering experience occurs not with your eyes and ears, but rather with your
  fingers and elbows. In other words, engineering education does not happen by listening in
  class or reading a book; rather it happens by designing under the watchful eyes of a patient
  mentor. So, go build something today, then show it to someone you respect!

Good luck
