2. Introduction to Embedded Systems
Chapter 2 objectives are to:
• Present an introduction to embedded systems
• Outline the basic steps in design
• Define data flow and call graphs as a design tool
• Present a short introduction to C programming

The objective of this chapter is to present the framework or fundamentals needed for system design in
general, and embedded system design in particular. A system is a collection of components that are
combined together to perform a single complicated task in a coordinated manner. Component is used
here in a very broad sense including software, computer hardware, digital hardware, analog circuits,
mechanical hardware, power supply and distribution, sensors, and actuators. A system is comprised
from components and interfaces. In a recursive manner, we can design a component by connecting
simpler components together with interfaces. Using this model, one can envision top-down design as
the process beginning with one large component, and then subdividing each component into simpler
subcomponents connected together with interfaces. This process completes when each component is
so simple it can be built or purchased. Testing can then proceed in a bottom-up fashion by connecting
actual components together with actual interfaces. Systems have structure defined by the components
and interconnections. Systems have behavior. For an embedded system, behavior is embodied by the
responses of its outputs to changes in its inputs. Both time and state are important factors in
describing the behavior of an embedded system. Systems have interconnectivity. Examples of these
interconnections include mechanical force (bolts and nuts), energy (power flowing out of a battery),
information flow (communication channel), synchronization (if this happens, make that happen), and
integration of information (yaw, pitch, and roll combine to define tilt angle). Systems have rules or
assumptions of expected usage. For example, the designer of an automobile expects you to drive it on
the road. This expected usage is often found as a list of constraints. If you learn two things from
reading this chapter, let them be these: every project needs a well-written requirements document,
and testing is something we must do at every stage of a project (beginning, middle, and end.)
2.1. Embedded Systems
To better understand the expression embedded microcomputer system, consider each word
separately. In this context, the word “embedded” means hidden inside so one can’t see it. The term
“micro” means small, and a “computer” contains a processor, memory, and a means to exchange data
with the external world. The word “system” means multiple components interfaced together for a
common purpose. Systems have structure, behavior, and interconnectivity operating in a framework
bound by rules and regulations. Another name for embedded systems is Cyber-Physical Systems,
introduced in 2006 by Helen Gill of the National Science Foundation, because these systems combine
the intelligence of a computer with the physical objects of our world. In an embedded system, we use
ROM for storing the software and fixed constant data and RAM for storing temporary information.
Many microcomputers employed in embedded systems use Flash EEPROM, which is an electrically-
erasable programmable ROM, because the information can easily be erased and reprogrammed. The
functionality of a digital watch is defined by the software programmed into its ROM. When you
remove the batteries from a watch and insert new batteries, it still behaves like a watch because the
ROM is nonvolatile storage. As shown in Figure 2.1, the term embedded microcomputer system
refers to a device that contains one or more microcomputers inside. Microcontrollers, which are
microcomputers incorporating the processor, RAM, ROM and I/O ports into a single package, are
often employed in an embedded system because of their low cost, small size, and low power
requirements. Microcontrollers like the Texas Instruments TM4C family are available with a large
number and wide variety of I/O devices, such as parallel ports, serial ports, timers, digital to analog
converters (DAC), and analog to digital converters (ADC). The I/O devices are a crucial part of an
embedded system, because they provide necessary functionality. The software together with the I/O
ports and associated interface circuits give an embedded computer system its distinctive
characteristics. Managing time, both as an input and an output, is a critical task. It is not only
important to get the correct output, but to get the correct output at the proper time. The
microcontrollers often must communicate with each other. How the system interacts with humans is
often called the human-computer interface (HCI) or man-machine interface (MMI).

Figure 2.1. An embedded system includes a microcomputer interfaced to external
 physical devices.
Checkpoint 2.1: What is an embedded system?
A digital multimeter, as shown in Figure 2.2, is a typical embedded system. This embedded system
has two inputs: the mode selection dial on the front and the red/black test probes. The output is a
liquid crystal display (LCD) showing measured parameters. The large black chip inside the box is a
microcontroller. The software that defines its very specific purpose is programmed into the ROM of
the microcontroller. As you can see, there is not much else inside this box other than the
microcontroller, a fuse, a rotary dial to select the mode, a few interfacing resistors, and a battery.

Figure 2.2. A digital multimeter contains a microcontroller programmed to
 measure voltage, current and resistance.
As defined previously, a microcomputer is a small computer. One typically restricts the term
embedded to refer to systems that do not look and behave like a typical computer. Most embedded
systems do not have a keyboard, a graphics display, or secondary storage (disk). There are two ways
to develop embedded systems. The first technique uses a microcontroller, like the ARM Cortex M-
series. In general, there is no operating system, so the entire software system is developed. These
devices are suitable for low-cost, low-performance systems. Volume 3 will describe how to design a
real-time operating system for the Cortex M family of microcontrollers. On the other hand, one can
develop a high-performance embedded system around a more powerful microcontroller such as the
ARM Cortex A-series. These systems typically employ an operating system and are first designed on
a development platform, and then the software and hardware are migrated to a stand-alone embedded
platform.
Checkpoint 2.2: What is a microcomputer?
The external devices attached to the microcontroller allow the system to interact with its environment.
An interface is defined as the hardware and software that combine to allow the computer to
communicate with the external hardware. We must also learn how to interface a wide range of inputs
and outputs that can exist in either digital or analog form. This first volume provides an introduction
to microcomputer programming, hardware interfacing, and the design of embedded systems. Volume 2
of this series will focus on the details of hardware interfacing and system design. Volume 3 describes
real-time operating systems and applies embedded system design to real-time data acquisition, digital
signal processing, high-speed networks, and digital control systems. In general, we can classify I/O
interfaces into parallel, serial, analog or time. Because of low cost, low power, and high
performance, there has been and will continue to be an advantage of using time-encoded inputs and
outputs.
A device driver is a set of software functions that facilitate the use of an I/O port. One of the simplest
I/O ports on the Texas Instruments TM4C family is a parallel port or General Purpose Input/Output
(GPIO). One such parallel port is Port A. The software will refer to this port using the
name GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R . Ports are a collection of pins, usually 8, which can be used for
either input or output. If Port A is an input port, then when the software reads
from GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R , it gets eight bits (each bit is 1 or 0), representing the digital levels
(high or low) that exist at the time of the read. If Port A is an output port, then when the software
writes to GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R , it sets the outputs on the eight pins high (1) or low (0),
depending on the data value the software has written.
The other general concept involved in most embedded systems is they run in real time. In a real-time
computer system, we can put an upper bound on the time required to perform the input-calculation-
output sequence. A real-time system can guarantee a worst case upper bound on the response time
between when the new input information becomes available and when that information is processed.
This response time is called interface latency. Another real-time requirement that exists in many
embedded systems is the execution of periodic tasks. A periodic task is one that must be performed at
equal-time intervals. A real-time system can put a small and bounded limit on the time error between
when a task should be run and when it is actually run. Because of the real-time nature of these
systems, microcontrollers have a rich set of features to handle many aspects of time.
Checkpoint 2.3: An input device allows information to be entered into the computer. List some of the
input devices available on a general purpose computer.
Checkpoint 2.4: An output device allows information to exit the computer. List some of the output
devices available on a general purpose computer.
The embedded computer systems in these three volumes will contain an ARM Cortex M
microcontroller, which will be programmed to perform a specific dedicated application. Software for
embedded systems typically solves only a limited range of problems. The microcomputer is
embedded or hidden inside the device. In an embedded system, the software is usually programmed
into ROM and therefore fixed. Even so, software maintenance (e.g., verification of proper
operation, updates, fixing bugs, adding features, extending to new applications, end user
configurations) is still extremely important. In fact, because microcomputers are employed in many
safety-critical devices, injury or death may result if there are hardware and/or software faults.
Consequently, testing must be considered in the original design, during development of intermediate
components, and in the final product. The role of simulation is becoming increasingly important in
today’s market place as we race to build better and better machines with shorter and shorter design
cycles. An effective approach to building embedded systems is to first design the system using a
hardware/software simulator, then download and test the system on an actual microcontroller.
2.2. Applications Involving Embedded Systems
An embedded computer system includes a microcomputer with mechanical, chemical, and electrical
devices attached to it, programmed for a specific dedicated purpose, and packaged up as a complete
system. Any electrical, mechanical, or chemical system that involves inputs, decisions, calculations,
analyses, and outputs is a candidate for implementation as an embedded system. Electrical,
mechanical, and chemical sensors collect information. Electronic interfaces convert the sensor
signals into a form acceptable for the microcomputer. For example, a tachometer is a sensor that
measures the revolutions per second of a rotating shaft. Microcomputer software performs the
necessary decisions, calculations, and analyses. Additional interface electronics convert the
microcomputer outputs into the necessary form. Actuators can be used to create mechanical or
chemical outputs. For example, an electrical motor converts electrical power into mechanical power.
Checkpoint 2.5: There is a microcomputer embedded in a digital watch. List three operations the
software must perform.
In contrast, a general-purpose computer system typically has a keyboard, disk, and graphics display
and can be programmed for a wide variety of purposes. Typical general-purpose applications include
word processing, electronic mail, business accounting, scientific computing, and data base systems.
The user of a general-purpose computer does have access to the software that controls the machine. In
other words, the user decides which operating system to run and which applications to launch.
Because the general-purpose computer has a removable disk or network interface, new programs can
easily be added to the system. The most common type of general-purpose computer is the personal
computer, e.g., the Apple MacBook, costing less than $3,000. Computers more powerful than the
personal computer can be grouped in the workstation category, ranging from $3,000 to $50,000
range. Supercomputers cost above $50,000. These computers often employ multiple processors and
have much more memory than the typical personal computer. The workstations and supercomputers
are used for handling large amounts of information (business applications) or performing large
calculations (scientific research.) This book will not specifically cover the general-purpose
computer, although many of the basic principles of embedded computers do apply to all types of
computer systems.
Observation: Since the advent of the personal computer in 1983, there have always been three
classes of computer systems: personal, workstation and supercomputer. While the computational
power of each class has grown by orders of magnitude, the price range of each has remained
relatively constant.
A cell phone has five or more microcontrollers. Automobiles employ dozens of microcontrollers. In
fact, upscale homes contain hundreds of microcontrollers, and the average consumer now interacts
with microcontrollers thousands of times each day. Embedded microcomputers impact virtually all
aspects of daily life (Table 2.1):
• Consumer Electronics
• Home
• Communications
• Automotive
• Military
• Industrial
• Business
• Shipping
• Medical
• Computer components

         Functions performed by the microcontroller
Consumer/Home:
 Washing machine            Controls the water and spin cycles, saving water and
energy
 Exercise equipment           Measures speed, distance, acceleration, calories, heart
rate
 Remote controls          Accepts key touches, sends infrared pulses, learns how to
interact with user
 Clocks and watches           Maintains the time, alarm, and display
 Games and toys           Entertains the user, joystick input, video output
 Audio/video                    Interacts with the operator, enhances performance
with sounds and pictures
 Set-back thermostats          Adjusts day/night thresholds saving energy
Communication:
 Answering machines            Plays outgoing messages and saves incoming messages
 Telephone system           Switches signals and retrieves information
 Cellular phones                   Interacts with key pad, microphone, and speaker
 Satellites                 Sends and receives messages
Automotive:
 Automatic braking           Optimizes stopping on slippery surfaces
 Noise cancellation         Improves sound quality, removing noise
 Theft deterrent devices         Allows keyless entry, controls alarm
 Electronic ignition        Controls sparks and fuel injectors
 Windows and seats           Remembers preferred settings for each driver
 Instrumentation          Collects and provides necessary information
Military:
 Smart weapons                     Recognizes friendly targets
 Missile guidance          Directs ordnance at the desired target
  Global positioning        Determines where you are on the planet, suggests paths,
coordinates troops
  Surveillance                Collects information about enemy activities
Industrial/Business/Shipping:
  Point-of-sale systems       Accepts inputs and manages money, keeps credit
information secure
  Temperature control        Adjusts heating and cooling to maintain temperature
  Robot systems                  Inputs from sensors, controls the motors improving
productivity
  Inventory systems        Reads and prints labels, maximizing profit, minimizing
shipping delay
  Automatic sprinklers        Controls the wetness of the soil maximizing plant
growth
Medical:
  Infant apnea monitors        Detects breathing, alarms if stopped
  Cardiac monitors        Measures heart function, alarms if problem
  Cancer treatments       Controls doses of radiation, drugs, or heat
  Prosthetic devices       Increases mobility for the handicapped
  Medical records       Collect, organize, and present medical information
Computer Components:
  Mouse                           Translates hand movements into commands for the
main computer
  USB flash drive       Facilitates the storage and retrieval of information
  Keyboard                  Accepts key strokes, decodes them, and transmits to the
main computer
Table 2.1. Products involving embedded systems.
2.3. Product Life Cycle
In this section, we will introduce the product development process in general. The basic approach is
introduced here, and the details of these concepts will be presented throughout the remaining chapters
of the book. As we learn software/hardware development tools and techniques, we can place them
into the framework presented in this section. As illustrated in Figure 2.3, the development of a
product follows an analysis-design-implementation-testing-deployment cycle. For complex systems
with long life-spans, we transverse multiple times around the life cycle. For simple systems, a one-
time pass may suffice.

Figure 2.3. Product life cycle.
During the analysis phase, we discover the requirements and constraints for our proposed system. We
can hire consultants and interview potential customers in order to gather this critical information. A
requirement is a specific parameter that the system must satisfy. We begin by rewriting the system
requirements, which are usually written in general form, into a list of detailed specifications. In
general, specifications are detailed parameters describing how the system should work. For example,
a requirement may state that the system should fit into a pocket, whereas a specification would give
the exact size and weight of the device. For example, suppose we wish to build a motor controller.
During the analysis phase, we would determine obvious specifications such as range, stability,
accuracy, and response time. There may be less obvious requirements to satisfy, such as weight, size,
battery life, product life, ease of operation, display readability, and reliability. Often, improving the
performance on one parameter can be achieved only by decreasing the performance of another. This
art of compromise defines the tradeoffs an engineer must make when designing a product. A
constraint is a limitation, within which the system must operate. The system may be constrained to
such factors as cost, safety, compatibility with other products, use of specific electronic and
mechanical parts as other devices, interfaces with other instruments and test equipment, and
development schedule. The following measures are often considered during the analysis phase of a
project:
Safety: The risk to humans or the environment
Accuracy: The difference between the expected truth and the actual parameter
Precision: The number of distinguishable measurements
Resolution: The smallest change that can be reliably detected
Response time: The time between a triggering event and the resulting action
Bandwidth: The amount of information processed per time
Maintainability: The flexibility with which the device can be modified
Testability: The ease with which proper operation of the device can be verified
Compatibility: The conformance of the device to existing standards
Mean time between failure: The reliability of the device, the life of a product
Size and weight: The physical space required by the system
Power: The amount of energy it takes to operate the system
Nonrecurring engineering cost (NRE cost): The one-time cost to design and test
Unit cost: The cost required to manufacture one additional product
Time-to-prototype: The time required to design, build, and test an example system
Time-to-market: The time required to deliver the product to the customer
Human factors: The degree to which our customers like/appreciate the product

Checkpoint 2.6: What’s the difference between a requirement and a specification?
The following is one possible outline of a Requirements Document. IEEE publishes a number of
templates that can be used to define a project (IEEE STD 830-1998). A requirements document states
what the system will do. It does not state how the system will do it. The main purpose of a
requirements document is to serve as an agreement between you and your clients describing what the
system will do. This agreement can become a legally binding contract. Write the document so that it is
easy to read and understand by others. It should be unambiguous, complete, verifiable, and
modifiable.
1. Overview
 1.1. Objectives: Why are we doing this project? What is the purpose?
 1.2. Process: How will the project be developed?
 1.3. Roles and Responsibilities: Who will do what? Who are the clients?
 1.4. Interactions with Existing Systems: How will it fit in?
 1.5. Terminology: Define terms used in the document.
 1.6. Security: How will intellectual property be managed?
2. Function Description
 2.1. Functionality: What will the system do precisely?
 2.2. Scope: List the phases and what will be delivered in each phase.
 2.3. Prototypes: How will intermediate progress be demonstrated?
 2.4. Performance: Define the measures and describe how they will be determined.
 2.5. Usability: Describe the interfaces. Be quantitative if possible.
 2.6. Safety: Explain any safety requirements and how they will be measured.
3. Deliverables
 3.1. Reports: How will the system be described?
 3.2. Audits: How will the clients evaluate progress?
 3.3. Outcomes: What are the deliverables? How do we know when it is done?

Observation: To build a system without a requirements document means you are never wrong, but
never done.
During the high-level design phase, we build a conceptual model of the hardware/software system. It
is in this model that we exploit as much abstraction as appropriate. The project is broken into
modules or subcomponents. Modular design will be presented in Chapter 5. During this phase, we
estimate the cost, schedule, and expected performance of the system. At this point we can decide if
the project has a high enough potential for profit. A data flow graph is a block diagram of the system,
showing the flow of information. Arrows point from source to destination. The rectangles represent
hardware components, and the ovals are software modules. We use data flow graphs in the high-level
design, because they describe the overall operation of the system while hiding the details of how it
works. Issues such as safety (e.g., Isaac Asimov’s first Law of Robotics “A robot may not harm a
human being, or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm”) and testing (e.g., we need
to verify our system is operational) should be addressed during the high-level design. A data flow
graph for a simple position measurement system is shown in Figure 2.4. The sensor converts position
in an electrical resistance. The analog circuit converts resistance into the 0 to +3.3V voltage range
required by the ADC. The 12-bit ADC converts analog voltage into a digital sample. The ADC
driver, using the ADC and timer hardware, collects samples and calculates voltages. The software
converts voltage to position. Voltage and position data are represented as fixed-point numbers within
the computer. The position data is passed to the LCD driver creating ASCII strings, which will be
sent to the liquid crystal display (LCD) module.

Figure 2.4. A data flow graph showing how the position signal passes through
 the system.
The next phase is engineering design. We begin by constructing a preliminary design. This system
includes the overall top-down hierarchical structure, the basic I/O signals, shared data structures, and
overall software scheme. At this stage there should be a simple and direct correlation between the
hardware/software systems and the conceptual model developed in the high-level design. Next, we
finish the top-down hierarchical structure and build mock-ups of the mechanical parts (connectors,
chassis, cables etc.) and user software interface. Sophisticated 3-D CAD systems can create realistic
images of our system. Detailed hardware designs must include mechanical drawings. It is a good idea
to have a second source, which is an alternative supplier that can sell our parts if the first source
can’t deliver on time. Call graphs are a graphical way to define how the software/hardware modules
interconnect. Data structures, which will be presented throughout the book, include both the
organization of information and mechanisms to access the data. Again safety and testing should be
addressed during this low-level design.
A call graph for a simple position measurement system is shown in Figure 2.5. Again, rectangles
represent hardware components, and ovals show software modules. An arrow points from the calling
routine to the module it calls. The I/O ports are organized into groups and placed at the bottom of the
graph. A high-level call graph, like the one shown in Figure 2.5, shows only the high-level
hardware/software modules. A detailed call graph would include each software function and I/O
port. Normally, hardware is passive and the software initiates hardware/software communication, but
as we will learn in this book, it is possible for the hardware to interrupt the software and cause
certain software modules to be run. In this system, the timer hardware will cause the ADC software
to collect a sample. The timer interrupt service routine (ISR) gets the next sample from the ADC
software, converts it to position, and displays the result by calling the LCD interface software. The
double-headed arrow between the ISR and the hardware means the hardware triggers the interrupt
and the software accesses the hardware.

Figure 2.5. A call graph for a simple position measurement system.
Observation: If module A calls module B, and B returns data, then a data flow graph will show an
arrow from B to A, but a call graph will show an arrow from A to B.
The next phase is implementation. We can also call this stage development because we will
develop a possible solution. An advantage of a top-down design is that implementation of
subcomponents can occur simultaneously. During the initial iterations of the life cycle, it is quite
efficient to implement the hardware/software using simulation. One major advantage of simulation is
that it is usually quicker to implement an initial product on a simulator versus constructing a physical
device out of actual components. Rapid prototyping is important in the early stages of product
development. This allows for more loops around the analysis-design-implementation-testing-
deployment cycle, which in turn leads to a more sophisticated product.
Recent software and hardware technological developments have made significant impacts on the
software development for embedded microcomputers. The simplest approach is to use a cross-
assembler or cross-compiler to convert source code into the machine code for the target system. The
machine code can then be loaded into the target machine. Debugging embedded systems with this
simple approach is very difficult for two reasons. First, the embedded system lacks the usual
keyboard and display that assist us when we debug regular software. Second, the nature of embedded
systems involves the complex and real-time interaction between the hardware and software. These
real-time interactions make it impossible to test software with the usual single-stepping and print
statements.
The next technological advancement that has greatly affected the manner in which embedded systems
are developed is simulation. Because of the high cost and long times required to create hardware
prototypes, many preliminary feasibility designs are now performed using hardware/software
simulations. A simulator is a software application that models the behavior of the hardware/software
system. If both the external hardware and software program are simulated together, even though the
simulated time is slower than the clock on the wall, the real-time hardware/software interactions can
be studied.
During the testing phase, we evaluate the performance of our system. First, we debug the system and
validate basic functions. Next, we use careful measurements to optimize performance such as static
efficiency (memory requirements), dynamic efficiency (execution speed), accuracy (difference
between expected truth and measured), and stability (consistent operation.) Debugging techniques
will be presented at the end of most chapters.
Maintenance is the process of correcting mistakes, adding new features, optimizing for execution
speed or program size, porting to new computers or operating systems, and reconfiguring the system
to solve a similar problem. No system is static. Customers may change or add requirements or
constraints. To be profitable, we probably will wish to tailor each system to the individual needs of
each customer. Maintenance is not really a separate phase, but rather involves additional loops
around the life cycle.
Figure 2.3 describes top-down design as a cyclic process, beginning with a problem statement and
ending up with a solution. With a bottom-up design we begin with solutions and build up to a
problem statement. Many innovations begin with an idea, “what if…?” In a bottom-up design, one
begins with designing, building, and testing low-level components. The low-level designs can be
developed in parallel. Bottom-up design may be inefficient because some subsystems may be
designed, built, and tested, but never used. As the design progresses the components are fit together to
make the system more and more complex. Only after the system is completely built and tested does
one define the overall system specifications. The bottom-up design process allows creative ideas to
drive the products a company develops. It also allows one to quickly test the feasibility of an idea. If
one fully understands a problem area and the scope of potential solutions, then a top-down design
will arrive at an effective solution most quickly. On the other hand, if one doesn’t really understand
the problem or the scope of its solutions, a bottom-up approach allows one to start off by learning
about the problem.
2.4. Successive Refinement
Throughout the book in general, we discuss how to solve problems on the computer. In this section,
we discuss the process of converting a problem statement into an algorithm. Later in the book, we
will show how to map algorithms into assembly language. We begin with a set of general
specifications, and then create a list of requirements and constraints. The general specifications
describe the problem statement in an overview fashion, requirements define the specific things the
system must do, and constraints are the specific things the system must not do. These requirements and
constraints will guide us as we develop and test our system.
Observation: Sometimes the specifications are ambiguous, conflicting, or incomplete.
There are two approaches to the situation of ambiguous, conflicting, or incomplete specifications.
The best approach is to resolve the issue with your supervisor or customer. The second approach is
to make a decision and document the decision.
Performance Tip: If you feel a system specification is wrong, discuss it with your supervisor. We
can save a lot of time and money by solving the correct problem in the first place.
Successive refinement, stepwise refinement, and systematic decomposition are three equivalent
terms for a technique to convert a problem statement into a software algorithm. We start with a task
and decompose the task into a set of simpler subtasks. Then, the subtasks are decomposed into even
simpler sub-subtasks. We make progress as long as each subtask is simpler than the task itself. During
the task decomposition we must make design decisions as the details of exactly how the task will be
performed are put into place. Eventually, a subtask is so simple that it can be converted to software
code. We can decompose a task in four ways, as shown in Figure 2.6. The sequence, conditional, and
iteration are the three building blocks of structured programming. Because embedded systems often
have real-time requirements, they employ a fourth building block called interrupts. We will
implement time-critical tasks using interrupts, which are hardware-triggered software functions.
Interrupts will be discussed in more detail in Chapters 9, 10, and 11. When we solve problems on the
computer, we need to answer these questions:
              What does being in a state mean?                   List the parameters of the state
              What is the starting state of the system?       Define the initial state
              What information do we need to collect?          List the input data
              What information do we need to generate?          List the output data
              How do we move from one state to another?            Specify actions we could perform
              What is the desired ending state?                 Define the ultimate goal
Figure 2.6. We can decompose a task using the building blocks of structured
 programming.

We need to recognize these phrases that translate to four basic building blocks:
“do A then do B”                            → sequential
“do A and B in either order”         → sequential
“if A, then do B”                          → conditional
“for each A, do B”                   → iterative
“do A until B”                           → iterative
“repeat A over and over forever”          → iterative (condition always true)
“on external event do B”                  → interrupt
“every t msec do B”                   → interrupt

Example 2.1. Build a digital door lock using seven switches.
Solution: The system has seven binary inputs from the switches and one binary output to the door
lock. The state of this system is defined as “door locked” and “door unlocked”. Initially, we want the
door to be locked, which we can make happen by turning a solenoid off (make binary output low). If
the 7-bit binary pattern on the switches matches a pre-defined keycode, then we want to unlock the
door (make binary output high). Because the switches might bounce (flicker on and off) when
changed, we will make sure the switches match the pre-defined keycode for at least 1 ms before
unlocking the door. We can change states by writing to the output port for the solenoid. Like most
embedded systems, there is no ending state. Once the switches no longer match the keycode the door
will lock again. The first step in successive refinement is to divide the tasks into those performed
once (Initialization), and those tasks repeated over and over (Execute lock), as shown as the left
flowchart in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7. We can decompose a task using the building blocks of structured
 programming.
As shown in the middle flow chart, we implement if the switches match the key, then unlock. If the
switches do not match we will lock the door. To verify the user entered the proper keycode the
switches must match, then match again after 1 ms. There are two considerations when designing a
system: security and safety. Notice that the system will lock the door if power is removed, because
power applied to the solenoid will unlock the door. For safety reasons, there should be a mechanical
way to unlock the door from the inside in case of emergency.
2.5. Quality Design
Embedded system development is similar to other engineering tasks. We can choose to follow well-
defined procedures during the development and evaluation phases, or we can meander in a haphazard
way and produce code that is hard to test and harder to change. The ultimate goal of the system is to
satisfy the stated objectives such as accuracy, stability, and input/output relationships. Nevertheless it
is appropriate to separately evaluate the individual components of the system. Therefore in this
section, we will evaluate the quality of our software. There are two categories of performance
criteria with which we evaluate the “goodness” of our software. Quantitative criteria include
dynamic efficiency (speed of execution), static efficiency (memory requirements), and accuracy of the
results. Qualitative criteria center on ease of software maintenance. Another qualitative way to
evaluate software is ease of understanding. If your software is easy to understand then it will be:
Easy to debug (fix mistakes)
Easy to verify (prove correctness)
Easy to maintain (add features)

Common Error: Programmers who sacrifice clarity in favor of execution speed often develop
software that runs fast, but is error-prone and difficult to change.

Golden Rule of Software Development
Write software for others as you wish they would write for you.

2.5.1. Quantitative Performance Measurements
In order to evaluate our software quality, we need performance measures. The simplest approaches to
this issue are quantitative measurements. Dynamic efficiency is a measure of how fast the program
executes. It is measured in seconds or processor bus cycles. Static efficiency is the number of
memory bytes required. Since most embedded computer systems have both RAM and ROM, we
specify memory requirement in global variables, stack space, fixed constants and program. The
global variables plus the stack must fit into the available RAM. Similarly, the fixed constants plus the
program must fit into the available ROM. We can also judge our embedded system according to
whether or not it satisfies given requirements and constraints, like accuracy, cost, power, size,
reliability, and time-table.

2.5.2. Qualitative Performance Measurements
Qualitative performance measurements include those parameters to which we cannot assign a direct
numerical value. Often in life the most important questions are the easiest to ask, but the hardest to
answer. Such is the case with software quality. So therefore we ask the following qualitative
questions. Can we prove our software works? Is our software easy to understand? Is our software
easy to change? Since there is no single approach to writing the best software, we can only hope to
present some techniques that you may wish to integrate into your own software style. In fact, this book
devotes considerable effort to the important issue of developing quality software. In particular, we
will study self-documented code, abstraction, modularity, and layered software. These issues indeed
play a profound effect on the bottom-line financial success of our projects. Although quite real,
because there is often not an immediate and direct relationship between a software’s quality and
profit, we may be mistakenly tempted to dismiss the importance of quality.
To get a benchmark on how good a programmer you are, take the following two challenges. In the first
challenge, find a major piece of software that you have written over 12 months ago, and then see if
you can still understand it enough to make minor changes in its behavior. The second challenge is to
exchange with a peer a major piece of software that you have both recently written (but not written
together), then in the same manner, see if you can make minor changes to each other's software.
Observation: You can tell if you are a good programmer if 1) you can understand your own code 12
months later, and 2) others can make changes to your code.

2.5.3. Attitude
Good engineers employ well-defined design processes when developing complex systems. When we
work within a structured framework, it is easier to prove our system works (verification) and to
modify our system in the future (maintenance.) As our software systems become more complex, it
becomes increasingly important to employ well-defined software design processes. Throughout this
book, a very detailed set of software development rules will be presented. This book focuses on real-
time embedded systems written in assembly language and C, but most of the design processes should
apply to other languages as well. At first, it may seem radical to force such a rigid structure to
software. We might wonder if creativity will be sacrificed in the process. True creativity is more
about good solutions to important problems and not about being sloppy and inconsistent. Because
software maintenance is a critical task, the time spent organizing, documenting, and testing during the
initial development stages will reap huge dividends throughout the life of the software project.
Observation: The easiest way to debug is to write software without any bugs.
We define clients as programmers who will use our software. A client develops software that will
call our functions. We define coworkers as programmers who will debug and upgrade our software.
A coworker, possibly ourselves, develops, tests, and modifies our software.
Writing quality software has a lot to do with attitude. We should be embarrassed to ask our coworkers
to make changes to our poorly written software. Since so much software development effort involves
maintenance, we should create software modules that are easy to change. In other words, we should
expect each piece of our code will be read by another engineer in the future, whose job it will be to
make changes to our code. We might be tempted to quit a software project once the system is running,
but this short time we might save by not organizing, documenting, and testing will be lost many times
over in the future when it is time to update the code.
As project managers, we must reward good behavior and punish bad behavior. A company, in an
effort to improve the quality of their software products, implemented the following policies.
The employees in the customer relations department receive a bonus for every
software bug that they can identify. These bugs are reported to the software
developers, who in turn receive a bonus for every bug they fix.

Checkpoint 2.7: Why did the above policy fail horribly?
We should demand of ourselves that we deliver bug-free software to our clients. Again, we should be
embarrassed when our clients report bugs in our code. We should be mortified when other
programmers find bugs in our code. There are a few steps we can take to facilitate this important
aspect of software design.
Test it now. When we find a bug, fix it immediately. The longer we put off fixing a mistake the more
complicated the system becomes, making it harder to find. Remember that bugs do not go away on
their own, but we can make the system so complex that the bugs will manifest themselves in
mysterious and obscure ways. For the same reason, we should completely test each module
individually, before combining them into a larger system. We should not add new features before we
are convinced the existing system is bug-free. In this way, we start with a working system, add
features, and then debug this system until it is working again. This incremental approach makes it
easier to track progress. It allows us to undo bad decisions, because we can always revert back to a
previously working system. Adding new features before the old ones are debugged is very risky. With
this sloppy approach, we could easily reach the project deadline with 100% of the features
implemented, but have a system that doesn’t run. In addition, once a bug is introduced, the longer we
wait to remove it, the harder it will be to correct. This is particularly true when the bugs interact with
each other. Conversely, with the incremental approach, when the project schedule slips, we can
deliver a working system at the deadline that supports some of the features.
Maintenance Tip: Go from working system to working system.
Plan for testing. How to test each module should be considered at the start of a project. In particular,
testing should be included as part of the design of both hardware and software components. Our
testing and the client's usage go hand in hand. In particular, how we test the module will help the
client understand the context and limitations of how our component is to be used. On the other hand, a
clear understanding of how the client wishes to use our hardware/software component is critical for
both its design and its testing.
Maintenance Tip: It is better to have some parts of the system that run with 100% reliability than to
have the entire system with bugs.
Get help. Use whatever features are available for organization and debugging. Pay attention to
warnings, because they often point to misunderstandings about data or functions. Misunderstanding of
assumptions that can cause bugs when the software is upgraded, or reused in a different context than
originally conceived. Remember that computer time is a lot cheaper than programmer time.
Maintenance Tip: It is better to have a system that runs slowly than to have one that doesn’t run at
all.
Deal with the complexity. In the early days of microcomputer systems, software size could be
measured in 100’s of lines of source code using 1000’s of bytes of memory. These early systems, due
to their small size, were inherently simple. The explosion of hardware technology (both in speed and
size) has led to a similar increase in the size of software systems. Some people forecast that by the
next decade, automobiles will have 10 million lines of code in their embedded systems. The only
hope for success in a large software system will be to break it into simple modules. In most cases, the
complexity of the problem itself cannot be avoided. E.g., there is just no simple way to get to the
moon. Nevertheless, a complex system can be created out of simple components. A real creative
effort is required to orchestrate simple building blocks into larger modules, which themselves are
grouped to create even larger systems. Use your creativity to break a complex problem into simple
components, rather than developing complex solutions to simple problems.
Observation: There are two ways of constructing a software design: one way is to make it so simple
that there are obviously no deficiencies and the other way is make it so complicated that there are no
obvious deficiencies. C.A.R. Hoare, "The Emperor's Old Clothes," CACM Feb. 1981.
2.6. Debugging Theory
The last section of every chapter in this book will address debugging techniques. Every programmer
is faced with the need to debug and verify the correctness of his or her software. A debugging
instrument is hardware or software used for the purpose of debugging. In this book, we will study
hardware-level probes like the logic analyzer, oscilloscope, and Joint Test Action Group (JTAG
standardized as the IEEE 1149.1); software-level tools like simulators, monitors, and profilers; and
manual tools like inspection and print statements. Nonintrusiveness is the characteristic or quality of
a debugger that allows the software/hardware system to operate normally as if the debugger did not
exist. Intrusiveness is used as a measure of the degree of perturbation caused in program performance
by the debugging instrument itself. For example, a print statement added to your source code is very
intrusive because it significantly affects the real-time interaction of the hardware and software. It is
important to quantify the intrusiveness of an instrument. Let t be the average time it takes to run the
software code comprising instrument. This time t is how much less time the system has to perform its
regular duties. Let Δt be the average time between executions of the instrument. A quantitative
measure of intrusiveness is t/Δt, which is the fraction of the time consumed by the process of
debugging itself. A debugging instrument is classified as minimally intrusive if it has a negligible
effect on the system being debugged. In other words, if t/Δt so small that the debugging processes
have a finite but inconsequential effect on the system behavior, we classify it as minimally intrusive.
In a real microcomputer system, breakpoints and single-stepping are intrusive, because the real
hardware continues to change while the software has stopped. When a program interacts with real-
time events, the performance can be significantly altered when using intrusive debugging tools. On the
other hand, we will learn later in this book that dumps, dumps with filter, and monitors are much less
intrusive. Examples of monitors are LEDs or organic LED (OLED) displays. A logic analyzer that
passively monitors the activity of the software is completely nonintrusive. Interestingly, breakpoints
and single-stepping on a mixed hardware/software simulator are often nonintrusive, because the
simulated hardware and the software are affected together.
Checkpoint 2.8: What does it mean for a debugging instrument to be minimally intrusive? Give both
a general answer and a specific criterion.
Research in the area of program monitoring and debugging mirrors the rapid pace of developments in
other areas of computer architecture and software systems. Because of the complexity explosion in
computer systems, effective debugging tools are essential. The critical aspect of debugging an
embedded system is the ability to see what the software is doing, where it is executing, and when it
did do it, without the debugger itself modifying system behavior. Terms such as program testing,
diagnostics, performance debugging, functional debugging, tracing, profiling, instrumentation,
visualization, optimization, verification, performance measurement, and execution measurement have
specialized meanings, but they are also used interchangeably, and they often describe overlapping
functions. For example, the terms profiling, tracing, performance measurement, or execution
measurement may be used to describe the process of examining a program from a time viewpoint.
But, tracing is also a term that may be used to describe the process of monitoring a program state or
history for functional errors, or to describe the process of stepping through a program with a
debugger. Usage of these terms among researchers and users vary.
Furthermore, the meaning and scope of the term debugging itself is not clear. In this book the goal of
debugging is to maintain and improve software, and the role of a debugger is to support this endeavor.
The debugging process is defined as testing, stabilizing, localizing, and correcting errors. Although
testing, stabilizing, and localizing errors are important and essential to debugging, they are auxiliary
processes: the primary goal of debugging is to remedy faults or to correct errors in a program.
Stabilization is process of fixing the inputs so that the system can be run over and over again yielding
repeatable outputs.
Although, a wide variety of program monitoring and debugging tools are available today, in practice
it is found that an overwhelming majority of users either still prefer or rely mainly upon “rough and
ready” manual methods for locating and correcting program errors. These methods include desk-
checking, dumps, and print statements, with print statements being one of the most popular manual
methods. Manual methods are useful because they are readily available, and they are relatively
simple to use. But, the usefulness of manual methods is limited: they tend to be highly intrusive, and
they do not provide adequate control over repeatability, event selection, or event isolation. A real-
time system, where software execution timing is critical, usually cannot be debugged with simple
print statements, because the print statement itself will require too much time to execute.
Black-box testing is simply observing the inputs and outputs without looking inside. Black-box
testing has an important place in debugging a module for its functionality. On the other hand, white-
box testing allows you to control and observe the internal workings of a system. A common mistake
made by new engineers is to just perform black box testing. Effective debugging uses both. One must
always start with black-box testing by subjecting a hardware or software module to appropriate test-
cases. Once we document the failed test-cases, we can use them to aid us in effectively performing
the task of white-box testing.
A debugging instrument is defined as hardware or software that is added to the system for the purpose
of debugging. A print statement is a common example of an instrument. Using the editor, one adds
print statements to the code that either verify proper operation or illustrate the programming errors. If
we test a system, then remove the instruments, the system may actually stop working, because of the
importance of timing in embedded systems. If we leave debugging instruments in the final product, we
can use the instruments to test systems on the production line, or test systems returned for repair. On
the other hand, sometimes we wish to provide for a mechanism to reliably and efficiently remove all
instruments when the debugging is done. Consider the following mechanisms as you develop your
own unique debugging style.
• Place all instruments in a unique column, so you can easily distinguish instruments
from regular programs.
• Define all debugging instruments as functions that all have a specific pattern in their
names. In this way, the find/replace mechanism of the editor can be used to find all
the calls to the instruments.
• Define the instruments so that they test a run time global flag. When this flag is
turned off, the instruments perform no function. Notice that this method leaves a
permanent copy of the debugging code in the final system, causing it to suffer a
runtime overhead, but the debugging code can be activated dynamically without
recompiling. Many commercial software applications utilize this method because it
simplifies “on-site” customer support.
• Use conditional compilation (or conditional assembly) to turn on and off the
instruments when the software is compiled. When the assembler or compiler supports
this feature, it can provide both performance and effectiveness.

The emergence of concurrent languages and the increasing use of embedded real-time systems place
further demands on debuggers. The complexities introduced by the interaction of multiple events or
time dependent processes are much more difficult to debug than errors associated with sequential
programs. The behavior of non-real-time sequential programs is reproducible: for a given set of
inputs their outputs remain the same. In the case of concurrent or real-time programs this does not
hold true. Control over repeatability, event selection, and event isolation is even more important for
concurrent or real-time environments.
Checkpoint 2.9: Consider the difference between a runtime flag that activates a debugging command
versus an assembly/compile-time flag. In both cases it is easy to activate/deactivate the debugging
statements. For each method, list one factor for which that method is superior to the other.
Checkpoint 2.10: What is the advantage of leaving debugging instruments in a final delivered
product?
Observation: There are two important components of debugging: having control over events and
being able to see what is happening. Remember: control and observability!
Common Error: The most common debugging mistake new programmers make is to simply observe
the overall inputs and outputs system without looking inside the device. Then they go to their
professor and say, “My program gives incorrect output. Do you know why?”
2.7. Switch and LED Interfaces
This section is completely out of place. It really belongs back in Chapters 4 or 8 with the other
input/output devices. However, I couldn’t wait to show you how much fun it is to make the
microcontroller interact with real physical devices. So in this section I will take a short side step
from the business of concepts and theories to teach you how to connect switches and LEDs to the
microcontroller. We will use switches to input data and use LEDs to output results.
Input/output devices are critical components of an embedded system. The first input device we will
study is the switch. It allows the human to input binary information into the computer. Typically we
define the asserted state, or logic true, when the switch is pressed. Contact switches can also be used
in machines to detect mechanical contact (e.g., two parts touching, paper present in the printer, or
wheels on the ground etc.) A single pole single throw (SPST) switch has two connections. The
switches are shown as the device between the little open circles in Figure 2.8. In a normally-open
switch (NO), the resistance between the connections is infinite (over 100 MΩ on the B3F tactile
switch) if the switch is not pressed and zero (under 0.1 Ω on the B3F tactile switch) if the switch is
pressed. There are two ways to interface the switch to the microcontroller: positive and negative
logic.

Figure 2.8. Single Pole Single Throw (SPST) Switch interface. The photo is a
 B3F tactile switch.
With positive logic the asserted state has a larger voltage than the unasserted state. In other words,
when the switch is pressed, the digital signal will be a logic one (t = 3.3V), and when the switch is
not pressed the digital signal will be a logic zero (t = 0V). Because we wish to have a 3.3V signal
when we press the switch, we connect one side of the switch to +3.3V. Notice in Figure 2.8 the signal
x will be 3.3V when the switch is pressed. However, x will float, which means x has no voltage,
when the switch is not pressed. If we add a pull-down resistor to ground the signal t will be 0V when
the switch is not pressed and 3.3V if the switch is pressed, as desired. Notice that 10 kΩ is 100,000
times larger than the on-resistance of the switch and 10,000 times smaller than its off-resistance.
Another way to choose the pull-down resistor is to consider the input current of the microcontroller
input pin. The current into the microcontroller will be less than 2µA (defined as IIL and IIH in the data
sheet). So, if the current into microcontroller is 2µA, then the voltage drop across the 10 kΩ resistor
will be 0.02 V, which is negligibly small.
With negative logic the asserted state has a smaller voltage than the unasserted state. In other words,
when the switch is not pressed, the digital signal will be a logic one (s = 3.3V), and when the switch
is pressed the digital signal will be a logic zero (s = 0V). With the negative logic interface we want
the pressed state to create a 0V. So, to convert the resistance of the switch into a digital signal, we can
connect one side of the switch to 0V. Notice in Figure 2.8 the signal y will be 0V when the switch is
pressed, but will float when the switch is not pressed. If we add a pull-up resistor to +3.3V the signal
s will be 0V when the switch is pressed and 3.3V if the switch is not pressed, as desired.
One of the complicating issues with mechanical switches is they can bounce (oscillate on and off)
when touched and when released. The contact bounce varies from switch to switch and from time to
time, but usually bouncing is a transient event lasting less than 5 ms. We can eliminate the effect of
bounce if we design software that waits at least 10 ms between times we read the switch values.
A light emitting diode (LED) emits light when an electric current passes through it. LEDs have
polarity, meaning current must pass from anode to cathode to activate. The anode is labeled a or + ,
and cathode is labeled k or -. The cathode is the short lead and there may be a slight flat spot on the
body of round LEDs. Thus, the anode is the longer lead. The brightness of an LED depends on the
applied electrical power (P=I*V). Since the LED voltage is approximately constant in the active
region (see left side of Figure 2.9), we can establish the desired brightness by setting the current.

Figure 2.9. Positive logic LED interface (Lite-On LTL-10223W).
Checkpoint 2.11: What resistor value in Figure 2.9 is needed if the desired LED operating point is
1.7V and 12 mA?
If the LED current is above 8 mA, we cannot connect it directly to the microcontroller because the
high currents may damage the chip. Figure 2.9 shows two possible interface circuits we could use. In
both circuits if the software makes its output high the LED will be on. If the software makes its output
low the LED will be off (shown in Figure 2.9 with italics). When the software writes a logic 1 to the
output port, the input to the 7405/PN2222 becomes high, output from the 7405/PN2222 becomes low,
10 mA travels through the LED, and the LED is on. When the software writes a logic 0 to the output
port, the input to the 7405/PN2222 becomes low, output from the 7405/PN2222 floats (neither high
nor low), no current travels through the LED, and the LED is dark. The value of the resistor is
selected to establish the proper LED current. When active, the LED voltage will be about 2 V, and the
power delivered to the LED will be controlled by its current. If the desired brightness requires an
operating point of 1.9 V at 10 mA, then the resistor value should be

where Vd, Id is the desired LED operating point, and VOL is the output low voltage of the LED driver.
If we use a standard resistor value of 100Ω in place of the 90Ω, then the current will be (3.3-1.9-
0.5V)/100Ω, which is about 9 mA. This slightly lower current is usually acceptable.

Figure 2.10. Low current LED interface (Agilent HLMP-D150).
When the LED current is less than 8 mA, we can interface it directly to an output pin without using a
driver. The LED shown in Figure 2.10 has an operating point of 1.7 V and 1 mA. For the positive
logic interface (Figure 2.10b) we calculate the resistor value based on the desired LED voltage and
current

where VOH is the output high voltage of the microcontroller output pin. Since VOH can vary from 2.4 to
3.3 V, it makes sense to choose a resistor from a measured value of VOH, rather than the minimum
value of 2.4 V. Negative logic means the LED is activated when the software outputs a zero. For the
negative logic interface (Figure 2.10c) we use a similar equation to determine the resistor value

where VOL is the output low voltage of the microcontroller output pin.
If we use a 1.2 kΩ in place of the 1.3 kΩ, then the current will be (3.3-1.6-0.4V)/1.2kΩ, which is
about 1.08 mA. This slightly higher current is usually acceptable. If we use a standard resistor value
of 1.5 kΩ in place of the 1.3 kΩ, then the current will be (3.3-1.6-0.4V)/1.5kΩ, which is about 0.87
mA. This slightly lower current is usually acceptable.
Design for tolerance means making it work for a range of possibilities. Assume the resistor value in
Figure 2.10c is 1.3kΩ, and the diode voltage remains at 1.6V. The VOL could range from 0 to 0.4 V. At
VOL=0V, Id=(3.3-1.6-0.0V)/1.3kΩ, which is about 1.3 mA. At VOL=0.4V, Id=(3.3-1.6-0.4V)/1.3kΩ,
which is about 1.0 mA. So the uncertainty in VOL causes a 1.0 to 1.3 mA uncertainty in Id. This is
usually acceptable. However, it makes sense to measure each of these voltages and currents in the
actual circuit to verify its proper operation.
Checkpoint 2.12: What resistor value in of Figure 2.10 is needed if the desired LED operating point
is 1.7V and 2 mA? Use the negative logic interface.
Observation: Using standard resistor values will make our product less expensive and easier to
obtain parts.
2.8. Introduction to C
This section is a brief introduction to C. C is a general-purpose programming language initially
developed by Dennis Ritchie between 1969 and 1973 while at AT&T Bell Labs. At the time, there
were programming languages called A and another named B, so Ritchie decided to name his language
C. Dennis Ritchie and Brian Kernighan wrote the first book on C, The C Programming Language.
Ritchie was also one of the developers of the UNIX operating system. As C became more popular,
many derivative languages were introduced. C++ was developed by Bjarne Stroustrup 1979-1983
also at Bell Labs. C++ is a language originally called “C plus classes”. In 1999, a professional
standard version of C, called C99, was defined. When you download Tivaware
(http://www.ti.com/tool/sw-tm4c) from Texas Instruments, you will notice TI’s example code for the
TM4C123 has been written in C99. In this book, we will adhere to the C99 standard, because it is
prevalent in industry.
A compiler is system software that converts a high-level language program (human readable format)
into object code (machine readable format). It produces software that is fast but to change the
software we need to edit the source code and recompile.
C code ( z = x+y; ) → Assembly code ( ADD R2,R1,R0 ) → Machine code ( 0xEB010200 )
An assembler is system software that converts an assembly language program (human readable
format) into object code (machine readable format). An interpreter executes directly the high level
language. It is interactive but runs slower than compiled code. Many languages can be compiled or
interpreted. The original BASIC (Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code) was
interpreted. This means the user typed software to the computer, and the interpreter executed the
commands as they were typed. In this book, an example of the interpreter will be the command
window while running the debugger. For more information on this interpreter, run Keil uVision and
execute Help->uVisionHelp. Next, you need to click the Contents tab, open the
uVisionIDEusersGuide, and then click DebugCommands. It will show you a list of debugger
commands you can type into the command window.
A linker builds software system by connecting (linking) software components. In Keil uVision, the
build command (Project->BuildTarget) performs both a compilation and a linking. The example
code in Program 2.1 has three software components that are linked together. These components are
startup.s uart.c and main.c.
In an embedded system, the loader will program object code into flash ROM. We place object code
in ROM because ROM is retains its information if power is removed and restored. In Keil uVision,
the download command (Flash->Download) performs a load operation.
A debugger is a set of hardware and software tools we use to verify system is operating correctly.
The two important aspects of a good debugger are control and observability.
Before we write software, we need to develop a plan. Software development is an iterative process.
Even though we list steps the development process in a 1,2,3,4 order, in reality we cycle through
these steps over and over. I like to begin with step 4), deciding how I will test it even before I decide
what it does.
1) We begin with a list of the inputs and outputs. This usually defines what the overall system will do.
We specify the range of values and their significance.
2) Next, we make a list of the required data. We must decide how the data is structured, what does it
mean, how it is collected, and how it can be changed.
3) Next we develop the software algorithm, which is a sequence of operations we wish to execute.
There are many approaches to describing the plan. Experienced programmers can develop the
algorithm directly in C language. On the other hand, most of us need an abstractive method to
document the desired sequence of actions. Flowcharts and pseudo code are two common descriptive
formats. There are no formal rules regarding pseudo code, rather it is a shorthand for describing what
to do and when to do it. We can place our pseudo code as documentation into the comment fields of
our program. Next we write software to implement the algorithm as define in the flowchart and
pseudo code.
4) The last stage is debugging. Learning debugging skills will greatly improve the quality of your
software and the efficiency at which you can develop code.
Every C program has a main , and execution will begin at the top of this main program. There are four
sections of a C program as shown in Program 2.1. The first section is the documentation section,
which includes the purpose of the software, the authors, the date, and any copyright information.
When the software involves external hardware we will add information about how the external
hardware is connected. The second section is the preprocessor directives. We will use the
preprocessor directive #include to connect this software with other modules. We use diamond braces
to include system libraries, like the standard I/O, and we use quotes to link up with other user code
within the project. In this case, the uartmodule is software we wrote to perform I/O with the
universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter (UART). The details of the UART will be presented later
in Section 8.2. For now, we just need to know when we call printf , information is transmitted out of
the microcontroller and displayed for the operator to see. The third section is global declarations
section. This section will include global variables and function prototypes for functions defined in
this module. The last section will be the functions themselves. In this book we will use the terms
subroutine, procedure, function, and program interchangeably. Every software system in C has exactly
one main program, which defines where it begins execution.
Line 1 defines the start of main, and in this book all our C code will have this line exactly. Lines 2-5
are the body of the main program. Line 2 calls a function in the UART driver to initialize the serial
port. Line 3 will output the message “Hello world” to the serial port. Line 4 will cause line 5 to be
executed over and over. Line 5 doesn’t do anything, so the program will output the message once and
sit there and do nothing forever. Line 6 is the end of the main, but this line will never be reached.C
has a lot of paired symbols. For every ( there is a matching ) . For every { there is a matching } . For
every " there is a matching " . The <> symbols will be matched only in #include statements. Other
symbols that will be matched are [] and '' .
//**** 0. Documentation Section
// This program demonstrates the sections of a C program
// Author: Ramesh Yerraballi & Jon Valvano
// Date: 5/28/2014
// 1. Pre-processor Directives Section
#include <stdio.h> // Diamond braces for sys lib: Standard I/O
#include <stdint.h> // C99 definitions
#include "uart.h" // Quotes for user lib: UART lib
// 2. Global Declarations section
// 3. Subroutines Section
// MAIN: Mandatory routine for a C program to be executable
int main(void){           // line 1
  UART_Init();             // line 2
  printf("Hello world"); // line 3
  while(1){            // line 4
  }               // line 5
}                 // line 6
 Program 2.1. Simple program illustrating the sections of a C program.
If you wish to run a similar program, you can download and run the Printf_LF120example from the
web site. Preprocessor lines begin with # in the first column, like the #include lines in the above
example. All preprocessor lines are invoked first (one pass through the software), and then all the
other lines will be compiled as regular C (second pass).
In assembly language, symbols placed at the beginning of each line have special meaning. On the
contrary, C is a free field language. Except for preprocessor lines, spaces, tabs and line breaks have
the same meaning. This means we can place more than one statement on a single line, or place a
single statement across multiple lines. For example a function could have been written without any
line breaks
uint32_t Random(void){M=1664525*M+1013904223;return(M);}
Since we rarely make hardcopy printouts of our software, it is not necessary to minimize the number
of line breaks. Furthermore, we could have added extra line breaks. I prefer the style of the program
on the right because each line contains one complete thought or action. As you get more experienced,
you will develop a programming style that is easy to understand. Although spaces, tabs, and line
breaks are syntactically equivalent, their proper usage will have a profound impact on the readability
of your software.
      uint32_t                         uint32_t Random(void){
      Random(void){                      M = 1664525*M+1013904223;
        M=                               return(M);
           1664525*M                   }
           +1013904223;
        return(M);
      }
The variable M , thefunction Random , the operation * , andthe keyword uint32_t are tokensin C
Each token must be contained on a single line. We see in the above example that tokens can be
separated by white spaces, which include space, tab, line break, or by special characters. Special
characters include punctuation marks (Table 2.2) and operations (Table 2.3).
 Punctuation Meaning
 ;           End of statement
 :           Defines a label
 ,           Separates elements of a list
 ()          Start and end of a parameter list
 {}          Start and stop of a compound
             statement
 []          Start and stop of a array index
 ""          Start and stop of a string
 ''          Start and stop of a character constant
Table 2.2. Special characters can be punctuation marks.

 Operation Meaning                         Operation Meaning
 =         Assignment statement            ==        Equal to
                                                     comparison
 ?           Selection                     <=        Less than or
                                                     equal to
 <           Less than                     >=        Greater than or
                                                     equal to
 >           Greater than                  !=        Not equal to
 !           Logical not (true to          <<        Shift left
             false, false to true)
 ~           1’s complement                >>          Shift right
 +           Addition                      ++          Increment
 -           Subtraction                   --          Decrement
 *           Multiply or pointer           &&          Boolean and
             reference
 /           Divide                        ||          Boolean or
 %           Modulo, division              +=          Add value to
             remainder
 |           Logical or                    -=          Subtract value to
 &           Logical and, or               *=          Multiply value to
             address of
 ^           Logical exclusive or          /=          Divide value to
 .                                         |=          Or value to
              Used to access parts
              of a structure
                                             &=          And value to
                                             ^=          Exclusive or
                                                         value to
                                             <<=         Shift value left
                                             >>=         Shift value right
                                             %=          Modulo divide
                                                         value to
                                             ->          Pointer to a
                                                         structure
Table 2.3. Special characters can be operators; operators can be made from 1, 2, or 3
 characters.
Punctuation marks (semicolons, colons, commas, apostrophes, quotation marks, braces, brackets, and
parentheses) are very important in C. It is one of the most frequent sources of errors for both the
beginning and experienced programmers. Another situation where spaces, tabs and line breaks matter
is string constants. We cannot type tabs or line breaks within a string constant. The characters
between the first " and second " define the string constant. A string is a set of ASCII characters
terminated with a 0. For example, the following C code will output my name (see Section 4.5):
           printf("Jonathan Valvano");

Program 2.2illustrates the assignment operator. Notice that in the line x=1; the x is on the left hand
side of the = . This specifies the address of x is the destination of assignment. On the other hand, in
the line z=x; the x is on the right hand side of the = . This specifies the value of x will be assigned
into the variable z . Also remember that the line z=x; creates two copies of the data. The original
value remains in x , while z also contains this value.
int32_t x,y,z;      // Three 32-bit signed variables
int main(void){
  x = 1; // set the value of x to 1
  y = 2; // set the value of y to 2
  z = x; // set the value of z to the value of x (both are 1)
  x = y = z = 0; // all all three to zero
  while(1){
  }
}
 Program 2.2. Simple program illustrating C arithmetic operators.
Program 2.3 illustrates the arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division.
In the operation x+4*y , multiplication has precedence over addition.
int32_t x,y,z; // Three 32-bit signed variables
int main(void){
    x=1; y=2; // set the values of x and y
    z = x+4*y; // arithmetic operation
    x++;       // same as x=x+1;
    y--;      // same as y=y-1;
    x = y<<2; // left shift same as x=4*y;
    z = y>>2; // right shift same as x=y/4;
    y += 2;     // same as y=y+2;
    while(1){
    }
}
    Program 2.3. Simple program illustrating C arithmetic operators.
Program 2.4 defines a function that we can call from elsewhere in the software. We will introduce a
simple conditional control structure. Assume all of Port A is configured as an output port, and Port B
bit 2 as an input port. The goal is to make Port A equal to 0 if Port B bit 2 is zero, and make Port A
equal to 100 if Port B bit 2 is set. The expression GPIO_PORTB_DATA_R&0x04 will return 0 if
Port B bit 2 is 0 and will return a 4 if Port B bit 2 is 1. The
expression (GPIO_PORTB_DATA_R&0x04)==0 will return true if Port B bit 2 is 0 and will
return a falseif Port B bit 2 is 1. The statement immediately following the if will be executed if the
condition is true. The statement immediately following the else will be executed if the condition is
false.
void CheckPB2(void){
  if((GPIO_PORTB_DATA_R&0x04)==0){ // test bit 2 of Port B
    GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R = 0;   // if PB2 is 0, then Port A=0
  }else{
    GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R = 100;   // if PB2 is not 0, then Port A=100
  }
}
    Program 2.4. Simple program illustrating the C if else control structure.
Program 2.5 also defines a function. Assume that Port A bit 3 is configured as an output pin. The goal
is to make the output pin toggle 100 times. Like the if statement, the while statement has a conditional
test (i.e., returns a true/false). The statement immediately following the while will be executed over
and over until the conditional test becomes false.
void TogglePA3(void){ uint32_t count;
  count = 0;
  while(count < 100){
    GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R = GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R^0x08; // toggle bit 3
    count ++; // increment counter until counter becomes 100,
  }
}
    Program 2.5. Simple program illustrating the C while control structure.
The for control structure has three parts and a body.
for(part1;part2;part3){body;}
In Program 2.5, the first part count=0 is executed once at the beginning. Before the body is executed,
the end-condition part 2 is executed. If the condition is true, count<100 then the
body GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R ^= 0x08; is executed. After the body is executed, the third part is
executed, count++ . The second part is always a conditional that results in a true or a false. The body
and third part are repeated until the conditional is false.
void TogglePA3(void){ uint32_t count;
  for(count = 0; count < 100; count++){
    GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R ^= 0x08; // toggle bit 3
  }
}
 Program 2.6. A rewrite of Program 2.5 illustrating the C for-loop control
 structure.
As with all programming languages the order of the tokens is important. There are two issues to
consider when evaluating complex statements. The precedence of the operator determines which
operations are performed first. In expression z=x+4*y , the 4*y is performed first because * has
higher precedence than + and =. The addition is performed second because + has higher precedence
than =. The assignment = is performed last. Sometimes we use parentheses to clarify the meaning of
the expression, even when they are not needed. Therefore, the line z=x+4*y; could have been written
as z=(x+4*y); z=(x+4*y); or z=(x+(4*y));
The second issue is the associativity. Associativity determines the left to right or right to left order of
evaluation when multiple operations of equal precedence are combined. For example + and - have the
same precedence, so how do we evaluate the following?
z = y-2+x;
We know that + and - associate the left to right, this function is the same as z=(y-2)+x; . Meaning the
subtraction is performed first because it is more to the left than the addition. Most operations
associate left to right, but the following table illustrates that some operators associate right to left.
   Precedence Operators                                         Associativity
   Highest    () []. -> ++ (postfix) -- (postfix)               Left to right
              ++ (prefix) -- (prefix) ! ~ sizeof (type)         Right to left
              +(unary)
              - (unary) & (address) * (dereference)
              * / %                                             Left to right
              + -                                               Left to right
              << >>                                             Left to right
              < <= > >=                                         Left to right
              == !=                                             Left to right
              &                                                 Left to right
                 ^                                               Left to right
                 |                                               Left to right
                 &&                                              Left to right
                 ||                                              Left to right
                 ?:                                              Right to left
                 = += -= *= /= %= <<= >>= |= &=                  Right to left
                   ^=
   Lowest        ,                                               Left to right
Table 2.4. Precedence and associativity determine the order of operation.
Observation: When confused about precedence (and aren't we all) add parentheses to clarify the
expression.
There are two types of comments. The first type explains how to use the software. These comments
are usually placed at the top of the file, within the header file, or at the start of a function. The reader
of these comments will be writing software that uses or calls these routines. The second type of
comments assists a future programmer (ourselves included) in changing, debugging or extending these
routines. We usually place these comments within the body of the functions. The comments on the right
of each line are examples of the second type.
As mentioned earlier, the preprocessor directives begin with # in the first column. As the name
implies preprocessor commands are processed first. I.e., the compiler passes through the program
handling the preprocessor directives. Although there are many possibilities (assembly language,
conditional compilation, interrupt service routines), I thought I’d mention the two most important ones
early in the book. We create a macro using #define to define constants.
#define SIZE 10
Basically, wherever SIZE is found as a token, it is replaced with the number 10 . A second important
directive is the #include , which allows you to include another entire file at that position within the
program. The #include directive will include the file named tm4c123ge6pm.h at this point in the
program. This file will define all the I/O port names for the TM4C123. There are similar header files
for each of the microcontrollers.
#include "tm4c123ge6pm.h"
It is important for the C programmer to distinguish the two terms declaration and definition. A
function declaration specifies its name, its input parameters and its output parameter. Another name
for a function declaration is prototype. A data structure declaration specifies its type and format. On
the other hand, a function definition specifies the exact sequence of operations to execute when it is
called. A function definition will generate object code, which are machine instructions to be loaded
into memory that perform the intended operations. A data structure definition will reserve space in
memory for it. The confusing part is that the definition will repeat the declaration specifications. The
C compiler performs just one pass through the code, and we must declare data/functions before we
can access/invoke them. To run, of course, all data and functions must be defined. For example the
declaration for the function Random could be written as
uint32_t Random(void);
We can see that the declaration shows us how to use the function, not how the function works.
Because the C compilation is a one-pass process, an object must be declared or defined before it can
be used in a statement. Actually the preprocessor performs the first pass through the program that
handles the preprocessor directives. A top-down approach is to first declare a function, use the
function, and lastly define the function as illustrated in Program 2.7. You see the high-level operations
first.
uint32_t Random(void);
void main(void){uint32_t n;
  while(1){
    n = (Random()>>24)%52; // n varies from 0 to 51
  }
}
uint32_t M=1;
uint32_t Random(void){
  M = 1664525*M+1013904223;
  return(M);
}
 Program 2.7. A main program that calls a function. In this case the declaration
 occurs first.
A bottom-up approach is to first define a function and then use the function as illustrated in Program
2.8. In the bottom-up approach, the definition both declares its structure and defines what it does. In
bottom-up, you see the low-level operations first.
uint32_t M=1;
uint32_t Random(void){
  M = 1664525*M+1013904223;
  return(M);
}
void main(void){uint32_t n;
  while(1){
    n = (Random()>>24)%52; // n varies from 0 to 51
  }
}
 Program 2.8. A main program that calls a function. In this case the definition
 occurs before its use.

A function is a sequence of operations that can be invoked from other places within the software. We
can pass zero or more parameters into a function. A function can have zero or one output parameter.
The add function in Program 2.9 has two 32-bit signed input parameters, and one 32-bit signed output
parameter. The numbers in the comments are added to simplify our discussion.
int32_t add(int32_t x, int32_t y){ int32_t z; // 1
 z = x+y;               // 2
 if((x>0)&&(y>0)&&(z<0))z= 2147483647; // 3
 if((x<0)&&(y<0)&&(z>0))z=-2147483648; // 4
 return(z);              // 5
}
void main(void){ int32_t a,b;           // 6
  a = add(2000,2000);                // 7
  b = 0;                     // 8
  while(1){                    // 9
    b = add(b,1);                // 10
  }                       // 11
}
 Program 2.9. A function with two inputs and one output.
The interesting part is that after the operations within the function are performed, control returns to the
place right after where the function was called. In C, execution begins with the main program. The
execution sequence is shown below (numbers on right are line numbers):
1                    void main(void){ int32_t a,b;               // 6
2                      a = add(2000,2000);                    // 7
3                    int32_t add(long x, long y){ long z;           // 1
4                      z = x+y;                         // 2
5                      if((x>0)&&(y>0)&&(z<0))z= 2147483647;                  // 3
6                      if((x<0)&&(y<0)&&(z>0))z=-2147483648;                  // 4
7                      return(z);                        // 5
8                      b = 0;                         // 8
9                      while(1){                        // 9
10              b = add(b,1);                    // 10
11          int32_t add(int32_t x, int32_t y){ int32_t z; // 1
12            z = x+y;                         // 2
13            if((x>0)&&(y>0)&&(z<0))z= 2147483647;                   // 3
14            if((x<0)&&(y<0)&&(z>0))z=-2147483648;                    // 4
15            return(z);                        // 5
16            }                            // 11
17            while(1){                        // 9
18              b = add(b,1);                    // 10
19          int32_t add(int32_t x, int32_t y){ int32_t z; // 1
20            z = x+y;                         // 2
21            if((x>0)&&(y>0)&&(z<0))z= 2147483647;                   // 3
22            if((x<0)&&(y<0)&&(z>0))z=-2147483648;                    // 4
23            return(z);                        // 5
Notice that the return from the first call goes to line 8, while all the other returns go to line 11. The
execution sequence repeats lines 9,10,1,2,3,4,5,11 indefinitely. The purpose of line 3 is to detect
overflow, which occurs when two large positive numbers are added such that the sum is too big and
does not fit into the 32-bit result. The purpose of line 4 is to detect underflow, which occurs when
two large negative numbers are added such that the sum is too small and does not fit into the 32-bit
result.
The functions in Programs 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6had neither an input or output parameter. To specify the
absence of a parameter we use the expression void .
The body of a function consists of a statement that performs the work. Normally the body is a
compound statement between a {} pair. If the function has a return parameter, then all exit points must
specify what to return.
Although C is a free field language, notice how the indenting has been added to programs in this book.
The purpose of this indenting is to make the program easier to read. On the other hand since C is a
free field language, the following two statements are quite different
Example A                     if(n1>100) n2=100; n3=0;
Example B                     if(n1>100) {n2=100; n3=0;}

In both cases n2=100; is executed only if n1>100. In Example A,the statement n3=0; is always
executed. In Example B, n3=0; is executed only if n1>100.
Variables declared outside of a function, like M in Program 2.8, are properly called external
variables because they are defined outside of any function. While this is the standard term for these
variables, it is confusing because there is another class of external variable, one that exists in a
separately compiled source file. In this document we will refer to variables in the present source file
as globals, and we will refer to variables defined in another file as externals. There are two reasons
to employ global variables. The first reason is data permanence. The other reason is information
sharing. Normally we pass information from one module to another explicitly using input and output
parameters, but there are applications like interrupt programming where this method is unavailable.
For these situations, one module can store data into a global while another module can view it.
Local variables are very important in C programming. They contain temporary information that is
accessible only within a narrow scope. We can define local variables at the start of a compound
statement. We call these local variables since they are known only to the block in which they appear,
and to subordinate blocks. The variables a, b, and z in Program 2.9 are local. In C, local variable
must be declared immediately after a brace { that begins a compound statement. Unlike globals,
which are said to be static, locals are created dynamically when their block is entered, and they cease
to exist when control leaves the block. Furthermore, local names supersede the names of globals and
other locals declared at higher levels of nesting. Therefore, locals may be used freely without regard
to the names of other variables. Although two global variables cannot use the same name, a local
variable of one block can use the same name as a local variable in another block. Programming errors
and confusion can be avoided by understanding these conventions.
2.9. Exercises
2.1 In 16 words or less give definitions of the following terms
a) Embedded                    b) Device driver                     c) Top down
d) Call graph                  e) Data flow graph            f) Successive refinement
g) Dynamic efficiency          h) Static efficiency          i) Real time

2.2 Define the following acronyms
a) HCI                          b) JTAG                                 c) NRE
d) GPIO                           e) LED                                 f) MMI
g) LCD                           h) ADC                                 i) DAC

2.3 Explain the differences between specification, requirement, and constraint.
2.4 In 16 words or less give definitions of the following debugging terms
a) Instrument                  b) Intrusiveness                  c) Black-box
d) White-box                   e) Minimally intrusive          f) Stabilization

2.5 There is a microcomputer embedded in a vending machine. List three operations the software
must perform.
2.6 What is the difference between a microcomputer and a microcontroller?
2.7 Consider a system with four modules named A, B, C, and D. Draw the call graph if A calls B, C
calls A and D, and B calls C. Why can’t the four individual modules in this system be tested one at a
time?
2.8 List 3 factors that we can use to evaluate the “goodness” of a program.
D2.9 Draw a data flow graph of the thermostat algorithm developed in Exercise 1.27.
D2.10 Draw a data flow graph of the cruise control algorithm developed in Exercise 1.28.
D2.11 Draw a data flow graph of the incremental controller developed in Exercise 1.42.
D2.12 Draw a data flow graph of the stepper motor controller developed in Exercise 1.43.
D2.13 Consider an MP3 player, which has a memory storage device, an MP3 decoder (converts
compressed data into raw form), buttons, an LCD, a USB link to a PC, dual DACs for stereo output,
and stereo headphones. Draw a possible data flow graph for system.
D2.14 You are given a double-pole switch that has three pins, labeled 1, 2, and 3. If the switch is not
pressed, pins 1 and 2 are connected (0Ω resistance) and pins 2 and 3 are not connected (infinite
resistance). If the switch is pressed, pins 2 and 3 are connected (0Ω resistance) and pins 1 and 2 are
not connected (infinite resistance). Pins 1 and 3 are never connected (it is a break-before-make
switch). Interface this switch to the microcontroller, such that input pin is high (3.3V) if the switch is
pressed and input pin is low (0V) if the switch is not pressed. You do not need to debounce the
switch. Label all chip numbers and resistor values. No software is required. The best solution will
not require any resistors.

D2.15 Interface an LED that requires 1 mA at 2.5 V. A digital output high on the microcontroller turns
on the LED. Assume VOH = 3.2V. I.e., this interface is positive logic.
D2.16 Interface an LED that requires 2 mA at 2.0 V. A digital output low on the microcontroller turns
on the LED. I.e., this interface is negative logic. Because of the direct connection to the
microcontroller, you should use 3.3V to power the LED (and not 5V). Assume VOL = 0.3V.
D2.17 Interface an LED that requires 15 mA at 2.5 V. Use a 7405 driver and a current limiting
resistor. A digital output high on the microcontroller turns on the LED. I.e., this interface is positive
logic. The 7405 output voltage VOL is 0.5V. At this current you can safely use either 3.3V or 5V to
power the LED.
D2.18 Interface an LED that requires 30 mA at 1.5 V. Use a 7406 driver and a current limiting
resistor. A digital output high the microcontroller turns on the LED. I.e., this interface is positive
logic. The 7406 output voltage VOL is 0.5V. At this large current, it is a good idea to replace the 3.3V
connection in Figure 1.9 with 5V. This way the current comes directly from the USB cable (5V) and
does not pass through the 3.3V regulator on the evaluation board.
D2.19 Interface an LED that requires 100 mA at 1.5 V. Use a PN2222 transistor driver and a current
limiting resistor. A digital output high the microcontroller turns on the LED. I.e., this interface is
positive logic. The PN2222 output voltage VCE is 0.3V. At this large current, it is a good idea to
replace the 3.3V connection in Figure 1.9 with 5V. This way the current comes directly from the USB
cable (5V) and does not pass through the 3.3V regulator on the evaluation board.
