5. Modular Programming
Chapter 5 objectives are to:
• Present the C syntax of keywords and punctuation
• Describe how to program in a modular way
• Use conditional branching to perform decisions
• Implement for-loops, macros, and recursion
• Implement modular programming using subroutines
• Present functional debugging as a method to test software
In this chapter, we will begin by presenting a general approach to modular design. In specific, we
will discuss how to organize software blocks in an effective manner. The ultimate success of an
embedded system project depends both on its software and hardware. Computer scientists pride
themselves in their ability to develop quality software. Similarly electrical engineers are well-trained
in the processes to design both digital and analog electronics. Manufacturers, in an attempt to get
designers to use their products, provide application notes for their hardware devices. The main
objective of this book is to combine effective design processes together with practical software
techniques in order to develop quality embedded systems. As the size and especially the complexity
of the software increase, the software development changes from simple "coding" to "software
engineering", and the required skills also vary along this spectrum. These software skills include
modular design, layered architecture, abstraction, and verification. Real-time embedded systems are
usually on the small end of the size scale, but never the less these systems can be quite complex.
Therefore, both hardware and software skills are essential for developing embedded systems. Writing
good software is an art that must be developed, and cannot be added on at the end of a project. Just
like any other discipline (e.g., music, art, science, religion), expertise comes from a combination of
study and practice. The watchful eye of a good mentor can be invaluable, so take the risk and show
your software to others inviting praise and criticism. Good software combined with average
hardware will always outperform average software on good hardware. In this chapter we will outline
various techniques for developing quality software.
5.1. C Keywords and Punctuation
C has predefined tokens, called keywords, which have specific meaning in C programs, as listed in
Table 5.1. This section describes keywords and punctuation.
Keyword         Meaning
__asm           Specify a function is written in assembly code (specific to
                ARM Keil™ uVision®)
auto            Specifies a variable as automatic (created on the stack)
break           Causes the program control structure to finish
case            One possibility within a switch statement
char            Defines a number with a precision of 8 bits(C99
                defines int8_t and uint8_t )
const           Defines parameter as constant in ROM, and defines a local
                parameter as fixed value
continue        Causes the program to go to beginning of loop
default         Used in switch statement for all other cases
do              Used for creating program loops
double          Specifies variable as double precision floating point
else            Alternative part of a conditional
extern          Defined in another module
float           Specifies variable as single precision floating point
for             Used for creating program loops
goto            Causes program to jump to specified location
if              Conditional control structure
int             Defines a number with a precision that will vary from
                compiler to compiler
long            Defines a number with a precision of 32 bits(C99
                defines int32_t and uint32_t )
register        Specifies how to implement a local
return          Leave function
short           Defines a number with a precision of 16 bits(C99
                defines int16_t and uint16_t )
signed          Specifies variable as signed (default)
sizeof          Built-in function returns the size of an object
static          Stored permanently in memory, accessed locally
struct          Used for creating data structures
switch          Complex conditional control structure
 typedef        Used to create new data types
 unsigned       Always greater than or equal to zero
 void           Used in parameter list to mean no parameter
 volatile       Can change implicitly outside the direct action of the
                software.
 while          Used for creating program loops
Table 5.1. Keywords have predefined meanings.
The volatile keyword disables compiler optimization, forcing the compiler to fetch a new value each
time. We will use volatile when defining I/O ports because the value of ports can change outside of
software action. We will also use volatile when sharing a global variable between the main program
and an interrupt service routine. It is a good programming practice not to use these keywords for your
variable or function names.
Punctuation marks are very important in C. It is one of the most frequent sources of errors for both
beginning and experienced programmers.
Semicolons are used as statement terminators. Strange and confusing syntax errors may be generated
when you forget a semicolon, so this is one of the first things to check when trying to remove syntax
errors. Notice that one semicolon is placed at the end of every simple statement in Program 5.1. When
executed, the function Step will output the pattern 10, 9, 5, 6 to Port D. The #define statement
creates a substitution rule, such that every instance of STEPPER in the program is replaces with (*
((volatile uint32_t *)0x4000703C)) .
#define STEPPER (*((volatile uint32_t *)0x4000703C))
void Step(void){
  STEPPER = 10;
  STEPPER = 9;
  STEPPER = 5;
  STEPPER = 6;
}
 Program 5.1. Semicolons are used to separate one statement from the next.
Preprocessor directives do not end with a semicolon since they are not actually part of the C language
proper. Preprocessor directives begin in the first column with the # and conclude at the end of the
line. Program 5.2will fill the array DataBuffer with data read from the input Port A. We assume in
this example that Port A has been initialized as an input. Notice that semicolons are used to separate
the three fields of the for loop statement.
uint8_t DataBuffer[100];
#define GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R (*((volatile uint32_t *)0x400043FC))
void Fill(void){ uint32_t j;
  for(j=0; j<100; j++){
    DataBuffer[j] = GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R;
  }
}
 Program 5.2. Semicolons are used to separate three fields of the for statement.
We can define a label using the colon. Although C has a goto statement, it is strongly discouraged to
use goto . Software is easier to understand using the block-structured control statements (if, if else,
for, while, do while, and switch case.) Program 5.3 will return after the Port A input reads the same
value 10000 times in a row. Again we assume Port A has been initialized as an input. Notice that
every time the current value on Port A is different from the previous value the counter is reinitialized.
Notice the use of colons in Program 5.3.
int32_t Debounce(void){ uint32_t cnt; uint32_t last,new;
start: cnt = 0;      // number of times Port C is the same
      last = GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R;
loop: if(++cnt==10000) goto done; // count 10000 times
      new = GPIO_PORTA_DATA_R;
      if(last != new) goto start; // changed??
      goto loop;
done: return(last);
}
 Program 5.3. Colons are used to define labels (places to which we can jump).
Colons also terminate case , and default prefixes that appear in switch statements. In Program 5.4
one output to the stepper motor producedeach time the function OneStep is called. The proper
stepper motor sequence is 10–9–5–6. The default case is used to restart the pattern. For both
applications of the colon (goto and switch), we see that a label is created that is a potential target for
a transfer of control. Notice the use of colons in Program 5.4.
uint8_t Last=10;
void OneStep(void){
uint8_t theNext;
  switch(Last){
    case 10: theNext = 9; break; // 10 to 9
    case 9: theNext = 5; break; // 9 to 5
    case 5: theNext = 6; break; // 5 to 6
    case 6: theNext = 10; break; // 6 to 10
    default: theNext = 10;
  }
  GPIO_PORTD_DATA_R = theNext;
  Last = theNext; // set up for next call
}
 Program 5.4. Colons are also used with the switch statement.
Commas separate items that appear in lists. We can create multiple variables of the same type using
commas.
uint32_t beginTime,endTime,elapsedTime;
Lists are also used with functions having multiple parameters, both when the function is defined and
called. Program 5.5 adds two 16-bit signed numbers, implementing ceiling and floor. Notice the use
of commas in Program 5.5.
int16_t add(int16_t x, int16_t y){ int16_t z;
  z = x+y;
  if((x>0)&&(y>0)&&(z<0))z = 32767;
  if((x<0)&&(y<0)&&(z>0))z = -32768;
  return(z);
}
void main(void){ int16_t a,b;
  a = add(2000,2000)
  b=0
  while(1){
    b = add(b,1);
}
 Program 5.5. Commas separate the parameters of a function.
Lists can also be used in general expressions. Sometimes it adds clarity to a program if related
variables are modified at the same place. The value of a list of expressions is always the value of the
last expression in the list. In the following example, first thetime is incremented, next thedate is
decremented, and then x is set to k+2 .
x = (thetime++, thedate--, k+2);
Apostrophesare used to specify character literals. Assuming the function OutChar will display a
single ASCII character, Program 5.6 will display the lower case alphabet.
void Alphabet(void){ char mych;
  for(mych='a'; mych<='z'; mych++){
    OutChar(mych); // Print next letter
  }
}
 Program 5.6. Apostrophes are used to specify characters.
Quotation marks are used to specify string literals. Strings are stored as a sequence of ASCII
characters followed by a termination code, 0. Program 5.7 will display “Hello World” twice.
const char Msg[]= "Hello World"; // string constant
void OutString(const char str[]){ int i;
  i = 0;
  while(str[i]){ // output until the 0 termination
    OutChar(str[i]); // Print next letter
    i = i+1;
  }
}
void PrintHelloWorld(void){
  OutString("Hello World");
  OutString(Msg);
}
 Program 5.7. Quotation marks are used to specify strings.
Braces {} are used throughout C programs. The most common application is for creating a compound
statement. Each open brace { must be matched with a closing brace }. Notice the use of indenting in
Programs 5.1 through 5.7 that helps to match up braces. Each time an open brace is used, the source
code is tabbed over using 2 spaces. In this way, it is easy to see at a glance the brace pairs.
Square brackets enclose array dimensions (in declarations) and subscripts (in expressions). The
following defines an integer array named Fifo consisting of 100 16-bit signed numbers.
int16_t Fifo[100];
The following assigns the variable PutPt to the address of the first entry of the array.
PutPt = &Fifo[0];
Parentheses enclose argument lists that are associated with function declarations and calls. They are
required even if there are no arguments. As with all programming languages, C uses parentheses to
control the order in which expressions are evaluated. Thus, (11+3)/2 yields 7, whereas 11+3/2 yields
12. Parentheses are very important when writing expressions.
5.2. Modular Design using Abstraction
In Section 2.4, we presented successive refinement as a method to convert a problem statement into a
software algorithm. Successive refinement is the transformation from the general to the specific. In
this section, we introduce the concept of modular programming and demonstrate that it is an effective
way to organize our software projects. There are four reasons for forming modules. First, functional
abstraction allows us to reuse a software module from multiple locations. Second, complexity
abstraction allows us to divide a highly complex system into smaller less complicated components.
The third reason is portability. If we create modules for the I/O devices, then we can isolate the rest
of the system from the hardware details. This approach is sometimes called a hardware abstraction
layer. Since all the software components that access an I/O port are grouped together, it will be easier
to redesign the embedded system on a machine with different I/O ports. Finally, another reason for
forming modules is security. Modular systems by design hide the inner workings from other modules
and provide a strict set of mechanisms to access data and I/O ports. Hiding details and restricting
access generates a more secure system.
Software must deal with complexity. Most real systems have many components, which interact in a
complex manner. The size and interactions will make it difficult to conceptualize, abstract, visualize,
and document. In this chapter we will present data flow graphs and call graphs as tools to describe
interactions between components. Software must deal with conformity. All design, including
software design, must interface with existing systems and with systems yet to be designed. Interfacing
with existing systems creates an additional complexity. Software must deal with changeability. Most
of the design effort involves change. Creating systems that are easy to change will help manage the
rapid growth occurring in the computer industry.

5.2.1. Definition and Goals
The key to completing any complex task is to break it down into manageable subtasks. Modular
programming is a style of software development that divides the software problem into distinct well-
defined modules. The parts are as small as possible, yet relatively independent. Complex systems
designed in a modular fashion are easier to debug because each module can be tested separately.
Industry experts estimate that 50 to 90% of software development cost is spent in maintenance. All
five aspects of software maintenance
• Correcting mistakes,
• Adding new features,
• Optimizing for execution speed or program size,
• Porting to new computers or operating systems, and
• Reconfiguring the software to solve a similar related program
are simplified by organizing the software system into modules. The approach is particularly useful
when a task is large enough to require several programmers.
A program module is a self-contained software task with clear entry and exit points. There is a
distinct difference between a module and the assembly language subroutine or C language function. A
module is usually a collection of subroutines or functions that in its entirety performs a well-defined
set of tasks. A collection of 32-bit trigonometry functions is an example of a module. The device
driver in Program 4.3 is another example of a module. Modular programming involves both the
specification of the individual modules and the connection scheme whereby the modules are
interfaced together to form the software system. While the module may be called from many locations
throughout the software, there should be well-defined entry points. In C, the entry point of a module
is defined in the header file and is specified by a list of function prototypes for the public functions.
Similarly in assembly, the entry point of a module is also a list of public subroutines that can be
called.
Common Error: In many situations the input parameters have a restricted range. It would be
inefficient for the module and the calling routine to both check for valid input. On the other hand, an
error may occur if neither checks for valid input.
An exit point is the ending point of a program module. The exit point of a subroutine is used to return
to the calling routine. We need to be careful about exit points. It is important that the stack be properly
balanced at all exit points. Similarly, if the subroutine returns parameters, then all exit points should
return parameters in an acceptable format. If the main program has an exit point it either stops the
program or returns to the debugger. In most embedded systems, the main program does not exit.
Common Error: It is an error if all the exit points of an assembly subroutine do not balance the stack
and return parameters in the same way.
In this section, an object refers to either a subroutine or a data element. A public object is one that is
shared by multiple modules. This means a public object can be accessed by other modules. Typically,
we make the most general functions of a module public, so the functions can be called from other
modules. For a module performing I/O, typical public functions include initialization, input, and
output. A private object is one that is not shared. I.e., a private object can be accessed by only one
module. Typically, we make the internal workings of a module private, so we hide how a private
function works from user of the module. In an object-oriented language like C++ or Java, the
programmer clearly defines a function or data object as public or private. Later in this chapter, we
will present a naming convention for assembly language or C that can be used in an equivalent manner
to define a function or data object as public or private.
At a first glance, I/O devices seem to be public. For example, Port D resides permanently at the fixed
address of 0x400073FC, and the programmer of every module knows that. In other words, from a
syntactic viewpoint, any module has access to any I/O device. However, in order to reduce the
complexity of the system, we will restrict the number of modules that actually do access the I/O
device. From a “what do we actually do” perspective, however, we will write software that
considers I/O devices as private, meaning an I/O device should be accessed by only one module. In
general, it will be important to clarify which modules have access to I/O devices and when they are
allowed to access them. When more than one module accesses an I/O device, then it is important to
develop ways to arbitrate or synchronize. If two or more want to access the device simultaneously
arbitration determines which module goes first. Sometimes the order of access matters, so we use
synchronization to force a second module to wait until the first module is finished. Most
microcontrollers do not have architectural features that restrict access to I/O ports, because it is
assumed that all software burned into its ROM was designed for a common goal, meaning from a
security standpoint one can assume there are no malicious components. However, as embedded
systems become connected to the Internet, providing the power and flexibility, security will become
important issue.
Checkpoint 5.1: What conflict could arise if multiple modules use the same port, but module
initialization functions are not friendly? How do you resolve the conflict?
Information hiding is similar to minimizing coupling. It is better to separate the mechanisms of
software from its policies. We should separate “what the function does” from “how the function
works”. What a function does is defined by the relationship between its inputs and outputs. It is good
to hide certain inner workings of a module and simply interface with the other modules through the
well-defined input/output parameters. For example we could implement a variable size buffer by
maintaining the current byte count in a global variable, Count . A good module will hide
how Count is implemented from its users. If the user wants to know how many bytes are in the buffer,
it calls a function that returns the count. A badly written module will not hide Count from its users.
The user simply accesses the global variable Count . If we update the buffer routines, making them
faster or better, we might have to update all the programs that access Count too. Allowing all
software to access Count creates a security risk, making the system vulnerable to malicious or
incompetent software. The object-oriented programming environments provide well-defined
mechanisms to support information hiding. This separation of policies from mechanisms is discussed
further in the section on layered software.
Maintenance Tip: It is good practice to make all permanently-allocated data and all I/O devices
private. Information is transferred from one module to another through well-defined public function
calls.
The Keep It Simple Stupid approach tries to generalize the problem so that the solution uses an
abstract model. Unfortunately, the person who defines the software specifications may not understand
the implications and alternatives. As a software developer, we always ask ourselves these questions:
“How important is this feature?”
“What if it worked this different way?”

Sometimes we can restate the problem to allow for a simpler and possibly more powerful solution.

5.2.2. Functions, Procedures, Methods, and Subroutines
A program module that performs a well-defined task can be packaged up and defined as a single
entity. Functions in that module can be invoked whenever a task needs to be performed. Object-
oriented high-level languages like C++ and Java define program modules as methods. Functions and
procedures are defined in some high-level languages like Pascal, FORTRAN, and Ada. In these
languages, functions return a parameter and procedures do not. Most high-level languages however
define program modules as functions, whether they return a parameter or not. A subroutine is the
assembly language version of a function. Consequently, subroutines may or may not have input or
output parameters. Formally, there are two components to a subroutine: definition and invocation. The
subroutine definition specifies the task to be performed. Examples of three subroutine definitions can
be seen as the SysTick functions in Program 4.7. In other words, it defines what will happen when
executed. The syntax for a subroutine definition was presented previously in Section 2.8. It begins
with a label, which will be the name of the subroutine and ends with a return instruction. The
definition of a subroutine includes a formal specification its input parameters and output parameters.
In well-written software, the task performed by a subroutine will be well-defined and logically
complete. The subroutine invocation is inserted to the software system at places when and where the
task should be performed. An example of a subroutine invocation can be seen in Program 3.9. We
define software that invokes the subroutine as “the calling program” because it calls the subroutine.
There are three parts to a subroutine invocation: pass input parameters, subroutine call, and accept
output parameters. If there are input parameters, the calling program must establish the values for
input parameters before it calls the subroutine. A BL instruction is used to call the subroutine. After
the subroutine finishes, and if there are output parameters, the calling program accepts the return
value(s). In this chapter, we will pass parameters using the registers. If the register contains a value,
the parameter is classified as call by value. If the register contains an address, which points to the
value, then the parameter is classified as call by reference.
For example, consider a subroutine that samples the 12-bit ADC, as drawn in Figure 5.1. An analog
input signal is connected to ADC0. The details of how the ADC works will be presented later in
Chapter 10, but for now we focus on the defining and invoking subroutines. The execution sequence
begins with the calling program setting up the input parameters. In this case, the calling program sets
Register R0equal to the channel number, MOV R0,#0 . The instruction BLADC_In will save the
return address in the LR registerand jump to the ADC_In subroutine. The subroutine performs a
well-defined task. In this case, it takes the channel number in Register R0 and performs an analog to
digital conversion, placing the digital representation of the analog input into Register R0. The BX
LR instruction will movethe return address into the PC, returning the execution thread to the
instruction after the BL in the calling program. In this case, the output parameter in Register R0
contains the result of the ADC conversion. It is the responsibility of the calling program to accept the
return parameter. In this case, it simply stores the result into variable n . In this example, both the
input and output parameters are call by value.

Figure 5.1. The calling program invokes the ADC_In subroutine passing
 parameters in registers.
5.2.3. Dividing a Software Task into Modules
The overall goal of modular programming is to enhance clarity. The smaller the task, the easier it will
be to understand. Coupling is defined as the influence one module’s behavior has on another module.
In order to make modules more independent we strive to minimize coupling. Obvious and appropriate
examples of coupling are the input/output parameters explicitly passed from one module to another. A
quantitative measure of coupling is the number of bytes per second (bandwidth) that are transferred
from one module to another. On the other hand, information stored in public global variables can be
quite difficult to track. In a similar way, shared accesses to I/O ports can also introduce unnecessary
complexity. Public global variables cause coupling between modules that complicate the debugging
process because now the modules may not be able to be separately tested. On the other hand, we must
use global variables to pass information into and out of an interrupt service routine and from one call
to an interrupt service routine to the next call. When passing data into or out of an interrupt service
routine, we group the functions that access the global into the same module, thereby making the global
variable private. Another problem specific to embedded systems is the need for fast execution,
coupled with the limited support for local variables. On many microcontrollers it is inefficient to
implement local variables on the stack. Consequently, many programmers opt for the less elegant yet
faster approach of global variables. Again, if we restrict access to these globals to function in the
same module, the global becomes private. It is poor design to pass data between modules through
public global variables; it is better to use a well-defined abstract technique like a FIFO queue.
We should assign a logically complete task to each module. The module is logically complete when it
can be separated from the rest of the system and placed into another application. The interface design
is extremely important. The interface to a module is the set of public functions that can be called and
the formats for the input/output parameters of these functions. The interfaces determine the policies of
our modules: “What does the module do?” In other words, the interfaces define the set of actions that
can be initiated. The interfaces also define the coupling between modules. In general we wish to
minimize the bandwidth of data passing between the modules yet maximize the number of modules. Of
the following three objectives when dividing a software project into subtasks, it is really only the
first one that matters
• Make the software project easier to understand
• Increase the number of modules
• Decrease the interdependency (minimize bandwidth between modules).

Checkpoint 5.2: List some examples of coupling.
We will illustrate the process of dividing a software task into modules with an abstract but realistic
example. The overall goal of the example shown in Figure 5.2 is to sample data using an ADC,
perform calculations on the data, and output results. The organic light emitting diode (OLED) could
be used to display data to the external world. Notice the typical format of an embedded system in that
it has some tasks performed once at the beginning, and it has a long sequence of tasks performed over
and over. The structure of this example applies to many embedded systems such as a diagnostic
medical instrument, an intruder alarm system, a heating/AC controller, a voice recognition module,
automotive emissions controller, or military surveillance system. The left side of Figure 5.2 shows
the complex software system defined as a linear sequence of ten steps, where each step represents
many lines of assembly code. The linear approach to this program follows closely to linear sequence
of the processor as it executes instructions. This linear code, however close to the actual processor,
is difficult to understand, hard to debug, and impossible to reuse for other projects. Therefore, we
will attempt a modular approach considering the issues of functional abstraction, complexity
abstraction, and portability in this example. The modular approach to this problem divides the
software into three modules containing seven subroutines. In this example, assume the sequence
Step4-Step5-Step6 causes data to be sorted. Notice that this sorting task is executed twice.

Figure 5.2. A complex software system is broken into three modules containing
 seven subroutines.
Functional abstraction encourages us to create a Sort subroutine allowing us to write the software
once, but execute it from different locations. Complexity abstraction encourages us to organize the
ten-step software into a main program with multiple modules, where each module has multiple
subroutines. For example, assume the assembly instructions in Step1 cause the ADC to be initialized.
Even though this code is executed only once, complexity abstraction encourages us to create
an ADC_Init subroutine so the system is easier to understand and easier to debug. In a similar way
assume Step2 initializes the OLED port, Step3 samples the ADC, the sequence Step7-Step8 performs
an average, and Step10 outputs to the OLED. Therefore, each well-defined task is defined as a
separate subroutine. The subroutines are then grouped into modules. For example, the ADC module is
a collection of subroutines that operate the ADC. The complex behavior of the ADC is now
abstracted into two easy to understand tasks: turn it on, and use it. In a similar way, the OLED module
includes all functions that access the OLED. Again, at the abstract level of the main program,
understanding how to use the OLED is a matter knowing we first turn it on then we transmit data. The
math module is a collection of subroutines to perform necessary calculations on the data. In this
example, we assume sort and average will be private subroutines, meaning they can be called only by
software within the math module and not by software outside the module. Making private subroutines
is an example of “information hiding”, separating what the module does from how the module works.
When we port a system, it means we take a working system and redesign it with some minor but
critical change. The OLED device is used in this system to output results. We might be asked to port
this system onto a device that uses an LCD in place of the OLED for its output. In this case, all we
need to do is design, implement and test an LCDmodule with two
subroutines LCD_Init and LCD_Out that function in a similar manner as the existing OLED
routines. The modular approach performs the exact same ten steps in the exact same order. However,
the modular approach is easier to debug, because first we debug each subroutine, then we debug each
module, and finally we debug the entire system. The modular approach clearly supports code reuse.
For example, if another system needs an ADC, we can simply use the ADC module software without
having to debug it again.
Observation: When writing modular code, notice its two-dimensional aspect. Down the y-axis still
represents time as the program is executed, but along the x-axis we now visualize a functional block
diagram of the system showing its data flow: input, calculate, output.

Observation: When writing modular code, we hide details that are likely to change. Furthermore, we
take details that are unlikely to change and use them to define the interfaces between modules.

5.2.4. How to Draw a Call Graph
Defined previously in Figure 2.5, we recall that a call graph is a graphical representation of the
organizational structure of the modules pieced together to construct a system. In this section, we will
work through the process of drawing a call graph. A software module is a collection of public
functions, private functions, and private global variables that together perform a complete task.
Modular programming places multiple related subroutines into a single module. I/O devices are
essential in all computers, but they are particularly relevant when developing software for an
embedded system. Just like our software, it is appropriate to group I/O ports into hardware modules,
which together perform a complete I/O task. The main program is at the top, and the I/O ports are at
the bottom. In a hierarchical system, the modules are organized both in a horizontal and vertical
fashion. Modules at the same horizontal level perform similar but distinct functions (e.g., we could
place all I/O modules at the same horizontal level in the call graph hierarchy). From a vertical
perspective, we place modules responsible for overall policy decisions at the top and modules
performing implementations at the bottom of the call graph hierarchy. Since one of the advantages of
breaking a large software project into subtasks is concurrent development, it makes sense to consider
concurrency when dividing the tasks. In other words, the modules should be partitioned in such a way
that multiple programmers can develop and test the subtasks as independently as possible. On the
other hand, careful and constant supervision is required as modules are connected together and tested.
An arrow represents a software linkage, i.e., one software module calling another. We draw the tail
of the arrow in the software module that initiates the call, and we point the head of the arrow at the
software module it calls. When programming in C, including a header file in the implementation file
of a module defines an arrow in the call graph. The exception to this rule is including a header file
that contains constants and has no corresponding implementation file. The file tm4c123ge6pm.h
contains the I/O port definitions for the TM4C123, and has no code file. Therefore, tm4c123ge6pm
is not a module. On the other hand we can create an ADC module by placing all the ADC functions in
the ADC.c file and defining the prototypes for the public functions in the ADC.h file. If we place
an #include "ADC.h" statement in our main.c code, we create a call graph arrow from the main
module to the ADC module, because software in the main module can call the public functions of the
ADC module. In a large complex system, we will add call graph arrows for situations where it can
call rather than where is does call. It is easier in a larger system to draw the can-call arrows than the
does-call arrows, because we just have to look at the header files each code file includes. In contrast,
we usually draw only the does-call arrows for accesses to I/O devices. In other words, a device
driver is a collection of I/O software for a particular I/O device. This approach will also simplify
maintaining a call graph during phases while the software is being designed, written, debugged, or
upgraded. Changes to the list of header files included by a module are much less frequent than
changes to the list of functions actually called. On the other hand, most embedded systems are simple
enough that it is more appropriate to show just the does-call arrows.
A global variable is one which is allocated in permanent RAM. These variables are a necessary and
important component of an embedded system, because some information is permanent in nature. Good
programming style however suggests we restrict access to these global variables to a single module.
On the other hand, a public global variable is accessed by more than one module. Public globals
represent poor programming style, because they add complexity to the system. Reading and writing
public globals add arrows to the call graph. If module A reads a global variable in module B, then we
add an arrow from B to A, because activities in B cause changes in A. If module A writes to a global
variable in module B, then we add an arrow from A to B, because activities in A cause changes in B.
If there is an arrow from A to B, and a second arrow from B to A, then modules A and B must be
tested together. Coupling through shared global variables is a very bad style because debugging will
be difficult.
Typically, hardware modules are at the lowest level, because hardware responds to software. An
arrow from an oval to a rectangle represents a hardware access, i.e., the software reads from or
writes to an I/O port. An arrow from an oval to a rectangle signifies the usual read/write access to the
hardware module or public global. We will study interrupts in detail in Chapter 9. With interrupts, a
hardware triggering event causes the software interrupt service routine to execute. Therefore with
interrupts, we add an arrow from the hardware module to the software module. It can be drawn with
two single-headed arrows or one double-headed arrow. Defining arrows between hardware and
software modules allows us to identify problems such as conflict (two modules writing to the same
I/O configuration registers), or race conditions (e.g., one module reading a port before another
module initializes it).
Figure 5.3 shows a call graph of the example presented in Figure 5.2. To draw a call graph, we first
represent all the software modules as ovals. Inside the oval lives the functions and variables of that
module. Normally, there is not space to list all the subroutines of each module inside the oval, but
they are drawn here in this figure so you can see the details of how the graph is drawn. In this
example, there is a main program and three software modules. Since this main program calls the Math
module, the main program is at a higher level than the Math module, therefore the oval for main will
be drawn above the oval for Math. The ADC, Math, and OLED modules do not call each other and
each is called by main, so they exist at the same level. In this example, there are two hardware
modules, and they are drawn as rectangles. To draw the arrows, we search for subroutine call
instructions. The tail of an arrow is placed in the module containing the calling program, and the head
of an arrow is placed in the module with the subroutine.
If there are multiple calls from one module to another, only one arrow is needed. For example, there
are two calls from main to ADC, but only one arrow is drawn. No arrows will be drawn to describe
subroutine calls within a module. For example, we do not need to draw arrows representing the Math
routine Math_Calc calling Sort and Average , because these are all within the same module. Two
arrows from software to hardware are drawn, because the ADC module accesses the ADC hardware,
and the OLED module accesses the OLED hardware.

Figure 5.3. A call graph of the system of Figure 5.2.
We can develop and connect modules in a hierarchical manner. Construct new modules by combining
existing modules. In general, to reduce complexity of the system we want to maximize the number of
modules and minimize the number of arrows between them. More specifically, we want to minimize
the bandwidth of data flowing from one module to the other.
Observation: If module A calls module B, and module B calls module A, then these two modules
must be tested together.
Maintenance Tip: It is good practice to have one hardware module (e.g., the ADC or OLED)
accessed by exactly one software module.
Checkpoint 5.3: In what way are I/O devices considered as public?
Checkpoint 5.4: How can you implement a system that considers I/O devices as private?

5.2.5. How to Draw a Data Flow Graph
As shown previously in Figure 2.4, a data flow graph is a graphical representation of the data as it
traverses the system. Figure 5.4 shows the data flow graph for the example presented in Figure 5.2. In
general, the data flow graph contains the same software and hardware modules as the call graph.
There are two fundamental differences, however. The arrows in a data flow graph specify the
direction, data type, and rate of data transfer. Conversely, arrows in a call graph specify which
module invoked which other module. The second difference is in general we draw modules in a data
flow graph from left to right as data enters as inputs on the left and exits as outputs on the right. In a
call graph, we draw modules top to bottom from high-level to low-level functions.
Figure 5.4. A data flow graph of the system of Figure 5.2.
Assume in this example, the analog input contains frequency components from 0 to 50 Hz. We classify
the signal as analog and specify the bandwidth of the analog signal to be 50 Hz. The output of the
ADC hardware is 12-bit digital samples. If the 12-bit ADC is sampled 100 times a second, we define
the bandwidth of the digital data out of the ADC software module as 100 samples/sec, 100
halfwords/sec or 200 bytes/sec. Assume once a second, the main program fills a 100-element buffer
and passes it to the math module. The math module takes in 100 samples and generates one 16-bit
result. In this case, we define the output of the math module to be 1 halfword/sec. If once a second
each result is printed as ten ASCII characters using the OLED, then the bandwidth into and out of the
OLED software module will be 10 characters/sec.

5.2.6. Top-down versus Bottom-up Design
Hierarchical systems have tree-structured call graphs, like system in Figure 5.3. Layered systems
have call graphs that group the modules into layers, such that the linkage arrows only go from a high
level to a lower level or within the same level. A lower level module is not allowed to call a higher
level. If at all possible, we should avoid cyclic graphs. A cycle in the call graph will make testing
difficult. Recall that we design top down and test bottom up. When there is a cycle in the call graph,
there is no good place to start debugging. There are two approaches to hierarchical programming. The
top-down approach starts with a general overview, like an outline of a paper, and builds refinement
into subsequent layers. Most engineers believe top down is the proper approach to design. A top-
downprogrammer was once quoted as saying,
“Write no software until every detail is specified”

Top down provides an excellent global approach to the problem. Managers like top down because it
gives them tighter control over their workers. The top-down approach works well when an existing
operational system is being upgraded or rewritten.
On the other hand the bottom-up approach starts with the smallest detail, builds up the system “one
brick at a time.” The bottom-up approach provides a realistic appreciation of the problem because
we often cannot appreciate the difficulty or the simplicity of a problem until we have tried it. It
allows programmers to start immediately coding and gives programmers more input into the design.
For example, a low level programmer may be able to point out features that are not possible and
suggest other features that are even better. Some software projects are flawed from their conception.
With bottom-up design, the obvious flaws surface early in the development cycle.
Bottom-up is a better approach when designing a complex system and specifications are open-ended.
For example, when researching new technologies or exploring new markets, you can’t perform a top-
down design because there are no specifications or constraints with which to work. However, a
bottom-up approach allows you to brainstorm putting pieces together in new and creative ways. In a
bottom-up design, questions begin with “I wonder what would happen if…”
On the other hand, top down is better when you have a very clear understanding of the problem
specifications and the constraints of your system.
5.3. Making Decisions
The previous section presented fundamental concepts and general approaches to solving problems on
the computer. In the subsequent sections, detailed implementations will be presented.

5.3.1. Conditional Branch Instructions
Normally the computer executes one instruction after another in a sequential or linear fashion. In
particular, the next instruction to execute is found immediately following the current instruction. We
use branch instructions to deviate from this straight line path. The branch instructions were presented
earlier in Chapter 3. The following unsigned conditional branch instructions must follow a subtract or
compare, such as SUBS CMN and CMP .
BLO target               ;Branch if unsigned less than                             if C=0,           same as
BCC
BLS target             ;Branch if unsigned less than or equal to                      if C=0 or Z=1
BHS target              ;Branch if unsigned greater than or equal to                      if C=1, same as
BCS
BHI target             ;Branch if unsigned greater than                               if C=1 and Z=0
After a subtraction the carry bit is 0 if there is an error and 1 if there is no error. To understand
exactly how unsigned conditional branches work, let’s start with the BLO instruction. As stated
earlier, we bring the first unsigned number into a register, and then subtract a second unsigned number
from the first. Let’s call the first number First and the second number Second. The BLO instruction is
supposed to branch if the first unsigned number is strictly less than the second. The two possibilities,
branch or no branch, are illustrated in number wheels drawn in Figure 5.5.

Figure 5.5. Number wheel on left shows the result of subtracting a big unsigned
 number from a little number, and the one on the right occurs when subtracting a
 small unsigned number from a large one.
Assume for a moment that the condition is true, meaning First < Second. Since First < Second, First-
Second should be a negative number. I.e., if we subtract a big unsigned number from a small unsigned
number, an unsigned overflow must occur, because the correct result of the subtraction is negative, but
there are no negative numbers in the unsigned format. Thus, the C bit must be clear (C=0 means
overflow error). The left side of Figure 5.5 shows the subtraction will always cross the 0–(232-1)
barrier because First < Second. Conversely, assume the condition is false, meaning the first unsigned
number is greater than or equal the second. The right side of Figure 5.5 shows when we subtract the
smaller second number from the bigger first number we get the correct result. In this case, the C bit
will be set (C=1 means no overflow error). Thus, the BLO instruction can be defined as branch if
C=0. The BHS instruction is the logical complement of BLO , so BHS instruction will branch if the
C bit is set. The BLS instruction will branch if the first number is less than the second (C=0) or if the
two numbers are equal (Z=1). Hence, the operation of the BLS instruction can be defined as branch
if (C=0 or Z=1). Lastly, the BHI instruction is the logical complement of BLS , so BHI instruction
will branch if (C=1 and Z=0).
The following signed branch instructions must follow a subtract compare or test instruction, such
as SUBS CMN and CMP .
BLT target           ; if signed less than                   if (~N&V | N&~V)=1      if N≠V
BGE target            ; if signed greater than or equal to          if (~N&V | N&~V)=0     if N=V
BGT target            ; if signed greater than                   if (Z | ~N&V | N&~V)=0 if Z=0 and
N=V
BLE target            ; if signed less than or equal to        if (Z | ~N&V | N&~V)=1 if Z=1 or N≠V
To understand exactly how signed conditional branches work, we will begin withthe BLT
instruction. We bring the first signed number into a register, and then subtract a second signed number
from the first. The BLT instruction is supposed to branch if the first signed number is strictly less
than the second. Assume for a moment that First < Second, thus the branch should occur. Since First <
Second, First-Second should be a negative number. Let’s further dissect this case into two subcases.
If the V bit is clear, the subtraction is correct and the N bit will be 1. This subcase defines the N&~V
term. If the V bit is set, the subtraction is incorrect and the result will be incorrectly positive, making
N bit 0. This subcase defines the ~N&V term. Conversely, assume the condition is false, meaning
First ≥ Second, and the branch should not occur. Since First ≥ Second, First-Second should be a
positive number. If the V bit is clear, the subtraction is correct and the N bit will be 0. If the V bit is
set, the subtraction is incorrect and the result will be incorrectly negative, making N bit 1. Thus,
the BLT instruction can be defined as branch if (~N&V | N&~V)=1. The BGE instruction is the
logical complement of BLT , so BGE instruction will branch if (~N&V | N&~V)=0. The BLE
instruction will branch if the first number is less than the second ((~N&V | N&~V)=1) or if the two
numbers are equal (Z=1). Combining the less than with the equal conditions, the operation of BLE
instruction can be defined as branch if (Z | ((~N&V) | (N&~V)))==1. Lastly, the BGT instruction is
the logical complement of BLE , so BGT instruction will branch if (Z | ((~N&V) | (N&~V)))=0.
Normally, we will never use the CMN instruction explicitly. However, when we write the
instruction CMP R0,#n the number n is specified by the flexible second operand. Thus, there are only
a limited number of choices we can select for the constant n . For example, n cannot equal -2. Luckily
for us, the assembler will automatically convert CMP R0,#-2 into the equivalent instruction CMN
R0,#2 .
Common Error:It is usually an error to follow a compare instruction with BPL or BMI .

5.3.2. Conditional if-then Statements
Decision making is an important aspect of software programming. Two values are compared and
certain blocks of program are executed or skipped depending on the results of the comparison. In
assembly language it is important to know the precision (e.g., 8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit) and the format of
the two values (e.g., unsigned, signed). It takes three steps to perform a comparison. You begin by
reading the first value into a register. If the second value is not a constant, it must be read into a
register, too. The second step is to compare the first value with the second value. You can use either a
subtract instruction with the S ( SUBS ) or a compare instruction ( CMPCMN ). The CMP CMN
SUBS instructions set the condition code bits. The last step is a conditional branch.
Observation:Think of the three steps 1) bring first value into a register, 2) compare to second value,
3) conditional branch, bxx (where xx is eq ne lo ls hi hs gt ge lt or le ). The branch will occur if (first
is xx second).
In Programs 5.8 and 5.9, we assume G is a 32-bit unsigned variable. Program 5.8contains two
separate if-then structures involving testing for equal or not equal. It will
call GEqual7 if G equals 7 , and GNotEqual7 if G does not equal 7 . When testing for equal or not
equal it doesn’t matter whether the numbers are signed or unsigned. However, it does matter if they
are 8-bit or 16-bit. To convert these examples to 16 bits, use the LDRH R0,[R2] instruction instead
of the LDR R0,[R2] instruction. To convert these examples to 8bits, use the LDRB R0,[R2]
instruction instead of the LDR R0,[R2] instruction.
       Assembly code                            C code
         LDR R2, =G ; R2 = &G                   uint32_t G;
         LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                  if(G == 7){
         CMP R0, #7 ; is G == 7 ?                 GEqual7();
         BNE next1 ; if not, skip               }
         BL GEqual7 ; G == 7
       next1
         LDR R2, =G ; R2 = &G
         LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                  if(G != 7){
         CMP R0, #7 ; is G != 7 ?                 GNotEqual7();
         BEQ next2 ; if not, skip               }
         BL GNotEqual7 ; G != 7
       next2
 Program 5.8. Conditional structures that test for equality (this works with signed
 and unsigned numbers).
When testing for greater than or less than, it does matter whether the numbers are signed or unsigned.
Program 5.9 contains four separate unsigned if-then structures.In each case, the first step is to bring
the first value in R0; the second step is to compare the first value with a second value; and the third
step is to execute an unsigned branch Bxx . The branch will occur if the first unsigned value is xx the
second unsigned value.
       Assembly code                           C code
         LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G              uint32_t G;
         LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G > 7){
         CMP R0, #7 ; is G > 7?                  GGreater7();
         BLS next1   ; if not, skip            }
         BL GGreater7 ; G > 7
       next1
         LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G
         LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G >= 7){
         CMP R0, #7 ; is G >= 7?                 GGreaterEq7();
         BLO next2    ; if not, skip           }
         BL GGreaterEq7 ; G >= 7
       next2
         LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G
         LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G < 7){
         CMP R0, #7 ; is G < 7?                  GLess7();
         BHS next3    ; if not, skip           }
         BL GLess7 ; G < 7
       next3
         LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G
         LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G <= 7){
         CMP R0, #7 ; is G <= 7?                 GLessEq7();
         BHI next4   ; if not, skip            }
         BL GLessEq7 ; G <= 7
       next4
 Program 5.9. Unsigned conditional structures.
It will call GGreater7 if G is greater than 7 , GGreaterEq7 if G is greater than or equal to 7 ,
GLess7 if G is less than 7 , and GLessEq7 if G is less than or equal to 7 . When comparing unsigned
values, the instructions BHI BLO BHS and BLS should follow the subtraction or comparison
instruction. A conditional if-then is implemented by bringing the first number in a register, subtracting
the second number, then using the branch instruction with complementary logic to skip over the body
of the if-then. To convert these examples to 16 bits, use the LDRH R0,[R2] instruction instead of
the LDR R0,[R2] instruction. To convert these examples to 8bits, use the LDRB R0,[R2]
instruction instead of the LDR R0,[R2] instruction.

Example 5.1. Assuming G1 is 8-bit unsigned, write software that sets G2=1 if G1 is greater than 100.
Solution: First, we draw a flowchart describing the desired algorithm, see Figure 5.6. Next, we
restate the conditional as “skip over if G1 is less than or equal to 100”. To implement the assembly
code we bring G1 into Register R0using LDRB to load an unsigned byte, subtract 100, then branch to
next if G1 is less than or equal to 100, as presented in Program 5.10. We will use an unsigned
conditional branch because the data format is unsigned.

Figure 5.6. Flowchart of an if-then structure.
   LDR R2, =G1 ; R2 = &G1                        uint8_t G1, G2;
   LDRB R0, [R2] ; R0 = G1                       if(G1>100){
   CMP R0, #100 ; is G1 > 100?                     G2 = 1;
   BLS next   ; if not, skip to end              }
   MOV R1, #1 ; R1 = 1
   LDR R2, =G2 ; R2 = &G2
   STRB R1, [R2] ; G2 = 1
 next
 Program 5.10. An unsigned if-then structure. LDRB used because 8-bit, BLS
 used because it is unsigned.

Checkpoint 5.5: Assume you have an 8-bit unsignedglobal variable N . Write assembly code that
implements if(N==25)isEqual();
Checkpoint 5.6:Assume H1 and H2 are two 16-bit unsignedvariables. Write assembly code that
implements if(H1==H2)isEqual();
Program 5.11 contains four separate signed if-then structures, where G is signed 32 bits. In each
case, the first step is to bring the first value in R0; the second step is to compare the first value with a
second value; and the third step is to execute a signed branch Bxx . The branch will occur if the first
signed value is xx the second signed value.
   Assembly code                           C code
     LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G              int32_t G;
     LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G > 7){
     CMP R0, #7 ; is G > 7?                  GGreater7();
     BLE next1    ; if not, skip           }
     BL GGreater7 ; G > 7
   next1
     LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G
     LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G >= 7){
     CMP R0, #7 ; is G >= 7?                 GGreaterEq7();
     BLT next2   ; if not, skip            }
     BL GGreaterEq7 ; G >= 7
   next2
     LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G
     LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G < 7){
     CMP R0, #7 ; is G < 7?                  GLess7();
     BGE next3    ; if not, skip           }
     BL GLess7 ; G < 7
   next3
     LDR R2, =G     ; R2 = &G
     LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G                 if(G <= 7){
     CMP R0, #7 ; is G <= 7?                 GLessEq7();
     BGT next4    ; if not, skip           }
     BL GLessEq7 ; G <= 7
   next4
 Program 5.11. Signed conditional structures.
Similar to Program 5.9, Program 5.11will call GGreater7 if G is greater
than 7 , GGreaterEq7 if G is greater than or equal to 7 , GLess7 if G is less than 7 ,
and GLessEq7 if G is less than or equal to 7 . When comparing signed values, the instructions BGT
BLT BGE and BLE should follow the subtraction or comparison instruction. A conditional if-then
is implemented by bringing the first number in a register, subtracting the second number, then using the
branch instruction with complementary logic to skip over the body of the if-then. To convert these
examples to 16 bits, use the LDRSH R0,[R2] instruction instead of the LDR R0,[R2] instruction.
To convert these examples to 8bits, use the LDRSB R0,[R2] instruction instead of the LDR R0,
[R2] instruction.
Checkpoint 5.7:When implementing if(N>25)isGreater(); why is it important to know if N is
signed or unsigned?
Common error: It is an error to use an unsigned conditional branch when comparing two signed
values. Similarly, it is a mistake to use a signed conditional branch when comparing two unsigned
values.
Observation: One cannot directly compare a signed number to an unsigned number. The proper
method is to first convert both numbers to signed numbers of a higher precision and then compare.

Example 5.2. Redesign the Example 5.1 code assuming G1 is 8-bit signed.
Solution: We can use the same flowchart shown previously in Figure 5.6. Again we bring G1 into
Register R0this time using LDRSB to load a signed byte, subtract 100, then branch to next if G1 is
less than or equal to 100, as presented in Program 5.12. However, we will use a signed conditional
branch because the data format is signed.

       LDR R2, =G1 ; R2 = &G1                      int8_t G1, G2;
       LDRSB R0, [R2] ; R0 = G1 (signed)           if(G1>100){
       CMP R0, #100 ; is G1 > 100?                   G2 = 1;
       BLE next ; if not, skip to end              }
       MOV R1, #1 ; R1 = 1
       LDR R2, =G2 ; R2 = &G2
       STRB R1, [R2] ; G2 = 1
     next
 Program 5.12. A signed if-then structure LDRSB is a signed 8-bit load. BLE is a
 signed branch.

Notice that the C code for Program 5.9 looks similar to Program 5.11, and the C code for Program
5.10 looks similar to Program 5.12. This is because the compiler knows the type of variables G1 and
G2; therefore, it knows whether to utilize unsigned or signed branches. Unfortunately, this similarity
can be deceiving. When writing code whether it be assembly or C, you still need to keep track of
whether your variables are signed or unsigned. Furthermore, when comparing two objects, they must
have comparable types. E.g., “Which is bigger, 2 unsigned apples or –3 signed dollars?” The
compiler does not seem to reject comparisons between signed and unsigned variables as an error.
However, I recommend that you do not compare a signed variable to an unsigned variable. When
comparing objects of different types, it is best to first convert both objects to the same format, and
then perform the comparison. Conversely, we see that all numbers are converted to 32 bits before
they are compared. This means there is no difficulty comparing variables of differing precisions: e.g.,
8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit as long as both are signed or both are unsigned.
We can use the unconditional branch to add an else clause to any of the previous if then structures.
A simple example of an unsigned conditional is illustrated in the Figure 5.7 and presented in Program
5.13. The first three lines test the condition G1 > G2 . If G1 > G2 , the software branches to high .
Once at high, the software calls the isGreater subroutine then continues. Conversely, if G1≤G2 , the
software does not branch and the isLessEq subroutine is executed.After executing the isLessEq
subroutine, there is an unconditional branch, so that only one and not both subroutines are called.
Figure 5.7. Flowchart of an if-then-else structure.
     LDR R2, =G1 ; R2 = &G1                    uint32_t G1,G2;
     LDR R0, [R2] ; R0 = G1                    if(G1>G2){
     LDR R2, =G2 ; R2 = &G2                      isGreater();
     LDR R1, [R2] ; R1 = G2                    }
     CMP R0, R1 ; is G1 > G2 ?                 else{
    BHI high ; if so, skip to high               isLessEq();
  low BL isLessEq ; G1 <= G2                   }
     B next ; unconditional
  high BL isGreater ; G1 > G2
  next
 Program 5.13. An unsigned if-then-else structure (unsigned 32-bit).
Checkpoint 5.8: Assume you have a 16-bit signed global variable M. Write assembly code that
implements if(M > 1000) isGreater(); else isLess();
The selection operator takes three input parameters and yields one output result. The format is
Expr1 ? Expr2 : Expr3
The first input parameter is an expression, Expr1 , which yields a Boolean(0 for false, not zero for
true). Expr2 and Expr3 return values that are regular numbers. The selection operator will return the
result of Expr2 if the value of Expr1 is true, and will return the result of Expr3 if the value
of Expr1 is false. The type of the expression is determined by the types of Expr2 and Expr3 .
If Expr2 and Expr3 have different types, then promotion is applied. The left and right side perform
identical functions. If b is 1 set a equal to 10, otherwise set a to 1.
                                                if(b==1)
                a = (b==1) ? 10 : 1;              a=10;
                                                else
                                                  a=1;

5.3.3. switch Statements
Switch statements provide a non-iterative choice between any number of paths based on specified
conditions. They compare an expression to a set of constant values. Selected statements are then
executed depending on which value, if any, matches the expression. The expression between the
parentheses following switch is evaluated to a number and compared one by one to the explicit
cases. Figure 5.8 draws a flowchart describing Program 5.4, which performs one output each time the
function OneStep is called. The break causes execution to exit the switch statement. The default
case is run if none of the explicit case statements match. The operation of the switch statement in
Program 5.4 performs this list of actions:
If Last is equal to 10, then theNext is set to 9.
If Last is equal to 9, then theNext is set to 5.
If Last is equal to 5, then theNext is set to 6.
If Last is equal to 6, then theNext is set to 10.
If Last is not equal any of the above, then theNext is set to 10.

When using break , only the first matching case will be invoked. In other words, once a match is
found, no other tests are performed. The body of the switch is not a normal compound statement since
local declarations are not allowed in it or in subordinate blocks.
Assume the output port is connected to a stepper motor, and the motor has 24 steps per rotation.
Calling OneStep will cause the motor to rotate by exactly 15 degrees. 15 degrees is 360 degrees
divided by 24. For more information on stepper motors, see Example 6.1, Program 7.6, and Section
8.7.

Figure 5.8. The switch statement is used to make multiple comparisons.
Program 5.14 converts an ASCII character to the equivalent decimal value. This example of a switch
statement shows that the multiple tests can be performed for the same condition.
uint8_t Convert(char letter){
uint8_t digit;
 switch (letter) {
   case 'A':
     case 'B':
     case 'C':
     case 'D':
     case 'E':
     case 'F':
        digit = letter+10-'A'; break;
     case 'a':
     case 'b':
     case 'c':
     case 'd':
     case 'e':
     case 'f':
        digit = letter+10-'a'; break;
     default:
        digit = letter-'0';
}
    return digit;
}
    Program 5.14. A switch statement is used to convert an ASCII character to
    numeric value.

5.3.4. While Loops
Quite often the microcomputer is asked to wait for events or to search for objects. Both of these
operations are solved using the while or do-while structure. A simple example of while loop is
illustrated in the Figure 5.9 and presented in Program 5.15. Assume G1 and G2 are unsigned 32-bit
variables. The operation is defined by the C code
while(G2 > G1){Body();}

specifies the function Body() will be executed over and over as long as G2>G1.

Figure 5.9. Flowchart of a while structure. Execute Body() over and over until
    G2≤G1.
Program 5.15begins with a test of G2>G1 . If G2≤G1 then the body of the while loop is skipped.
The unconditional branch( B loop )after the body causes G2 and G1 to be tested again. In this way,
the body is executed repeatedly until G2≤G1 .
     LDR R4, =G1 ; R4 = &G1                    uint32_t G1,G2;
     LDR R5, =G2 ; R5 = &G2
  loop LDR R0, [R5] ; R0 = G2                  while(G2 > G1){
    LDR R1, [R4] ; R1 = G1                       Body();
     CMP R0, R1 ; is G2 <= G1?                 }
    BLS next    ; if so, skip to next
    BL Body ; body of the loop
    B loop
  next
 Program 5.15. A while loop structure.
Observation: The body of a while loop may execute zero or more times, but the body of a do-while
loop is executed at least once.
One of the conventions when writing assembly is whether or not subroutines should save registers.
According to AAPCS, we will allow subroutines to freely modify R0–R3 and R12. Conversely, if a
subroutine wishes to use R4 through R11, it will preserve the values using the stack. Similarly, if the
subroutine wishes to use LR (e.g., to call another subroutine) it must save and restore LR. AAPCS
requires us to push and pop an even number of registers. AAPCS guarantees the address pointers in
R4 and R5 only need to be set once in Program 5.15, because we can assume that the call to Body()
will not corrupt them. However, since the variables themselves are held in RAM and may therefore
be changed by some other piece of code, it does make sense to reload the values of the variables each
time through the loop.
Checkpoint 5.9: Assume you have a 16-bit unsigned global variable N . Write assembly code that
implements while(N!=25){body();}

5.3.5. Do-while Loops
A do-while loop performs the body first, and the test for completion second. It will execute the body
at least once. Assume PF1 and PA5 are definitions of I/O pins using bit-specific addressing. Program
5.16 will toggle the output PF1 as long as input PA5 is low.
     LDR R1, =PF1 ; R1 = &PF1                  // toggle PF1 while PA5 low
     LDR R5, =PA5 ; R5 = &PA5                  do{
  loop LDR R0, [R1]                              PF1 = PF1^0x02;
     EOR R0, #2 ; toggle bit 1                 } while((PA5&0x20)==0);
     STR R0, [R1]
     LDR R2, [R5] ; R2 = PA5
     ANDS R2, #0x20 ; bit 5 set?
     BEQ loop ; spin while low
  next
 Program 5.16. A do-while loop structure.
5.3.6. For Loops
A for-loop control structure is a special case of the while loop. For loops can iterate up or down. To
show the similarity between the while loop and for loop these two C functions are identical. The
<init> code is executed once. The <test> code returns a true/false and is tested before each iteration.
The <body> and <end> codes are executed each iteration.
             <init>;                   for(<init>; <test>; <end>){
             while(<test>){              <body>;
               <body>;                 }
               <end>;
             }

For-loops are a convenient way to perform repetitive tasks. As an example, we write code that
calls Process() 100 times. Two possible solutions are illustrated in Figure 5.10. The solution on the
left starts at 0 and counts up to 100, while the solution on the right starts at 100 and counts down to 0.
The first field is the starting task (e.g., i=0 ). The next field specifies the conditions with which to
continue execution (e.g., i<100 ), and the last field is the operation to perform after each interactions
(e.g., i++ ). Similar to a while loop, the test occurs before each execution of the body.

Figure 5.10. Two flowcharts of a for - loop structure.
The count-up implementation places the loop counter in the Register R4, as shown in Program
5.17.As mentioned earlier, we assume the subroutine Process preserves the value in R4.

      MOV R4, #0 ; R4 = 0                        for(i=0; i<100; i++){
   loop CMP R4, #100 ; index >= 100?               Process();
      BHS done    ; if so, skip to done          }
      BL Process ; process function
      ADD R4, R4, #1 ; R4 = R4 + 1
      B loop
   done
 Program 5.17. A simple for-loop.
If we assume the body will execute at least once, we can execute a little faster, as shown in Program
5.18, by counting down. Counting down is one instruction faster than counting up.
     MOV R4, #100 ; R4 = 100       MOV R4, #0 ; R4 = 0
  loop BL Process ; body        loop BL Process ; body
     SUBS R4, R4, #1 ; R4 = R4-    ADD R4, R4, #1 ; R4 = R4+1
  1                                CMP R4, #100 ; done?
     BNE loop                      BLO loop    ; if not,repeat
  done
 Program 5.18. Optimized for-loops.
5.4. *Assembly Macros
A macro is a template for a sequence of instructions. The macro definition includes a name and a
code sequence. This name becomes the mnemonic by which the macro is subsequently invoked.
Invoking a macro means replacing the macro name with its code sequence, analogous to a copy-paste
operation in the editor. Macros are like subroutines in the sense we use them to encapsulate
operations we wish to perform as a single higher-level function. With subroutines, we call a function
at run time by moving the PC into the LR and jumping to the code that defines the function. The return
from subroutine also occurs at run time, by moving return address from LR back into the PC. Invoking
a macro, on the other hand, occurs at assembly time. When the assembler sees a macro in your code,
it performs a character substitution (copy/paste), replacing the macro name with the macro definition.
The syntax used in this section is compatible with ARM Keil™ uVision® compiler. The macro
definition may also include macro arguments. A macro definition may contain any code or directive
except nested macro definitions. Invoking previously defined macros is allowed inside a macro
definition. The code sequence of the macro is inserted in the source file at the position where the
macro is invoked. To invoke a macro, write the macro name in the operation field of a source
statement. Place the arguments, if any, in the operand field. The macro may contain conditional
assembly directives that cause the assembler to produce parameter-dependent variations of the macro
definition. The definition of a macro consists of three parts:
The header statement, a MACRO directive with a label that names the macro.
The code sequence, with argument placeholders as needed.
The MEND directive, terminating the macro definition.
We can use macros to define what looks like new instructions, For example, this macro creates a new
assembly instruction that performs the modulus. MOD = DIVIDEND % DIVISOR
  MACRO
  UMOD $Mod,$Divnd,$Divsr ;MOD,DIVIDEND,DIVISOR
  UDIV $Mod,$Divnd,$Divsr ;Mod = DIVIDEND/DIVISOR
  MUL $Mod,$Mod,$Divsr ;Mod = DIVISOR*(DIVIDEND/DIVISOR)
  SUB $Mod,$Divnd,$Mod ;Mod = DIVIDEND-DIVISOR*(DIVIDEND/DIVISOR)
  MEND
The registers MOD and DIVIDEND must not be the same register. We invoke this macro in our code
simply by placing UMOD as an operation in our program.
    Our code                               Result created by assembler
     UMOD R3,R0,R1 ;R3=R0%R1                UDIV R3,R0,R1
                                            MUL R3,R3,R1
                                            SUB R3,R0,R3
     STR R3,[R7]                            STR R3,[R7]
     UMOD R3,R2,R4 ;R3=R2%R4                UDIV R3,R2,R4
                                            MUL R3,R3,R4
                                              SUB R3,R2,R3
     STR R3,[R6]                              STR R3,[R7]

Observation: Subroutines optimize memory space with a cost of execution speed.There is one copy
of the code but requires a BL to call and a BX LR to return.
Observation: Macros optimize execution speed with a cost of memory space. There is one copy of
the code for each invocation but does not require call or return instructions. If a macro is invoked
once, then it will execute faster and require less memory as compared to defining the operation as a
subroutine.

Example 5.3. Redesign the I/O driver for an LED on PF2, originally solved in Program 4.3b.
Solution: We will leave the initialization as a function, because it is only called once. However, we
will rewrite the three operations that output to the pin. The initialization will define PE0 as an output.
The subroutine solution, shown on the left of Program 5.19, is repeated from Program 4.3b. These
macros do not have any parameters. Assume PF2 is a bit-specific label, PF2 EQU 0x40025010 .

   LED_Off                                  MACRO
     LDR R1, =PF2                           LED_Off
     MOV R0, #0                             LDR R1, =PF2
     STR R0, [R1]                           MOV R0, #0
     BX LR                                  STR R0, [R1]
                                            MEND
   LED_On
     LDR R1, =PF2                           MACRO
     MOV R0, #1                             LED_On
     STR R0, [R1]                           LDR R1, =PF2
     BX LR                                  MOV R0, #1
                                            STR R0, [R1]
   LED_Toggle                               MEND
     LDR R1, =PF2
     LDR R0, [R1]                           MACRO
     EOR R0, R0, #1                         LED_Toggle
     STR R0, [R1]                           LDR R1, =PF2
     BX LR                                  LDR R0, [R1]
                                            EOR R0, R0, #1
                                            STR R0, [R1]
                                            MEND
 Program 5.19. I/O port drivers using subroutines and macros.

Checkpoint 5.10: What advantage does the macro solution have over the subroutine solution?
Sometimes a macro is only one line long. This example creates a new assembly instruction that
performs multiply by 7. This approach can be used to multiply by any constant in the form of 2n±1.
For multiply by 7, we use the fact that if x is a variable, then 7x = (x<<3)-x.
  MACRO
  MUL7 $Rd,$Rn
  RSB $Rd,$Rn,$Rn,LSL #3
  MEND

We invoke this macro in our code simply by placing MUL7 as an operation in our program. Notice
that this macro generates much smaller object code and runs much faster than using the MUL
instruction.
    Our code                               Result created by assembler
     MUL7 R3,R2 ;R3=7*R2                    RSB R3,R2,R2,LSL #3
     STR R3,[R7]                            STR R3,[R7]
     MUL7 R4,R4 ;R4=7*R4                    RSB R4,R4,R4,LSL #3
     STR R4,[R6]                            STR R4,[R7]

This approach can also be used to multiply by any constant in the form of 1±2-n. For example, to
multiply by 15/16 we implement x - (x>>4). This macro is unsigned multiply by 15/16.
  MACRO
  MUL15_16 $Rd,$Rn
  SUB $Rd,$Rn,$Rn,LSR #4
  MEND
5.5. *Recursion
A recursive subroutine is one that calls itself. Each time the subroutine is started a new instantiation
occurs. There is a unique set of parameters, registers, and local variables for each instantiation. The
stack is a convenient way to separate the parameters and variables of one instantiation from another.
In order for the recursive function to finish, there must be a situation where a direct result is
generated, which is called the end condition. The body of a recursive relation defines the operation
in terms of calls to itself that are closer to the end condition(s). For example, the factorial has two
possibilities
Fact(1) = 1                                          end condition, base case, or anchor case
Fact(n) = n*Fact(n-1) if n>1                        recursion
Program 5.20 shows two implementations of factorial. The one on the top uses iteration, and the one
on the bottom uses recursion. It is usually the case that a recursive algorithm can be rewritten in
iterative form. Nevertheless, sometimes it is more convenient to implement the algorithm in recursive
form.
   ; iterative implementation (22 bytes)        // iterative implementation
   ; Input: R0 is n                             // Assumes: n <= 12
   ; Output: R0 is Fact(n)                      uint32_t Fact(uint32_t n){
   ; Assumes: R0 <= 12 (13! overflows)          uint32_t r;
   Fact MOV R1, #1 ; R1 = 1 = total               r = 1;
   loop CMP R0, #1 ; is n (R0) <= 1?              for(; n>1; n--){
       BLS done ; if so, skip to done               r = r*n;
       MUL R1, R0, R1 ; total = total*n           }
       SUB R0, R0, #1 ; n = n – 1                 return r;
       B loop                                   }
   done MOV R0, R1          ; total = Fact(n)
       BX LR
   ; recursive implementation (30 bytes)
   ; Input: R0 is n
   ; Output: R0 is Fact(n)                      // recursive implementation
   ; Assumes: R0 <= 12 (13! overflows)          // Assumes: n <= 12
   Fact CMP R0, #1 ; is n (R0) <= 1?            uint32_t Fact(uint32_t n){
       BLS endcase ; if so, to endcase            if(n <= 1){ // end condition
       PUSH {R0, LR} ; save R0 and LR               return 1;
       SUB R0, R0, #1 ; n = n – 1                 }
       BL Fact      ; R0 = Fact(n-1)              return n*Fact(n-1); // recursion
       POP {R1, LR} ; restore R1, LR            }
       MUL R0, R0, R1 ; R0 = n*Fact(n-1)
       BX LR         ; normal return
   endcase
       MOV R0, #1 ; R0 = 1
       BX LR         ; end case return
 Program 5.20. Iterative and recursive implementations of factorial.
Table 5.2 shows the execution time in cycles for these two assembly implementations. Notice that the
recursive implementation is slightly longer, and the execution speed is slightly slower.
        Input    Iterative        Recursive
        1        11               9
        2        18               23
        3        25               37
        4        32               51
        5        39               65
Table 5.2. Execution times in cycles for Program 5.20 running on LM3S1968
 including all branches.
Recursive Fact(0) and Fact(1) do not push anything onto the stack. Fact(n) (2<=n<=12) pushes 8*(n-
1) bytes (32-bit n and 32-bit LR per call, above 1). The iterative also uses the stack, creating the
digits right to left pushing them onto the stack, and then popping off the digits in the correct order.
Checkpoint 5.11:How many stack bytes are required for each instantiation of Fact ? How much stack
space is required to execute Fact(5) ?
The power function, y = xn, can be designed in a recursive manner. We will assume the inputs x and n
are 32-bit unsigned integers. We begin with some simple observations that may lead to the base case.
At this point we write them all down and see later if any can be used:
0n = 0 for all n
1n = 1 for all n
x0 = 1 for all x not equal to 0
x1 = x for all x
x2 = x*x for all x
Next we try to rewrite the function in terms of itself so that the problem becomes simpler
xn = x*x*x*x…*x             (n times, this is the iterative approach)
 n    n+1
x = x /x                     (This is more complex)
 n       n-1
x = x*x                      (This is simpler)

The last rewrite is written in a recursive manner and will eventually lead to the x0 = 1 base.
uint32_t power (uint32_t x, uint32_t n){
  if(x == 0) return 0;
  if(n == 0) return 1;
  return x*power(x,n - 1);
}
The power function has two base cases. The first one is needed to handle the power(0,0) possibility.
For x not zero, the second base case will become true eventually. If n=10, then the recursive function
will call itself 10 times. Fibonacci can be defined recursively
uint32_t fibonacci(uint32_t n){
  if(n == 0) return 0;
  if(n == 1) return 1;
  return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2);}
}

Example 5.4. You are given a subroutine, OutChar , which outputs one ASCII character. Design a
function that outputs a 32-bit unsigned integer.
Solution: We will solve this two ways, iteratively and recursively. As always, we ask “what is our
starting point?”, “how do we make progress?”, and “when are we done?” The input, N, is a 32-bit
unsigned number (in R0), and we are done when 1 to 10 ASCII characters are displayed, representing
the value of N. Figure 5.11 demonstrates the successive refinement approach to solving this problem
iteratively. The iterative solution has three phases: initialization, creation of digits, and output of the
ASCII characters. The digits are created from the remainders occurring by dividing the input, N by
10. To get all the digits we divide by 10 until the quotient is 0. Because the digits are created in the
opposite order, each digit will be pushed on the stack during the creation phase and popped off the
stack during the output stage. The counter is needed so the output stage knows how many digits to pop
from the stack.

Figure 5.11. Successive refinement method for the iterative approach.
Figure 5.12 demonstrates the successive refinement approach to solving this problem recursively.
Most recursive functions first check for the end condition. If the end condition is true, it handles the
simple case directly. If the end condition is not true, it simplifies the problem (in this case N = N/10)
and calls itself. Just like the iterative solution, the digits (calculated as R) are calculated in reverse
order, and the stack is used to save the intermediate results, so the digits are displayed in proper
order.
Figure 5.12. Successive refinement method for the recursive approach.
Program 5.21 shows two assembly language implementations of this 32-bit output decimal function.
The iteration solution actually has two loops; the first loop determines the digits in opposite order,
and the second loop outputs the digits in proper order. The recursive solution also uses the stack to
calculate the least significant digit first, but output the most significant digit first. There is no
fundamental rule that states which is better iteration or recursion. A good programmer has both in his
or her toolbox, and uses whichever is easier to understand and easier to debug.
     ; iterative implementation                // iterative method
     ; uses up to 48 bytes of stack            void OutUDec(uint32_t n){
     ; Input: R0 is 32-bit number N            uint32_t cnt=0;
     ; Output: none                            char buffer[11];
     ; Modifies: R1, R2, R3                      do{
     OutUDec                                       buffer[cnt] = n%10;// digit
         PUSH {R4, LR}                             n = n/10;
         MOV R2, #10 ; R2 = 10 = divisor           cnt++;
         MOV R4, #0 ; R4 = 0 = cnt               }
     ODloop                                      while(n);// repeat until n==0
         UDIV R3, R0, R2 ; R3 = N/10             for(; cnt; cnt--){
         MUL R1, R3, R2 ; R1 = N/10*10             OutChar(buffer[cnt-1]+'0');
         SUB R1, R0, R1 ; R1 = N%10              }
         PUSH {R1}        ; save value         }
         ADD R4, R4, #1 ; cnt = cnt + 1
         MOVS R0, R3 ; R0 N = N/10
         CMP R0, #0 ; is N == 0?
         BNE ODloop ; if not continue
     ODout POP {R0} ; restore into R0
         ADD R0, R0, #'0'; convert ASCII
         BL OutChar ; print character
         SUBS R4, R4, #1 ; cnt = cnt – 1
         CMP R4, #0       ; is cnt == 0?
         BNE ODout         ; if not continue
         POP {R4, LR} ; restore
         BX LR        ; return

     ; recursive implementation
     ; uses a maximum of 76 bytes of stack     // recursive method
     ; Input: R0 is 32-bit number N            void OutUDec(uint32_t n){
     ; Output: none                              if(n >= 10){
     ; Modifies: R1, R2, R3                        OutUDec(n/10); // ms digits
     OutUDec                                       n = n%10; // n is 0-9
         PUSH {LR}                               }
         CMP R0, #10 ; character < 10?           OutChar(n+'0');
         BLO ODend        ; if so, end         }
         MOV R2, #10 ; R2 = divisor
         UDIV R3, R0, R2 ; R3 = N/10
         MUL R1, R3, R2 ; R1 = N/10*10
         SUB R1, R0, R1 ; R1 = N%10
         PUSH {R1}       ; save
         MOVS R0, R3 ; N = N/10
         BL OutUDec ; OutUDec(N/10)
         POP {R0}      ; restore into R0
     ODend
         ADD R0, R0, #'0'; convert ASCII
       BL OutCh       ; print character
       POP {LR}      ; restore
       BX LR       ; return
 Program 5.21. Iterative and recursive implementations of output decimal.
To observethe execution of the recursive implementation of OutUDec , we can place a breakpoint on
the first line and observe the stack and Register R0.

Observation: In general, recursive algorithms are shorter to write, but require additional stack
space.
5.6. Writing Quality Software
5.6.1. Style Guidelines
The objective of this section is to present style rules when developing software. This set of rules is
meant to guide not control. In other words, they serve as general guidelines rather than fundamental
law. Choosing names for variables and functions involves creative thought, and it is intimately
connected to how we feel about ourselves as programmers. Of the policies presented in this section,
naming conventions may be the hardest habit for us to break. The difficulty is that there are many
conventions that satisfy the “easy to understand” objective. Good names reduce the need for
documentation. Poor names promote confusion, ambiguity, and mistakes. Poor names can occur
because code has been copied from a different situation and inserted into our system without proper
integration (i.e., changing the names to be consistent with the new situation.) They can also occur in
the cluttered mind of a second-rate programmer, who hurries to deliver software before it is finished.
Names should have meaning.If we observe a name away from the place where it is defined, the
meaning of the object should be obvious. The object TxFifo is clearly the transmit first in first out
circular queue. The function LCD_OutString will output a string to the LCD.
Avoid ambiguities. Don't use variable names in our system that are vague or have more than one
meaning. For example, it is vague to use temp , because there are many possibilities for temporary
data, in fact, it might even mean temperature. Don't use two names that look similar, but have different
meanings.
Give hints about the type. We can further clarify the meaning of a variable by including phrases in the
variable name that specify its type. For example, dataPt timePt putPt are pointers.
Similarly, voltageBuf timeBuf pressureBuf are data buffers. Other good phrases include Flag Mode
U L Index Cnt , which refer to Boolean flag, system state, unsigned 16-bit, signed 32-bit, index into
an array, and a counter respectively.
Use the same name to refer to the same type of object. For example, everywhere we need a local
variable to store an ASCII character we could use the name letter . Another common example is to
use the names i j k for indices into arrays. The names V1 R1 might refer to a voltage and a
resistance. The exact correspondence is not part of the policies presented in this section, just the fact
that a correspondence should exist. Once another programmer learns which names we use for which
types of object, understanding our code becomes easier.
Use a prefix to identify public objects. A public variable is shared between two modules. A public
function is a function in one module that can be called from another module. An underline character
will separate the module name from the function name. Public objects have the underline and private
objects do not. As an exception to this rule, we can use the underline to delimit words in all upper-
case name (e.g., MIN_PRESSURE equ 10 ). Functions that can be accessed outside the scope of a
module (i.e., public) will begin with a prefix specifying the module to which it belongs. It is poor
style to create public variables, but if they need to exist, they too would begin with the module prefix.
The prefix matches the module name containing the object. For example, if we see a function call, BL
LCD_OutString we know the public function belongs to the LCD module. Notice the similarity
between this syntax (e.g., LCD_Init ) and the corresponding syntax we would use if programming the
module in C++ (e.g., LCD.Init() ). Using this convention, we can distinguish public and private
objects.
Use upper and lower case to specify the allocation of an object. We will define I/O port addresses
and other constants using no lower-case letters, like typing with caps-lock on. In other words, names
without lower-case letters refer to objects with fixed values. TRUE FALSE and NULL are good
examples of fixed-valued objects. As mentioned earlier, constant names formed from multiple words
will use an underline character to delimit the individual words. E.g., MAX_VOLTAGE
UPPER_BOUND FIFO_SIZE . Permanently allocated variables are global, with a name beginning
with a capital letter, but including some lower-case letters. Temporarily allocated variables are
called local, and the name will begin with a lower-case letter, and may or may not include upper case
letters. Since all functions are permanently allocated, we can start function names with either an
upper-case or lower-case letter. Using this convention, we can distinguish constants, globals and
locals.
An object's properties (public/private, local/global, constant/variable) are always perfectly clear at
the place where the object is defined. The importance of the naming policy is to extend that clarity
also to the places where the object is used.
Use capitalization to delimit words. Names that contain multiple words should be defined using a
capital letter to signify the first letter of the word. Recall that the case of the first letter specifies
whether it is a local or global variable. Some programmers use the underline as a word-delimiter, but
except for constants, we will reserve underline to separate the module name from the name of a
public object. Table 5.3 overviews the naming convention presented in this section.

 Object type             Examples of names that identify type
 Constants               CR SAFE_TO_RUN PORTA STACK_SIZE
                         START_OF_RAM
 Local variables         maxTemperature lastCharTyped errorCnt
 Private global          MaxTemperature LastCharTyped ErrorCnt RxFifoPt
 variable
 Public global           DAC_MaxTemperature Key_LastCharTyped
 variable                Network_ErrCnt
 Private function        ClearTime wrapPointer InChar
 Public function         Timer_ClearTime RxFifo_Put Key_InChar
Table 5.3. Examples of names.
Checkpoint 5.12: Just by looking at its name, how can you tell if a function is private or public?
Checkpoint 5.13: Just by looking at its name, how can you tell if a variable is local or global?
The Single Entry Point is at the Top. In assembly language, we place a single entry point of a
subroutine at the first line of the code. By default, C functions have a single entry point. Placing the
entry point at the top provides a visual marker for the beginning of the subroutine.
The Single Exit Point is at the Bottom. Most programmers prefer to use a single exit point as the last
line of the subroutine. Some programmers employ multiple exit points for efficiency reasons. In
general, we must guarantee the registers, stack, and return parameters are at a similar and consistent
state for each exit point. In particular, we must deallocate local variables properly. If you do employ
multiple exit points, then you should develop a means to visually delineate where one subroutine ends
and the next one starts. You could use one line of comments to signify the start a subroutine and a
different line of comments to show the end of it. Program 5.22 employs distinct visual markers to see
the beginning and end of the subroutine.
Label Names. Some of the assembly examples used weak label names like “ loop ”, “ done ”,
“ end ”, and “ out ”. These names technically work, and they might make sense for very short
examples. But they can cause problems when functions are copied from one file to another, resulting
in multiple “ loop ” labels. One or both needs to be changed before it even assembles. Labels inside
functions can be precededwith the function name, such as “ AbsOK ” or with an underscore
“ Abs_OK ”.
  ;------------Abs------------                 //************Abs************
  ; Take the absolute value of a number.       // Input: signed 32-bit
  ; Input: R0 is 32-bit signed number          // Output: absolute value
  ; Output: R0 is 31-bit absolute value        uint32_t Abs(int32_t n){
  Abs CMP R0, #0 ; is number (R0) >= 0?          if(n<0){
       BPL AbsOK ; if so, already positive         n = -n;
      EOR R0, R0, #0xFFFFFFFF ; invert bits      }
       ADD R0, R0, #1           ; add one        return (uint32_t) n;
  AbsOK BX LR                    ; return      }
  ;------------end of Abs------------
 Program 5.22. Examples that use comments to delineate its beginning and end.
Observation: Having the first and last lines of a subroutine be the entry and exit points makes it
easier to debug, because it will be easy to place debugging instruments (like breakpoints).
Common error: If you place a debugging breakpoint on the last BL LR of a subroutine with multiple
exit points, then sometimes the subroutine will return without generating the break.
Write Structured Programs. A structured program is one that adheres to a strict list of program
structures, previously defined in Section 1.8and further elaborated in Section 5.2. When we program
in C (with the exception of goto , which by the way you should only use with extreme care) we are
forced to write structured programs due to the syntax of the language. One technique for writing
structured assembly language is to adhere to the program structures shown in Figure 1.29. In other
words, restrict the assembly language branching to configurations that mimic the software behavior
of if , if-else , do-while , while , for and switch . Structured programs are much easier to debug,
because execution proceeds only through a limited number of well-defined pathways. When we use
well-understood assembly branching structures, then our debugging can focus more on the overall
function and less on how the details are implemented.
The Registers Must Be Saved. When working on a software team it is important to establish a rule
whether or not subroutines will save/restore registers. Establishing this convention is especially
important when a mixture of assembly and high-level language is being used, or if the software
project remains active for long periods of time. It is safest to save and restore registers that are
modified (most programmers do not save/restore the PSR) and output parameter(s) returned in a
register. Exceptions to this rule can be made for those portions of the code where speed is most
critical. According to AAPCS, we will preserve R4 through R11, but not preserve R0–R3, R12, or
the PSR. Remember to always save the link register if your function calls another function. Stack
operations function more efficiently if the SP remains aligned on an 8-byte boundry. We maintain the
stack on an 8-byte alignment by pushing and popping an even number of registers. Subsequent function
calls over-write the return location for your function, making yours unable to return. It is also
important to ensure that the SP is the same on exit from your function as it was at entry.
Common Error: If the calling routine expects a subroutine to save/restore registers, and it doesn’t,
then information will be lost.
Observation: If the calling routine does not expect a subroutine to save/restore registers, and it does,
then the system executes a little slower and the object code is a little bigger than it could be.
Common Error: When a mixture of C and assembly language programs are integrated, then an error
may occur if the AAPCS rules are changed because there may be a change in if registers are
saved/restored, or how parameters are passed.
Use High-Level Languages Whenever Possible. It may seem odd to have a rule about high-level
languages in a section about assembly language programming. It is even odder to make this statement
in a book devoted to assembly language programming. In general, we should use high-level languages
when memory space and execution speed are less important than portability and maintenance. When
execution speed is important, you could write the first version in a high-level language, run a profiler
(that will tell you which parts of your program are executed the most), then optimize the sections of
code using up the most execution time by writing them in assembly language. If a C language
implementation just doesn't run fast enough, you could consider a more powerful compiler or a faster
microcomputer.
Observation: High-level language programmers who are well acquainted with the underlying
assembly language of the machine have a better understanding of how their machine and software
work.
Minimize Conditional Branching. Every time software makes a conditional branch, there are two
possible outcomes that must be tested (branch or not branch.) In the example shown in Program 5.23,
assume we wish to set a 32-bit Flag if Port G bit 7 is true. A flag will be true if it is any nonzero
value, and false if it is zero. A conditional branch could be avoided by solving the problem in another
way. We will define a PG7 label to be the bit-specific address for this pin (0x40026200).
Observation: Software can be made easier to understand by reworking the approach in order to
reduce the number of conditional branches.
Checkpoint 5.14: If a system has 20 conditional branches, how many potential execution paths might
there be through the software?
 PG7 EQU 0x40026200                       // uses conditional branch
 ; set flag with conditional branch       void SetFlag(void){
 ; Input: none                              if(PG7){
 ; Output: none                               Flag = -1; // PG7 is 0x80
 ; Modifies: R1, R2                         } else{
 SetFlagConditional                           Flag = 0; // PG7 is 0
      LDR R2, =PG7 ; R2 = 0x40026200        }
      LDR R1, [R2] ; R1 = PG7             }
      LDR R2, =Flag ; R2 = &Flag          // no conditional branch
      CMP R1, #0x80 ; is PG7 == 0x80?     void SetFlag(void){
      BNE SFCClr                            Flag = PG7; // 0 or 0x80
 SFCSet MOV R1, #-1 ; PG7 is high         }
      STR R1, [R2] ; Flag = -1
      B SFCEnd
 SFCClr MOV R1, #0 ; PG7 is low
      STR R1, [R2] ; Flag = 0
 SFCEnd BX LR
 ; set flag with no conditional branch
 ; Input: none
 ; Output: none
 ; Modifies: R1, R2
 SetFlagNoConditional
    LDR R2, =PG7 ; R2 = 0x40026200
    LDR R1, [R2] ; R1 = PG7
    LDR R2, =Flag ; R2 = &Flag
    STR R1, [R2] ; Flag = 0x00 or 0x80
    BX LR
 Program 5.23. Sometimes we can remove a conditional branch and simplify the
 program.

5.6.2. Comments
Discussion about comments was left for last, because they are the least important aspect involved in
writing quality software. It is much better to write well-organized software with simple interfaces
having operations so easy to understand that comments are not necessary.
The beginning of every file should include the file name, purpose, hardware connections,
programmer, date, and copyright. E.g.,
; filename adtest.s
; Test of TM4C123 12-bit ADC
; 1 Hz sampling and output to the serial port
; Last modified 5/19/14 by Jonathan W. Valvano
; Copyright 2014 by Jonathan W. Valvano, valvano@mail.utexas.edu
; You may use, edit, run or distribute this file
; as long as the above copyright notice remains
The beginning of every function should include a line delimiting the start of the function, purpose,
input parameters, output parameters, and special conditions that apply. The comments at the beginning
of the function explain the policies (e.g., how to use the function.) These comments, which are similar
to the comments for the prototypes in the header file, are intended to be read by the client. E.g.,
;----------------------UART_InUDec-------------------------------
; Accepts ASCII input from the UART in unsigned decimal format
; and converts to a 32-bit unsigned number with a maximum of 65535
; If a number is above 2^32, it truncates without reporting error
; Backspace will remove last digit typed
; Inputs: none
; Outputs: Register R0 is the unsigned 32-bit value
Comments can be added to a variable or constant definition to clarify the usage. In particular,
comments can specify the units of the variable or constant. For complicated situations, we can use
additional lines and include examples. E.g.,
V1      SPACE 2 ; voltage at node 1 in mV, range -5000 mV to +5000 mV
Fs     SPACE 2 ; sampling rate in Hz
FoundFlag SPACE 1 ; 0 if keyword not yet found, 1 if found
RunMode SPACE 1 ; 0, 1, 2, or 3 specifies system mode
; 0 means idle
; 1 means startup
; 2 means active run
; 3 means stopped
Comments can be used to describe complex algorithms. These types of comments are intended to be
read by our coworkers. The purpose of these comments is to assist in changing the code in the future,
or applying this code into a similar but slightly different application. Comments that restate the
function provide no additional information, and actually make the code harder to read. Examples of
bad comments include:
ADD R0,#1 ; add one to R0
MOV R1,#0 ; set R1 to 0

Good comments explain why the operation is performed, and what it means:
ADD R0,#1 ; maintain elapsed time in msec
MOV R1,# 0 ; switch to idle mode because no more data is available

We can add spaces so the comment fields line up. We should avoid tabs because they often do not
translate well from one computer to another. In this way, the software is on the left and the comments
can be read on the right.
I taught a large programming class one semester, and being an arrogant and lazy fellow, I thought I
could write a grading program that accepts the students’ programming assignments and automatically
generates and records their grades. The second step will be to design a Massive Open Online Class,
MOOC, on edX, and then I could teach the masses without ever having to show up for work. My
grading program worked OK for the functional aspects of the students’ software. My program
generated inputs, called the students’ program and compared the results with expected behavior.
Where I utterly failed was in my attempts to automatically grade their software on style. I used the
following three part “quality” statistic. First, I measured execution speed the student's software, si.
Smaller times represent improved dynamic efficiency. Next, I measured the number of bytes in the
object code, bi. Again, a smaller number represents better static efficiency. Third, I used the number
of ASCII characters in the source code, ci, as a quantitative measure of documentation. For this
parameter, bigger is better. In a typical statistical fashion, I used the average and standard deviation to
calculate

Half way through the semester, I happened to look at some assignments and was horrified to find the
all-time worst software ever written from both a style and content basis. To improve speed and
reduce size, the students cut so many corners that their code didn’t really work anymore, it just
appeared to work to my grading program. Then they took the ugly mess and filled it with nonsense
comments, giving it the appearance of extensive documentation. To my students in that class that
semester, I sincerely apologize. We should write comments for coworkers who must change our
software, or clients who will use our software.

5.6.3. Inappropriate I/O and Portability
One of the biggest mistakes beginning programmers make is the inappropriate usage of I/O calls (e.g.,
screen output and keyboard input). An explanation for their foolish behavior is that they haven't had
the experience yet of trying to reuse software they have written for one project in another project.
Software portability is diminished when it is littered with user input/output. To reuse software with
user I/O in another situation, you will almost certainly have to remove the input/output statements. In
general, we avoid interactive I/O at the lowest levels of the hierarchy, rather return data and flags and
let the higher level program do the interactive I/O. Often we add keyboard input and screen output
calls when testing our software. It is important to remove the I/O that not directly necessary as part of
the module function. This allows you to reuse these functions in situations where screen output is not
available or appropriate. Obviously screen output is allowed if that is the purpose of the routine.
Common Error: Performing unnecessary I/O in a subroutine makes it harder to reuse at a later time.
5.7. How Assemblers Work
Assemblers are development tools that process assembly language source program statements and
translate them into executable machine language object files. The symbolic language used to code
source programs to be processed by the assembler is called assembly language. The language is a
collection of mnemonic symbols representing: operations (i.e., machine instruction mnemonics or
directives to the assembler), symbolic names, operators, and special symbols. The assembly language
provides mnemonic operation codes for all machine instructions in the instruction set. The assembly
language also contains mnemonic directives that specify auxiliary actions to be performed by the
assembler. These directives or pseudo-ops are not always translated into machine language.
Most assemblers require two passes. During the first pass, the source program is analyzed in order to
develop the symbol table. A symbol tableis a mapping between symbolic names
(e.g., GPIO_PORTD_DIR_R ) and their numeric values (e.g., 0x40007400 .) During the second
pass, the object file is created (assembled) using the symbol table developed in pass one. It is during
the second pass that the source program listing is also produced. The symbol table is recreated in the
second pass. A phasing error occurs if the symbol table values calculated in the two passes are
different. Errors that occur during the assembly process (e.g., undefined symbol, illegal op code,
illegal operand, etc.) are explained in the listing file.
The source code is a file of characters usually created with an editor. Each line within the source
code is processed completely before the next line is read. As each line is processed, the assembler
examines the label, operation code, and operand fields. The operation code table is scanned for a
match with a known opcode. During the processing of a standard operation code mnemonic, the
standard machine code is inserted into the object file. If an assembler directive is being processed,
the proper action is taken.
Any errors that are detected by the assembler are displayed after the actual line containing the error is
printed. Object codeis the binary values (instructions and data) that, when executed by the computer,
perform the intended function. The listing file contains the address, object code, and a copy of the
source code. The listing file also provides a symbol table describing where in memory the program
and data will be loaded. The symbol table is a list of all the names used in the program along with the
values. A symbol is created when you put a label starting in column 1. The symbol table value for this
type is the absolute memory address where the instruction, variable or constant will reside in
memory. The second type of label is created by the EQU ,

GPIO_PORTD_DIR_R EQU 0x40007400

The value for this type of symbol is simply the number specified in the operand field. When the
assembler processes an instruction with a symbol in it, it simply substitutes the fixed value in place of
the symbol. Therefore we will use symbols to clarify (make it easier to understand) our programs.
The symbol table for this example is given at the end of the listing file. An assembler error will occur
if the operand cannot be formed with the flexible second operand:
 MOV R0,#GPIO_PORTD_DIR_R ;will not assemble
 LDR R0,=GPIO_PORTD_DIR_R ;this is OK

A compiler converts high-level language source code into object code. A cross-compiler also
converts source code into object code and creates a listing file except that the object code is created
for a target machine that is different from the machine running the cross-compiler. uVision® and Code
Composer Studio™ include both a cross-assembler and a cross-compiler because they run on the
Windows PC and creates Cortex™ object code.
Checkpoint 5.15: What does the assembler do in pass 1?
Checkpoint 5.16: What does the assembler do in pass 2?
5.8. Functional debugging
5.8.1. Stabilization
Functional debugging involves the verification of input/output parameters. Functional debugging is a
static process where inputs are supplied, the system is run, and the outputs are compared against the
expected results. Four methods of functional debugging are presented in this section, and two more
functional debugging methods are presented in the next chapter after indexed addressing mode is
presented. There are two important aspects of debugging: control and observability. The first step of
debugging is to stabilize the system. In the debugging context, we stabilize the problem by creating a
test routine that fixes (or stabilizes) all the inputs. In this way, we can reproduce the exact inputs over
and over again. Stabilization is an effective approach to debugging because we can control exactly
what software is being executed. Once stabilized, if we modify the program, we are sure that the
change in our outputs is a function of the modification we made in our software and not due to a
change in the input parameters. When a system has a small number of possible inputs (e.g., less than a
million), it makes sense to test them all. When the number of possible inputs is large we need to
choose a set of inputs. There are many ways to make this choice. We can select values:
Near the extremes and in the middle
Most typical of how our clients will properly use the system
Most typical of how our clients will improperly attempt to use the system
That differ by one
You know your system will find difficult
Using a random number generator

To stabilize the system we define a fixed set of inputs to test, run the system on these inputs, and
record the outputs. Debugging is a process of finding patterns in the differences between recorded
behavior and expected results. The advantage of modular programming is that we can perform
modular debugging. We make a list of modules that might be causing the bug. We can then create new
test routines to stabilize these modules and debug them one at a time. Unfortunately, sometimes all the
modules seem to work, but the combination of modules does not. In this case we study the interfaces
between the modules, looking for intended and unintended (e.g., unfriendly code) interactions.

5.8.2. Single Stepping
Many debuggers allow you to set the program counter to a specific address then execute one
instruction at a time. The debugger provides three stepping commands Step, StepOver and StepOut
commands. Step is the usual execute one assembly instruction. However, when debugging C we can
also execute one line of C. StepOver will execute one assembly instruction, unless that instruction is
a subroutine call, in which case the debugger will execute the entire subroutine and stop at the
instruction following the subroutine call. StepOut assumes the execution has already entered a
subroutine, and will finish execution of the subroutine and stop at the instruction following the
subroutine call.

5.8.3. Breakpoints with Filtering
A breakpoint is a mechanism to tag places in our software, which when executed will cause the
software to stop. Normally, you can break on any line of your program.
One of the problems with breakpoints is that sometimes we have to observe many breakpoints before
the error occurs. One way to deal with this problem is the conditional breakpoint. To illustrate the
implementation of conditional breakpoints, add a global variable called Count and initialize it to 32
in the initialization ritual. Add the following conditional breakpoint to the appropriate location in
your software. Using the debugger, we set a regular breakpoint at bkpt . We run the system again (you
can change the 32 to match the situation that causes the error.)
          PUSH {R1, R2} ; save R1 and R2
          LDR R2, =Count ; R2 = Count              if(--Count==0)
          LDR R1, [R2] ; R1 = Count                  bkpt
          SUBS R1, R1, #1 ; Count = Count – 1
          STR R1, [R2] ; store to Count
          BNE DEBUG_skip ; if Count != 0, skip
      DEBUG_bkpt NOP         ; put breakpoint here
      DEBUG_skip POP {R1, R2} ; restore R1 and
      R2

Notice that the breakpoint occurs only on the 32nd time the break is encountered. Any appropriate
condition can be substituted. Most modern debuggers allow you to set breakpoints that will trigger on
a count. However, this method allows flexibility of letting you choose the exact conditions that cause
the break.

5.8.4. Instrumentation: Print Statements
The use of print statements is a popular and effective means for functional debugging. One difficulty
with print statements in embedded systems is that a standard “printer” may not be available. Another
problem with printing is that most embedded systems involve time-dependent interactions with its
external environment. The print statement itself may be so slow, that the debugging process itself
causes the system to fail. In this regard, the print statement is intrusive. Therefore, throughout this
book we will utilize debugging methods that do not rely on the availability of a standard output
device.If printf is implemented using the UART (printf_UARTxxx.zip), the baud rate is 115200
bits/sec. This translates to 11520 characters per second. Therefore, it takes about 868 µs to output 10
characters using printf . However, because the UART has a 16-character buffer, if we output less than
16 characters, and then wait more than 1.4ms before we output again, the use of printf would be
minimally intrusive.

5.8.5. Desk checking
We perform a desk check (or dry run) by determining in advance, either by analytical algorithm or
explicit calculations, the expected outputs of strategic intermediate stages and final results for typical
inputs. We then run our program and compare the actual outputs with this template of expected results.
Focus. The first step is to specify a small piece of code you think may be incorrect. This step will get
easier as you develop experience writing and debugging code. If a particular output is incorrect, we
suspect each of the modules used to transform input into the incorrect output. Rather than testing the
entire system we debug a very small piece (10 to 20 lines).
Preparation. For a particular set of inputs (e.g., inputs that result in incorrect outputs), we hand-
execute our code, writing down all intermediate results as we expect them to be. It is called desk
checking because this step is performed at our desk with paper and pencil.
Control. Set a breakpoint at the start of the code, and run to that point. We should force the input
parameters to be one of the sets of inputs for which we prepared.
Observability. Configure the debugger so we can observe variables and intermediate calculations.
Single step the software and compare the actual outputs with the expected results.
5.9. Exercises
5.1Assume you have a 16-bit unsigned global variable H. Write assembly code that implements if(H
> 1234)isGreater();

5.2Assume you have a 16-bit signed global variable H. Write assembly code that implements if(H >
-1234)isGreater();

5.3Assume you have an 8-bit unsigned global variable G. Write assembly code that implements if(G
< 50) isLess(); else isMore();

5.4Assume you have a 16-bit signed global variable H. Write assembly code that implements if(H <
-500) isLess(); else isMore();

5.5Assume you have an 8-bit global variable G. Write assembly code that
implements while(G&0x80)body();

5.6 Write assembly code that implements
while(GPIO_PORTD_DATA_R &0x01)body();

5.7 You will write three assembly language versions of the following C code
n=100; while(n!=0){n--; body();}
a) Assume the variable n is implemented as a 16-bit global variable.
b) Assume the variable n is implemented as an 8-bit global variable.
c) Assume the variable n is implemented as a 32-bit variable in Register R2.

5.8 You will write three assembly language versions of the following C code
n=0; while(n<100){n++; body();}
a) Assume the variable n is implemented as a 16-bit global variable.
b) Assume the variable n is implemented as an 8-bit global variable.
c) Assume the variable n is implemented as a 32-bit variable in Register R4.

5.9 You will write two assembly language versions of the following C code
n=1000; while(n!=0){n--; body();}
a) Assume the variable n is implemented as a 16-bit global variable.
b) Assume the variable n is implemented as a 32-bit variable in Register R5.

5.10 There are two 16-bit signed variables, called Input and Output . Write assembly code that
checks the Input , and if Input is less than -100, then the code sets the Output to 200. Conversely
if Input is greater than or equal to -100, then the code does not modify Output .
5.11 Assume Register R0 contains an ASCII character. Write assembly code that converts any lower
case letters (a-z) to upper case (A-Z). For example, if Register R0 is initially ‘g’, convert it to ‘G’.
Leave all other characters unchanged.

5.12 Assume Register R0 contains an ASCII character. Write assembly code that converts any upper
case letters (A-Z) to lower case (a-z). For example, if Register R0is initially ‘G’, convert it to ‘g’.
Leave all other characters unchanged.

5.13 Write an assembly subroutine that implements a median filter. The three 32-bit unsigned numbers
are passed into the subroutine by value in Registers R0, R1 and R2. The median is the middle value
of the three, sorted by size. The return parameter is passed back in Register R0.

5.14 Write an assembly subroutine that finds the least common multiple of two numbers. The inputs
are passed in as 32-bit unsigned numbers in Registers R0 and R1. The result is returned as a 32-bit
unsigned number in Register R0.

5.15You are given a stopwatch module with the following functions. Try and guess what each function
does. Watch_SetTimerResolution , Watch_StartTimer , Watch_StopTimer , Watch_DisplayTime

D5.16 Assume there are two 8-bit unsigned digital inputs attached to Ports F and G respectively. Port
F contains the measured motor speed in rotations per second (rps), and Port G contains the desired
motor speed also in rps. There is an 8-bit unsigned output on Port A interfaced to the motor that
controls power to the motor. PORTA=0 means no power, PORTA =255 is full power. After
initialization the incremental motor controller should implement this: If the actual speed is less than
the desired and if PORTA <255, then increment PORTA
If the actual speed equals the desired, then do not change PORTA
If the actual speed is greater than the desired and if PORTA >0, then decrement PORTA
After initialization, the body of the main program execute over and over.

D5.17 The goal is to design a one-wheeled balancing robot. Assume there is an 8-bit signed digital
input attached to Port F. Port F contains the measured angle of the robot with respect to the ground in
degrees. The desired position is straight up, which is 0 degrees. There is an 8-bit signed output on
Port G interfaced to the wheel that controls torque to the wheel. Port G = -128 means full clockwise
torque, Port G = 0 means no torque, and Port G = +127 means full counterclockwise torque. After
initialization the incremental controller should:
If the angle is less than zero and if Port G < 127, then increment Port G
If the angle equals zero, then do not change Port G
If the angle is greater than zero and if Port G > -128, then decrement Port G
After initialization, the body of the main program execute over and over.
5.10. Lab Assignments
There are many types of recursion. The factorial and the decimal output functions in Section 5.4 are
examples of linear recursion, because only one call is made to the function within the function. A tail
recursive function has the recursive call as the last action taken by the function. A tail recursive
function can be implemented in an iterative manner by removing the recursive call and substituting it
with a loop. A binary recursive function calls itself twice during the course of its execution. For
Labs 5.1 and 5.2, pass parameters in registers and place local variables also in registers. Implement
32-bit unsigned arithmetic. Design a main program to test the functionality of your solution. Measure
the execution speed and required stack space of both versions for 5 different input values. Generalize
the results.
Lab 5.1 Tail Recursion. Implement the following recursive greatest common divisor function in
assembly language. Convert the operation to a nonrecursive algorithm, and implement it also in
assembly language.
uint32_t gcd(uint32_t m, uint32_t n){
  uint32_t r;
  if(m < n){
    return gcd(n,m);
  }
  r = m%n;
  if(r == 0){
    return(n);
  }
  return(gcd(n,r));
}

Lab 5.2 Binary Recursion. nCk is the number of combinations of choosing n elements out of a set of k
elements. Implement the following recursive function in assembly language. Convert the operation to
a nonrecursive algorithm, and implement it also in assembly language.
uint32_t nCk(uint32_t n, uint32_t k){
  if((k == 0)||(n == k)){
    return(1);
  }
  return(nCk(n-1,k) + nCk(n-1,k-1));
}
