8. Serial and Parallel Port Interfacing
Chapter 8 objectives are to:
• Describe the UART and SSI serial ports,
• Discuss how to interface a keyboard using scanning,
• Explain and interface electromechanical devices that are binary in nature,
• Use pulse width modulation (PWM) to control power delivered to a DC motor,
• Interface and control a stepper motor.

A more detailed approach to interfacing can be found in Volume 2 of these series. However, in this
chapter is an introduction to I/O interfacing. The common theme of this chapter is I/O interfacing
connected to serial and parallel ports. The chapter begins with a discussion of UART and SSI ports,
which can be used to interface external devices to the microcontroller such as GPS, DAC, LCD,
OLED, and ADC devices. Various I/O devices such as keyboards, optical sensors, relays, solenoids,
DC motors, and stepper motors will be interfaced. In addition, the pulse width modulation will be
used when interfacing DC motors so that the software can control power delivered to the motor.
Advances in the number and sophistication of the I/O ports have contributed greatly to the long term
growth of applications of embedded systems. This book covers just some of the ports and some of the
features of the LM3S/TM4C family of microcontrollers. For a complete list of I/O ports refer to the
respective data sheets.

Figure 8.1. Geared DC motors provide a good torque and speed for light-weight
 robots.
8.1. General Introduction to Interfacing
There are three components to microcomputer interfacing. Since many external devices have physical
characteristics, the first step is the mechanical design of the physical components. Often, the
mechanical design is simply selecting the physical devices from a list of available components. The
next step is the analog and digital electronics used to connect the physical devices to the computer.
The voltage levels of the external device must be translated into values compatible with the
microcontroller. The RS232 interface using the MAX3232 interface in Figure 8.3 is a typical example
of this translation. Some external devices need the interface to source or sink current, and the
interfaces in Figures 8.14, 8.18 and 8.23 can be used for these applications. The input/output
information may be encoded as simple digital signals or variable analog signals. Interfacing with
analog signals will be presented in Chapter 11. More complex systems may use frequency, period,
phase, or pulse width to represent the signals. Interfacing with time-based signals will be presented
in Chapter 9. The third component of interfacing is the low-level software that transforms the
mechanical and electrical devices into objects that perform the desired tasks. The group of these low-
level functions is often designated as an I/O device driver. Since this book serves as an introduction
to interfacing, most of the hardware circuits are given, and the software design is explained. More
details can be found in Volume 2.
Most microcontrollers are built with CMOS logic. Interfacing with CMOS logic involves
consideration of voltage, current, and capacitance. First, let’s consider a digital output, e.g., a port pin
with its direction register equal to 1. IOH is the largest current a port pin can source when the output is
high. VOH is the smallest voltage a port pin will be if the output is high and the current is less than IOH.
If the microcontroller is powered by VDD, then the output high voltage will be between VOH and VDD.
IOL is the largest current a port pin can sink when the output is low. VOL is the largest voltage a port
pin will be if the output is low and the current is less than IOL. The output low voltage will be
between 0 and VOL. Next, let’s consider a digital input, e.g., a port pin with its direction register equal
to 0. IIH is the current the input port pin will require when its input is high. VIH is the voltage above
which the input will be considered high. IIL is the current the input port pin will require when its input
is low. VIL is the voltage below which the input will be considered low. Figure 8.2 shows current
parameters for various digital logic families, and Table 8.1 shows voltage parameters. In summary, if
the input is between 0 and VIL, it is considered a low. If the input is between VIH and VDD, it is
considered a high. Refer back to the transistor-level implementation in Figure 3.5. If the voltage on an
input pin remains between VIL and VIH for a long time, both the p-type and n-type transistors will be
active, causing a short circuit from power to ground. With some CMOS microcomputers one must
define unused I/O pins either as outputs or specify them as inputs and tie the pin high (or low) in
hardware. On the LM3S/TM4C family of microcontrollers we can leave an unused pin disconnected
if the software leaves its DEN pins zero. Because of the extremely high impedance of CMOS inputs,
an unconnected input pin may oscillate, dissipating power unnecessarily. In order for the output to
properly drive all the inputs of the next stage, the maximum available output current must be larger
than the sum of all the required input currents for both the high and low conditions.
                             and

In order for the digital information to be properly transferred from the output of one module to the
input of the next, we need the output high voltage to be more than the required input high voltage, and
the output low voltage to be less than the input low voltage, see Figure 8.2.
          VOH ≥ VIH               and            VOL ≤ VIL
   Family           Example       IOH       IOL        IIH     IIL
   Standard TTL 7404              0.4 mA 16 mA 40 µA 1.6
                                                               mA
   Schottky TTL 74S04             1 mA      20 mA 50 µA 2 mA
   Low Power        74LS04        0.4 mA 4 mA          20 µA 0.4
   Schottky                                                    mA
   High Speed       74HC04        4 mA      4 mA       1 µA 1 µA
   CMOS
   TM4C 2mA- TM4C123 2 mA                   2 mA       2 µA 2 µA
   drive
   TM4C 4mA- TM4C123 4 mA                   4 mA       2 µA 2 µA
   drive
   TM4C 8mA- TM4C123 8 mA                   8 mA       2 µA 2 µA
   drive
   TM4C 12mA- TM4C1294 12 mA 12 mA 2 µA 2 µA
   drive
Table 8.1. The input and output currents of various digital logic families and microcontrollers.

Figure 8.2. Voltage thresholds for various digital logic families.
The last consideration for interfacing with CMOS logic is capacitance. Capacitance loading occurs
with each input and with long cables. ADC pins on the LM3S/TM4C microcontrollers have an input
capacitance around 1 pF. A typical input capacitance on CMOS logic is about 5 pF. Consider a
situation where the output of one circuit is attached to the input of another. If the output goes from 0 to
+3.3V, the voltage as perceived at the input of the next stage will be

where R is the resistance in the circuit, and C is the capacitive load. τ =R*C is called the time
constant. If the time constant is very small, the input goes from 0 to +3.3 almost immediately after the
output goes 0 to +3.3V. If the signal is a square wave with period T, the interface will only work for
situations where the period T is large compared to the time constant τ.
I/O ports are the specific components of a microcomputer that allow it to interact with its
environment. A device driver is a collection of software functions that allow higher level software to
utilize an I/O device. In other words, the set of low-level functions that input/output directly with the
hardware are grouped together in a single module and called a device driver.
8.2. Universal Asynchronous Receiver
Transmitter (UART)
In this section we will develop a simple device driver using the Universal Asynchronous
Receiver/Transmitter (UART). This serial port allows the microcontroller to communicate with
devices such as other computers, printers, input sensors, and LCDs. Serial transmission involves
sending one bit at a time, such that the data is spread out over time. The total number of bits
transmitted per second is called the baud rate. The reciprocal of the baud rate is the bit time, which
is the time to send one bit. Most microcontrollers have at least one UART. Before discussing the
detailed operation on the LM3S/TM4C, we will begin with general features common to all devices.
Each UART will have a baud rate control register, which we use to select the transmission rate. Each
device is capable of creating its own serial clock with a transmission frequency approximately equal
to the serial clock in the computer with which it is communicating. A frame is the smallest complete
unit of serial transmission. Figure 8.3 plots the signal versus time on a serial port, showing a single
frame, which includes a start bit (which is 0), 8 bits of data (least significant bit first), and a stop bit
(which is 1). There is always only one start bit, but the Stellaris ® and Tiva ® UARTs allow us to
select the 5 to 8 data bits and 1 or 2 stop bits. The UART can add even, odd, or no parity bit.
However, we will employ the typical protocol of 1 start bit, 8 data bits, no parity, and 1 stop bit. This
protocol is used for both transmitting and receiving. The information rate, or bandwidth, is defined as
the amount of data or useful information transmitted per second. From Figure 8.3, we see that 10 bits
are sent for every byte of usual data. Therefore, the bandwidth of the serial channel (in bytes/second)
is the baud rate (in bits/sec) divided by 10.

Figure 8.3. A serial data frame with 8-bit data, 1 start bit, 1 stop bit, and no parity
 bit.
Common Error: If you change the bus clock frequency without changing the baud rate register, the
UART will operate at an incorrect baud rate.
Checkpoint 8.1: Assuming the protocol drawn in Figure 8.3 and a baud rate of 1000 bits/sec, what is
the bandwidth in bytes/sec?
Table 8.2 shows the three most commonly used RS232 signals. The RS232 standard uses a DB25
connector that has 25 pins. The EIA-574 standard uses RS232 voltage levels and a DB9 connector
that has only 9 pins. The most commonly used signals of the full RS232 standard are available with
the EIA-574 protocols. Only TxD, RxD, and SG are required to implement a simple bidirectional
serial channel, thus the other signals are not shown (Figure 8.4). We define the data terminal
equipment (DTE) as the computer or a terminal and the data communication equipment (DCE) as
the modem or printer.
   DB25 RS232 DB9 EIA- Signal Description True DTE DCE
   Pin  Name Pin 574
                  Name
   2    BA    3   103 TxD Transmit        -5.5V out in
                              Data
   3    BB    2   104 RxD Receive         -5.5V in  out
                              Data
   7    AB    5   102 SG      Signal
                              Ground
Table 8.2. The commonly-used signals on the RS232 and EIA-574 protocols.

Figure 8.4. Hardware interface implementing an asynchronous RS232 channel.
 The TM4C123 and TM4C1294 have eight UART ports (see Tables 4.3 and 4.4).
Observation: Most LM3S/TM4C development kits send UART0 channel through the USB cable, so
the circuit shown in Figure 8.4 will not be needed. On the PC side of the cable, the serial channel
becomes a virtual COM port.
RS232 is a non-return-to-zero (NRZ) protocol with true signified as a voltage between -5 and -15 V.
False is signified by a voltage between +5 and +15 V. A MAX3232 converter chip is used to translate
between the +5.5/-5.5 V RS232 levels and the 0/+3.3 V digital levels. The capacitors in this circuit
are important, because they form a charge pump used to create the ±5.5 voltages from the +3.3 V
supply. The RS232 timing is generated automatically by the UART. During transmission, the Maxim
chip translates a digital high on microcontroller side to -5.5V on the RS232/EIA-574 cable, and a
digital low is translated to +5.5V. During receiving, the Maxim chip translates negative voltages on
RS232/EIA-574 cable to a digital high on the microcontroller side, and a positive voltage is
translated to a digital low. The computer is classified as DTE, so its serial output is pin 3 in the EIA-
574 cable, and its serial input is pin 2 in the EIA-574 cable. When connecting a DTE to another DTE,
we use a cable with pins 2 and 3 crossed. I.e., pin 2 on one DTE is connected to pin 3 on the other
DTE and pin 3 on one DTE is connected to pin 2 on the other DTE. When connecting a DTE to a
DCE, then the cable passes the signals straight across. In all situations, the grounds are connected
together using the SG wire in the cable. This channel is classified as full-duplex, because
transmission can occur in both directions simultaneously.
8.2.1. Asynchronous Communication
We will begin with transmission, because it is simple. The transmitter portion of the UART includes a
data output pin, with digital logic levels as drawn in Figure 8.5. The transmitter has a 16-element
FIFO and a 10-bit shift register, which cannot be directly accessed by the programmer (Figure 8.5).
The FIFO and shift register in the transmitter are separate from the FIFO and shift register associated
with the receiver. To output data using the UART, the software will first check to make sure the
transmit FIFO is not full (it will wait if TXFFis 1) and then write to the transmit data register
(e.g., UART0_DR_R ). The bits are shifted out in this order: start, b0, b1, b2, b3, b4, b5, b6, b7, and then
stop, where b0 is the LSB and b7 is the MSB. The transmit data register is write only, which means the
software can write to it (to start a new transmission) but cannot read from it. Even though the transmit
data register is at the same address as the receive data register, the transmit and receive data registers
are two separate registers.

Figure 8.5. Data and shift registers implement the serial transmission.
When a new byte is written to UART0_DR_R , it is put into the transmit FIFO. Byte by byte, the
UART gets data from the FIFO and loads them into the 10-bit transmit shift register. The 10-bit shift
register includes a start bit, 8 data bits, and 1 stop bit. Then, the frame is shifted out one bit at a time
at a rate specified by the baud rate register. If there are already data in the FIFO or in the shift register
when the UART0_DR_R is written, the new frame will wait until the previous frames have been
transmitted, before it too is transmitted. The FIFO guarantees the data are transmitted in the order they
were written. The serial port hardware is actually controlled by a clock that is 16 times faster than
the baud rate, referred to in the datasheet as Baud16. When the data are being shifted out, the digital
hardware in the UART counts 16 times in between changes to the U0Tx output line.
The software can actually write 16 bytes to the UART0_DR_R , and the hardware will send them all
one at a time in the proper order. This FIFO reduces the software response time requirements of the
operating system to service the serial port hardware. Unfortunately, it does complicate the
hardware/software timing. At 9600 bits/sec, it takes 1.04 ms to send a frame. Therefore, there will be
a delay ranging from 1.04 and 16.7 ms between writing to the data register and the completion of the
data transmission. This delay depends on how much data are already in the FIFO at the time the
software writes to UART0_DR_R .
Receiving data frames is a little trickier than transmission because we have to synchronize the
receive shift register with the incoming data. The receiver portion of the UART includes a U0Rx data
input pin with digital logic levels. At the input of the microcontroller, true is 3.3V and false is 0V.
There is also a 16-element FIFO and a 10-bit shift register, which cannot be directly accessed by the
programmer (Figure 8.6). Again the receive shift register and receive FIFO are separate from those in
the transmitter. The receive data register, UART0_DR_R , is read only, which means write
operations to this address have no effect on this register (recall write operations activate the
transmitter). The receiver obviously cannot start a transmission, but it recognizes a new frame by its
start bit. The bits are shifted in using the same order as the transmitter shifted them out: start, b0, b1,
b2, b3, b4, b5, b6, b7, and then stop.
There are six status bits generated by receiver activity. The Receive FIFO empty flag, RXFE, is clear
when new input data are in the receive FIFO. When the software reads from UART0_DR_R , data
are removed from the FIFO. When the FIFO becomes empty, the RXFE flag will be set, meaning there
are no more input data. There are other flags associated with the receiver. There is a Receive FIFO
full flag RXFF, which is set when the FIFO is full. There are four status bits associated with each
byte of data. For this reason, the receive FIFO is 12 bits wide. The overrun error, OE, is set when
input data are lost because the FIFO is full and more input frames are arriving at the receiver. An
overrun error is caused when the receiver interface latency is too large. The break error, BE, is set
when the input is held low for more than a frame. The PE bit is set on a parity error. Because the
error rate is so low, most systems do not implement parity. The framing error, FE, is set when the stop
bit is incorrect. Framing errors are probably caused by a mismatch in baud rate.

Figure 8.6. Data register shift registers implement the receive serial interface.
The receiver waits for the 1 to 0 edge signifying a start bit, then shifts in 10 bits of data one at a time
from the U0Rx line. The internal Baud16 clock is 16 times faster than the baud rate. After the 1 to 0
edge, the receiver waits 8 Baud16 clocks and samples the start bit. 16 Baud16 clocks later it samples
b0. Every 16 Baud16 clocks it samples another bit until it reaches the stop bit. The UART needs an
internal clock faster than the baud rate so it can wait the half a bit time between the 1 to 0 edge
beginning the start bit and the middle of the bit window needed for sampling. The start and stop bits
are removed (checked for framing errors), the 8 bits of data and 4 bits of status are put into the
receive FIFO. The FIFO implements hardware buffering so data can be safely stored if the software
is performing other tasks.
Observation: If the receiving UART device has a baud rate mismatch of more than 5%, then a
framing error can occur when the stop bit is incorrectly captured.
An overrun occurs when there are 16 elements in the receive FIFO, and a 17th frame comes into the
receiver. In order to avoid overrun, we can design a real-time system, i.e., one with a maximum
latency. The latency of a UART receiver is the delay between the time when new data arrives in the
receiver (RXFE=0) and the time the software reads the data register. If the latency is always less than
160 bit times, then overrun will never occur.
Observation: With a serial port that has a shift register and one data register (no FIFO buffering), the
latency requirement of the input interface is the time it takes to transmit one data frame.
In the example illustrated in Figure 8.7, assume the UART receive shift register and receive FIFO are
initially empty (RXFE=1). 17 incoming serial frames occur one right after another (letters A – Q), but
the software does not respond. At the end of the first frame, the 0x41 (letter ‘A’) goes into the receive
FIFO, and the RXFEflag is cleared. Normally, the UART_InChar function would respond to RXFE
being clear and read the data from the UART. In this scenario however, the software is busy doing
other things and does not respond to the presence of data in the receive FIFO. Next, 15 more frames
are shifted in and entered into the receive FIFO. At the end of the 16th frame, the FIFO is full
(RXFF=1). If the software were to respond at this point, then all 16 characters would be properly
received. If the 17th frame occurs before the first is read by the software, then an overrun error
occurs, and a frame is lost. We can see from this worst case scenario that the software must read the
data from the UART within 160 bit times of the clearing of RXFE.

Figure 8.7. Seventeen receive data frames result in an overrun (OE) error.

8.2.2. LM3S/TM4C UART Details
Next we will overview the specific UART functions on the LM3S/TM4C microcontrollers. This
section is intended to supplement rather than replace the Texas Instruments manuals. When designing
systems with any I/O module, you must also refer to the reference manual of your specific
microcontroller. It is also good design practice to review the errata for your microcontroller to see if
any quirks (mistakes) exist in your microcontroller that might apply to the system you are designing.
The LM3S/TM4C microcontrollers have one to eight UARTs. The specific port pins used to
implement the UARTs vary from one chip to the next. To find which pins your microcontroller uses,
you will need to consult its datasheet. Table 8.3 shows some of the registers for the UART0. If the
microcontroller has a second or third UART, the register names will replace the 0 with a 1 – 7. For
the exact register addresses, you should include the appropriate header file (e.g., tm4c1294ncpdt.h).
To activate a UART you will need to turn on the UART clock in the SYSCTL_RCGCUART_R
register. You should also turn on the clock for the digital port in the SYSCTL_RCGCGPIO_R
register. You need to enable the transmit and receive pins as digital signals. The alternative function
for these pins must also be selected.
The OE, BE, PE, and FE are error flags associated with the receiver. You can see these flags in two
places: associated with each data byte in UART0_DR_R or as a separate error register
in UART0_RSR_R . The overrun error (OE) is set if data has been lost because the input driver
latency is too long. BE is a break error, meaning the other device has sent a break. PE is a parity
error (however, we will not be using parity). The framing error (FE) will get set if the baud rates do
not match. The software can clear these four error flags by writing any value to UART0_RSR_R .
The status of the two FIFOs can be seen in the UART0_FR_R register. The BUSY flag is set while
the transmitter still has unsent bits, even if the transmitter is disabled. It will become zero when the
transmit FIFO is empty and the last stop bit has been sent. If you implement busy-wait output by first
outputting then waiting for BUSY to become 0 (right flowchart of Figure 8.8), then the routine will
write new data and return after that particular data has been completely transmitted.
The UART0_CTL_R control register contains the bits that turn on the UART. TXE is the Transmitter
Enable bit, and RXE is the Receiver Enable bit. We set TXE, RXE, and UARTEN equal to 1 in
order to activate the UART device. However, we should clear UARTEN during the initialization
sequence.
              31–    11     10    9     8      7–0                   Name
              12
 $4000.C000          OE     BE    PE    FE     DATA                  UART0_DR_R

              31–3                      3      2      1     0
 $4000.C004                             OE     BE     PE    FE       UART0_RSR_R

              31–    7      6     5     4      3      2–0
              8
 $4000.C018          TXFE RXFF    TXFF RXFE BUSY                     UART0_FR_R

              31–    15–0
              16
 $4000.C024          DIVINT                                          UART0_IBRD_R

              31–6                      5–0
 $4000.C028                             DIVFRAC                      UART0_FBRD_R

              31–    7      6–5   4     3      2      1     0
              8
 $4000.C02C          SPS    WPEN FEN    STP2   EPS    PEN   BRK      UART0_LCRH_R

              31–    9      8     7     6–3    2      1     0
              10
 $4000.C030          RXE    TXE   LBE          SIRLP SIREN UARTEN UART0_CTL_R

Table 8.3. Some UART registers. Each register is 32 bits wide. Shaded bits are zero.
The UART0_IBRD_R and UART0_FBRD_R registers specify the baud rate. The baud rate divider
is a 22-bit binary fixed-point value with a resolution of 2-6. The Baud16 clock is created from the
system bus clock, with a frequency of (Bus clock frequency)/divider. The baud rate is 16 times
slower than Baud16
Baud rate = Baud16/16 = (Bus clock frequency)/(16*divider)
For example, if the bus clock is 8 MHz and the desired baud rate is 19200 bits/sec, then the divider
should be 8,000,000/16/19200 or 26.04167. As a binary fixed-point number, this number is about
11010.000011. We can establish this baud rateby putting the 11010 into UART0_IBRD_R and the
000011 into UART0_FBRD_R . In reality, 11010.000011 is equal to 1667/64 or 26.046875. The
baud rates in the transmitter and receiver must match within 5% for the channel to operate properly.
The error for this example is 0.02%.
The three registers UART0_LCRH_R , UART0_IBRD_R , and UART0_FBRD_R form an internal
30-bit register. This internal register is only updated when a write operation to UART0_LCRH_R is
performed, so any changes to the baud-rate divisor must be followed by a write to
the UART0_LCRH_R register for the changes to take effect. Out of reset, both FIFOs are disabled
and act as 1-byte-deep holding registers. The FIFOs are enabled by setting the FENbit
in UART0_LCRH_R .
Checkpoint 8.2: Assume the bus clock is 10 MHz. What is the baud rate if UART0_IBRD_R equals
2 and UART0_FBRD_R equals 32?
Checkpoint 8.3: Assume the bus clock is 50 MHz. What values should you put in UART0_IBRD_R
and UART0_FBRD_R to make a baud rate of 38400 bits/sec?

Figure 8.8. Flowcharts of InChar and OutChar using busy-wait synchronization.

8.2.3. UART Device Driver
Software that sends and receives data must implement a mechanism to synchronize the software with
the hardware. In particular, the software should read data from the input device only when data is
indeed ready. Similarly, software should write data to an output device only when the device is ready
to accept new data. With busy-wait synchronization, the software continuously checks the hardware
status waiting for it to be ready. In this section, we will use busy-wait synchronization to write I/O
programs that send and receive data using the UART. After a frame is received, the receive FIFO will
be not empty (RXFE becomes 0) and the 8-bit data is available to be read. To get new data from the
serial port, the software first waits for RXFEto be zero, then reads the result from UART0_DR_R .
Recall that when the software reads UART0_DR_R it gets data from the receive FIFO. This
operation is illustrated in Figure 8.8 and shown in Program 8.1. In a similar fashion, when the
software wishes to output via the serial port, it first waits for TXFFto be clear, then performs the
output. When the software writes UART0_DR_R it puts data into the transmit FIFO. An interrupt
synchronization method will be presented in Chapter 11.
The initialization program, UART_Init , enables the UART device and selects the baud rate. The
PCTL bits were defined back in Tables 4.3, 4.4. PCTL bits 7-0 are set to 0x11 to select U0Tx and
U0Rx on PA1 and PA0. The input routine waits in a loop until RXFE is 0 (FIFO not empty), then
reads the data register. The output routine first waits in a loop until TXFF is 0 (FIFO not full), then
writes data to the data register. Polling before writing data is an efficient way to perform output.
UART2_xxx.zip is the interrupt-driven version, which will be presented in Chapter 11.
// Assumes a 50 MHz bus clock, creates 115200 baud rate
void UART_Init(void){          // should be called only once
  SYSCTL_RCGCUART_R |= 0x0001; // activate UART0
  SYSCTL_RCGCGPIO_R |= 0x0001; // activate port A
  UART0_CTL_R &= ~0x0001; // disable UART
  UART0_IBRD_R = 27; // IBRD=int(50000000/(16*115,200)) = int(27.1267)
  UART0_FBRD_R = 8; // FBRD = round(0.1267 * 64) = 8
  UART0_LCRH_R = 0x0070; // 8-bit word length, enable FIFO
  UART0_CTL_R = 0x0301;            // enable RXE, TXE and UART
  GPIO_PORTA_PCTL_R = (GPIO_PORTA_PCTL_R&0xFFFFFF00)+0x00000011; // UART
  GPIO_PORTA_AMSEL_R &= ~0x03; // disable analog function on PA1-0
  GPIO_PORTA_AFSEL_R |= 0x03; // enable alt funct on PA1-0
  GPIO_PORTA_DEN_R |= 0x03; // enable digital I/O on PA1-0
}
// Wait for new input, then return ASCII code
char UART_InChar(void){
  while((UART0_FR_R&0x0010) != 0); // wait until RXFE is 0
  return((char)(UART0_DR_R&0xFF));
}
// Wait for buffer to be not full, then output
void UART_OutChar(char data){
  while((UART0_FR_R&0x0020) != 0); // wait until TXFF is 0
  UART0_DR_R = data;
}
 Program 8.1. Device driver functions that implement serial I/O (UART_xxx.zip).
Checkpoint 8.4: How does the software clear RXFE?
Checkpoint 8.5: How does the software clear TXFF?
Checkpoint 8.6: Describe what happens if the receiving computer is operating on a baud rate that is
twice as fast as the transmitting computer?
Checkpoint 8.7: Describe what happens if the transmitting computer is operating on a baud rate that
is twice as fast as the receiving computer?
Checkpoint 8.8: How do you change Program 8.1 to run at the same baud rate, but the system clock is
now 10 MHz.
8.3. Synchronous Serial Interface, SSI
Microcontrollers employ multiple approaches to communicate synchronously with peripheral devices
and other microcontrollers. The synchronous serial interface (SSI) system can operate as a master or
as a slave. The channel can have one master and one slave, or it can have one master and multiple
slaves. With multiple slaves, the configuration can be a star (centralized master connected to each
slave), or a ring (each node has one receiver and one transmitter, where the nodes are connected in a
circle.) The master initiates all data communication.
Stellaris ® and Tiva ® microcontrollers have 0 to 4 Synchronous Serial Interface or SSI modules.
Another name for this protocol is Serial Peripheral Interface or SPI. The fundamental difference
between a UART, which implements an asynchronous protocol, and a SSI, which implements a
synchronous protocol, is the manner in which the clock is implemented. Two devices communicating
with asynchronous serial interfaces (UART) operate at the same frequency (baud rate) but have two
separate clocks. With a UART protocol, the clock signal is not included in the interface cable
between devices. Two UART devices can communicate with each other as long as the two clocks
have frequencies within ±5% of each other. Two devices communicating with synchronous serial
interfaces (SSI) operate from the same clock (synchronized). With a SSI protocol, the clock signal is
included in the interface cable between devices. Typically, the master device creates the clock, and
the slave device(s) uses the clock to latch the data (in or out.) The SSI protocol includes four I/O
lines. The slave select SSI0Fss is an optional negative logic control signal from master to slave
signal signifying the channel is active. The second line, SCK, is a 50% duty cycle clock generated by
the master. The SSI0Tx (master out slave in, MOSI) is a data line driven by the master and received
by the slave. The SSI0Rx (master in slave out, MISO) is a data line driven by the slave and received
by the master. In order to work properly, the transmitting device uses one edge of the clock to change
its output, and the receiving device uses the other edge to accept the data. Figure 8.9 shows the I/O
port locations of the SSI ports discussed in this book, see Tables 4.3 and 4.4.

Figure 8.9. Synchronous serial port pins on Stellaris ® LM3Sand Tiva ® TM4C
 microcontrollers.
On the LM3S/TM4C the shift register can be configured from 4 to 16 bits. The shift register in the
master and the shift register in the slave are linked to form a distributed register. Figure 8.10
illustrates communication between master and slave. Typically, the microcontroller and the I/O
device slave are so physically close we do not use interface logic.
The interface is classified as synchronous because the hardware clock is shared between devices.
The SSI on the LM3S/TM4Cemploys two hardware FIFOs. Both FIFOs are 8 elements deep and 4 to
16 bits wide, depending on the selected data width. When performing I/O the software puts into the
transmit FIFO by writing to the SSI0_DR_R register and gets from the receive FIFO by reading from
the SSI0_DR_R register.

Figure 8.10. A synchronous serial interface between a microcontroller and an I/O
 device.
Table 8.4 lists the SSI0 registers on the TM4C. The TM4C can operate in slave mode, but we will
focus on master mode. The PCTL bits are defined in Tables 4.3 and 4.4.
 Address    31-6                         3       2       1       0       Name
 $400F.E61C                              SSI3    SSI2    SSI1    SSI0    SYSCTL_RCGCSSI_R

              31-16   15-8        7      6       5-4     3-0
 $4000.8000           SCR         SPH    SPO     FRF     DSS             SSI0_CR0_R

              31-16   15-0
 $4000.8008           Data                                               SSI0_DR_R

              7       6      5    4      3       2       1      0
 $4000.8004                              SOD     MS      SSE    LBM
                                                               SSI0_CR1_R
 $4000.800C                       BSY    RFF     RNE     TNF    TFE
                                                               SSI0_SR_R
 $4000.8010   CPSDVSR                                          SSI0_CPSR_R
 $4000.8014                           TXIM  RXIM RTIM   RORIM SSI0_IM_R
 $4000.8018                           TXRIS RXRIS RTRIS RORRIS SSI0_RIS_R
 $4000.801C                           TXMIS RXMIS RTMIS RORMIS SSI0_MIS_R
 $4000.8020                                       RTIC  RORIC  SSI0_ICR_R
 $4000.4420   SEL   SEL   SEL   SEL   SEL   SEL   SEL   SEL    GPIO_PORTA_AFSEL_R
 $4000.441C   DEN   DEN   DEN   DEN   DEN   DEN   DEN   DEN    GPIO_PORTA_DEN_R
 $4000.4400   DIR   DIR   DIR   DIR   DIR   DIR   DIR   DIR    GPIO_PORTA_DIR_R
 $400F.E608   GPIOH GPIOG GPIOF GPIOE GPIOD GPIOC GPIOB GPIOA SYSCTL_RCGCGPIO_R
Table 8.4. The TM4C SSI0 registers. Each register is 32 bits wide. Bits 31 – 8 are zero.
If there is data in the transmit FIFO, the SSI module will transmit it. With SSI it transmits and
receives bits at the same time. When a data transfer operation is performed, this distributed 8- to 32-
bit register is serially shifted 4 to 16 bit positions by the SCK clock from the master so the data is
effectively exchanged between the master and the slave. Data in the master shift register are
transmitted to the slave. Data in the slave shift register are transmitted to the master. Typically, the
microcontroller is master and the I/O module is the slave, but one can operate the microcontroller in
slave mode. When designing with SSI, you will need to consult the data sheets for your specific
microcontroller.
The SSI clock frequency is established by the 8-bit field SCRfield in the SSI0_CR0_R register and
the 8-bit field CPSDVSRfield in the SSI0_CPSR_R register. SCR can be any 8-bit value from 0 to
255. CPSDVSR must be an even number from 2 to 254. Let fBUS be the frequency of the bus clock.
The frequency of the SSI is
fSSI = fBUS / (CPSDVSR * (1 + SCR))
Common control features for the SSI module include:
Baud rate control register, used to select the transmission rate
Data size 4 to 16 bits
Mode bits in the control register to select
master versus slave
Freescale mode with clock polarity and clock phase
TI synchronous serial mode
Microwire mode
Interrupt arm bit
Ability to make the outputs open drain (open collector)

Common status bits for the SPI module include:
BSY, SSI is currently transmitting and/or receiving a frame,
or the transmit FIFO is not empty
RFF, SSI receive FIFO is full
RNE, SSI receive FIFO is not empty
TNF, SSI transmit FIFO is not full
TFE, SSI transmit FIFO is empty

The key to proper transmission is to select one edge of the clock (shown as “T” in Figure 8.11) to be
used by the transmitter to change the output, and use the other edge (shown as “R”) to latch the data in
the receiver. In this way data is latched during the time when it is stable. Data available is the time
when the output data is actually valid, and data required is the time when the input data must be valid.
The LM3S/TM4C output transmission is valid (S5) from 0 to 1 bus clock after the clock. I.e., the
maximum S5 time is 1 system bus cycle and the minimum is 0. When receiving the setup time (S8) is
1 system bus cycle and the hold time (S9) is 2 system bus cycles. In order for the communication to
occur without error, the data available from the device that is driving the data line must overlap (start
before and end after) the data required by the other device that is receiving the data. It is this overlap
that will determine the maximum frequency at which synchronous serial communication can occur.
The concepts of data available and data required will be presented in much more detail in Volume 2.
Checkpoint 8.9: What are the definitions of setup time and hold time?

Figure 8.11. Synchronous serial timing showing the data available interval
 overlaps the data required interval.
Observation: Because the clocks are shared, if you change the bus clock frequency, the transfer rate
will change in both master and slave.
The Freescale SPI timing (with SPO=SPH=0) is shown in Figure 8.12. The SPI transmits data at the
same time as it receives input. In the Freescale modes, the SPI changes its output on the opposite edge
of the clock as it uses to shift data in. There are three mode control bits (MS, SPO, SPH) that affect
the transmission protocol. If the device is a master (MS=0), it generates the SCLK, and data is output
on the SSI0Tx pin and input on the SSI0Rx pin. The SPO control bit specifies the polarity of the
SCLK. In particular, the SPO bit specifies the logic level of the clock when data is not being
transferred. The SPH bit affects the timing of the first bit transferred and received. If SPH is 0, then
the device will shift data in on the first (and 3rd, 5th, 7th, … etc.) clock edge. If SPH is 1, then the
device will shift data in on the second (and 4th, 6th, 8th, … etc.) clock edge. The data is transmitted
MSB first. There are SSI examples on the book web site (MAX5353_xxx.zip, SDC_xxx.zip).
Furthermore, most Stellaris® evaluation boards utilize the SSI to interface the organic light emitting
diode display. So most of the OLED example projects also include example SSI code.
There is also a TI synchronous serial mode and another protocol called Microwire. Refer to the data
sheets for details of these modes.
Figure 8.12. Synchronous serial Freescale single transfer mode (SPO=0, SPH=0).
Analog Devices, Maxim, and Texas Instruments will send free samples of DACs and ADCs to
students, so these SPI interface examples are inexpensive to build. The data sheets of most devices
will assist you when interfacing it to your microcontroller. I do suggest you get plastic dual in-line
packages (PDIP), so you can plug the parts into a protoboard. Also you should consider voltage
levels, making sure the chips operate on whatever voltage supply you have on your system.
http://www.analog.com/en/index.html
http://www.maxim-ic.com/
http://www.ti.com
8.4. Nokia 5110 Graphics LCD Interface
In this section we will interface a Nokia 5110 LCD using busy-wait synchronization. See Figure 8.13.
Before we output data or commands to the display, we will check a status flag and wait for the
previous operation to complete. Busy-wait synchronization is very simple and is appropriate for I/O
devices that are fast and predicable.

Figure 8.13. Nokia 5110 display with 84 by 48 monochrome pixels.
The Nokia 5110 uses the synchronous serial interface (SSI) described in the last section to control
PA5 (MOSI), PA3 (Fss), and PA2 (Sclk), as shown in Figure 8.14. Pins PA7 and PA6 are regular
GPIO pins. The microcontroller will be master and the LCD slave. There are multiple Nokia 5110
displays for sale on the market with the same LCD but different pin locations for the signals. Figure
8.14 shows two of the possible pin configurations. Please look on your actual display for the pin
name and not the pin number. Be careful when connecting the backlight, because at 3.3V the back light
draws 80 mA. If you want a dimmer back light connect 3.3V to a 100 ohm resistor, and the other end
of the resistor to the LED/BL pin.

Figure 8.14. Nokia 5110 interface to a TM4C123.
Program 8.2 lists the prototypes for public functions available in the software starter project. The Init
function must be called once, before any of the other functions can be called. The SetCursor function,
defines where on the screen subsequent character output will occur. Each ASCII character is 7 pixels
wide and 8 pixels high. This means there can be 84/7 = 12 characters by 48/8 = 6 rows. The cursor is
defined by character position, not pixel location, so 0 ≤ newX ≤ 11 and 0 ≤ newY ≤ 5, with 0,0
being the top row on left. The Clear function erases the entire screen. It takes 4,032 bits, or 504
bytes, to represent an entire 84 by 48 pixel image. The DrawFullImage function takes a 504-byte
array and copies it onto the display. Additional graphics functions were presented previously in
Section 6.7.
void Nokia5110_Init(void);
void Nokia5110_SetCursor(uint8_t newX, uint8_t newY);
void Nokia5110_Clear(void);
void Nokia5110_DrawFullImage(const uint8_t *ptr);
void Nokia5110_OutChar(char data);
void Nokia5110_OutString(char *ptr);
void Nokia5110_OutUDec(unsigned uint16_t n);
 Program 8.2. Software prototypes for Nokia 5110 display (Nokia5110xxx.zip).

The OutChar OutString and OutUDec functions draw ASCII characters on the screen. These three
functions maintain a cursor so you can call these three functions in any order.The matrix ASCII[][5]
contains the pixel image for each character. Notice the 5 by 8 image for ASCII 0x7F is the University
of Texas UT symbol. There is one blank line before the 5 by 8 character and one blank line after
making each character 7 wide by 8 pixels tall, see Program 8.3.
static const uint8_t ASCII[][5] = {
  {0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00} // 20, space
  ,{0x00, 0x00, 0x5f, 0x00, 0x00} // 21 !
…
  ,{0x1f, 0x24, 0x7c, 0x24, 0x1f} // 7f UT sign
};
#define PA6 (*((volatile uint32_t *)0x40004100))
void static lcddatawrite(uint8_t data){
  while((SSI0_SR_R&0x02)==0){}; // busy-wait on TNF
  PA6 = 0x20;            // DC is data
  SSI0_DR_R = data; // data out
}
void Nokia5110_OutChar(char data){int i;
  lcddatawrite(0x00);      // blank vertical line padding
    for(i=0; i<5; i=i+1){ // 5 by 8 image
      lcddatawrite(ASCII[data - 0x20][i]);
    }
    lcddatawrite(0x00);     // blank vertical line padding
}
    Program 8.3. Low-level functions to output characters on the Nokia 5110 display
    (Nokia5110xxx.zip).
8.5. Scanned Keyboards
In a scanned interface, the switches are placed in a row/column matrix. In this way, many keys can
be interfaced with just a few I/O pins. Figure 8.15 shows a matrix keyboard with 4 rows and 4
columns. In general, if there are n rows and m columns, there could be n*m switches, but we would
need only n+m I/O pins. The at the four outputs signifies open collector (an output with two states
HiZ and low.)

Figure 8.15. A matrix keyboard interfaced to the microcomputer.
The computer drives one row at a time to zero, while leaving the other rows at HiZ. By reading the
column, the software can detect if a key is pressed in that row. The software “scans” the device by
checking all rows one by one. For most microcontrollers, the open collector functionality can be
implemented by toggling the direction register. Remember, open collectors have two states low and
off. The output low state can be made by making the pin an output and setting the output data to zero.
The output off state can be made by making the pin an input.
8.6. Binary actuators
8.6.1. Interface
Relays, solenoids, and DC motors are grouped together because their electrical interfaces are similar.
We can add speakers to this group if the sound is generated with a square wave. In each case, there is
a coil, and the computer must drive (or not drive) current through the coil. To interface a coil, we
consider voltage, current, and inductance. We need a power supply at the desired voltage
requirement of the coil. If the only available power supply is larger than the desired coil voltage, we
use a voltage regulator (rather than a resistor divider) to create the desired voltage. We connect the
power supply to the positive terminal of the coil, shown as +V in Figure 8.16. We will use a
transistor device to drive the negative side of the coil to ground. The computer can turn the current on
and off using this transistor. The second consideration is current. In particular, we must however
select the power supply and an interface device that can support the coil current. The 7406 is a digital
inverter with open collector outputs (HiZ and low). The 2N2222 is a bipolar junction transistor
(BJT), NPN type, with moderate current gain. The TIP120 is a Darlington transistor, also NPN type,
that can handle larger currents. The IRF540 is a MOSFET transistor that can handle even more
current. BJT and Darlington transistors are current-controlled (meaning the output is a function of the
input current), while the MOSFET is voltage-controlled (output is a function of input voltage). When
interfacing a coil to the microcontroller, we use information like Table 8.5 to select an interface
device capable of sinking the current necessary to activate the coil. It is a good design practice to
select a driver with a maximum current at least twice the required coil current. When the digital Port
output is high, the interface transistor is active, and current flows through the coil. When the digital
Port output is low, the transistor is not active, and no current flows through the coil.
           Device        Type                 Maximum
                                              current
           TM4C123       CMOS                 8 mA
           TM4C1294      CMOS                 12 mA
           7406/7407     TTL logic            40 mA
           2N2222        BJT NPN              500 mA
           TIP120        Darlington NPN       5A
           IRF540        power MOSFET         28 A
Table 8.5. Four possible devices that can be used to interface a coil compared to the
LM3S/TM4C.

Similar to the solenoid and EM relay, the DC motor has a frame that remains motionless, and an
armature that moves. In this case, the armature moves in a circular manner (shaft rotation). A DC
motor has an electro-magnet as well. When current flows through the coil, a magnetic force is created
causing a rotation of the shaft. Brushes positioned between the frame and armature are used to
alternate the current direction through the coil, so that a DC current generates a continuous rotation of
the shaft. When the current is removed, the magnetic force stops, and the shaft is free to rotate. The
resistance in the coil (R) comes from the long wire that goes from the + terminal to the – terminal of
the motor. The inductance in the coil (L) arises from the fact that the wire is wound into coils to
create the electromagnetics. The coil itself can generate its own voltage (emf) because of the
interaction between the electric and magnetic fields. If the coil is a DC motor, then the emf is a
function of both the speed of the motor and the developed torque (which in turn is a function of the
applied load on the motor.) Because of the internal emf of the coil, the current will depend on the
mechanical load. For example, a DC motor running with no load might draw 50 mA, but under load
(friction) the current may jump to 500 mA.

Figure 8.16. Binary interface to EM relay, solenoid, DC motor, or speaker.
Observation: It is important to realize that many devices cannot be connected directly up to the
microcontroller. In the specific case of motors, we need an interface that can handle the voltage and
current required by the motor.
The third consideration is inductance in the coil. The 1N914 diode in Figure 8.16 provides protection
from the back emf generated when the switch is turned off, and the large dI/dt across the inductor
induces a large voltage (on the negative terminal of the coil), according to V=L∙dI/dt. For example, if
you are driving 0.1 A through a 0.1 mH coil (Port output = 1) using a 2N2222, then disable the driver
(Port output = 0), the 2N2222 will turn off in about 20ns. This creates a dI/dt of at least 5·106 A/s,
producing a back emf of 500 V! The 1N914 diode shorts out this voltage, protecting the electronic
from potential damage. The 1N914 is called a snubber diode.

Example 8.1. Design an interface for two +12V 1A geared DC motors. These two motors will be
used to propel a robot with two independent drive wheels, shown back in Figure 8.1.
Solution: We will use two copies of the TIP120 circuit in Figure 8.16 because the TIP120 can sink at
least three times the current needed for this motor. We select a +12V supply and connect it to the +V
in the circuit. The needed base current is
Ib = Icoil /hfe = 1A/1000 = 1mA
The desired interface resistor.
Rb ≤ (VOH - Vbe)/ Ib = (5-2.5)/1mA = 2.5 k Ω
To cover the variability in hfe, we will use a 1 kΩ resistor instead of the 2.5 kΩ. The actual voltage on
the motor when active will be +12-2 = 10V. The coils and transistors can vary a lot, so it is
appropriate to experimentally verify the design by measuring the voltages and currents.

8.6.2. Electromagnetic and Solid State Relays
A relay is a device that responds to a small current or voltage change by activating switches or other
devices in an electric circuit. It is used to remotely switch signals or power. The input control is
usually electrically isolated from the output switch. The input signal determines whether the output
switch is open or closed. Relays are classified into three categories depending upon whether the
output switches power (i.e., high currents through the switch) or electronic signals (i.e., low currents
through the switch). Another difference is how the relay implements the switch. An electromagnetic
(EM) relay uses a coil to apply EM force to a contact switch that physically opens and closes. The
solid state relay (SSR) uses transistor switches made from solid state components to electronically
allow or prevent current flow across the switch). The three types are
           1. The classic general purpose relay has an EM coil and can switch AC power
           2. The reed relay has an EM coil and can switch low level DC electronic
signals
           3. The solid state relay (SSR) has an input triggered semiconductor power
switch
Three solid state relays are shown in Figure 8.17. Interfacing a SSR is identical to interfacing an
LED, which was previously described in Figure 2.9. A SSR interface was presented earlier as Figure
4.17. SSRs allow the microcontroller to switch AC loads from 1 to 30A. They are appropriate in
situations where the power is turned on and off many times.

Figure 8.17. Solid state relays can be used to control power to an AC appliance.
The input circuit of an EM relay is a coil with an iron core. The output switch includes two sets of
silver or silver-alloy contacts (called poles.) One set is fixed to the relay frame, and the other set is
located at the end of leaf spring poles connected to the armature. The contacts are held in the
“normally closed” position by the armature return spring. When the input circuit energizes the EM
coil, a “pull in” force is applied to the armature and the “normally closed” contacts are released
(called break) and the “normally open” contacts are connected (called make.) The armature pull in
can either energize or de-energize the output circuit depending on how it is wired. Relays are
mounted in special sockets, or directly soldered onto a PC board.
The number of poles (e.g., single pole, double pole, 3P, 4P etc.) refers to the number of switches that
are controlled by the input. The relay shown below is a double pole because it has two switches.
Single throw means each switch has two contacts that can be open or closed. Double throw means
each switch has three contacts. The common contact will be connected to one of the other two
contacts (but not both at the same time.) The parameters of the output switch include maximum AC
(or DC) power, maximum current, maximum voltage, on resistance, and off resistance. A DC signal
will weld the contacts together at a lower current value than an AC signal, therefore the maximum
ratings for DC are considerable smaller than for AC. Other relay parameters include turn on time, turn
off time, life expectancy, and input/output isolation. Life expectancy is measured in number of
operations. Figure 8.18 illustrates the various configurations available. The sequence of operation is
described in Table 8.6.

Figure 8.18. Standard relay configurations.

Form     Activation             Deactivation
         Sequence               Sequence
A        Make 1                 Break 1
B        Break 1                Make 1
C        Break 1, Make 2        Break 2, Make 1
D        Make 1, Break 2        Make 2, Break 1
E        Break 1, Make 2,
         Break 3
Table 8.6. Standard definitions for five relay configurations.

8.6.3. Solenoids
Solenoids are used in discrete mechanical control situations such as door locks, automatic disk/tape
ejectors, and liquid/gas flow control valves (on/off type). Much like an EM relay, there is a frame
that remains motionless, and an armature that moves in a discrete fashion (on/off). A solenoid has an
electro-magnet. When current flows through the coil, a magnetic force is created causing a discrete
motion of the armature. Each of the solenoids shown Figure 8.19 has a cylindrically-shaped armature
the moves in the horizontal direction relative to the photograph. The solenoid on the top is used in a
door lock, and the second from top is used to eject the tape from a video cassette player. When the
current is removed, the magnetic force stops, and the armature is free to move. The motion in the
opposite direction can be produced by a spring, gravity, or by a second solenoid.

Figure 8.19. Photo of four solenoids.
8.7. *Pulse-width modulation
In the previous interfaces the microcontroller was able to control electrical power to a device in a
binary fashion: either all on or all off. Sometimes it is desirable for the microcontroller to be able to
vary the delivered power in a variable manner. One effective way to do this is to use pulse width
modulation (PWM). The basic idea of PWM is to create a digital output wave of fixed frequency, but
allow the microcontroller to vary its duty cycle. Figure 8.20 shows various waveforms that are high
for H cycles and low for L cycles. The system is designed in such a way that H+L is constant
(meaning the frequency is fixed). The duty cycle is defined as the fraction of time the signal is high:

Hence, duty cycle varies from 0 to 1. We interface this digital output wave to an external actuator
(like a DC motor), such that power is applied to the motor when the signal is high, and no power is
applied when the signal is low. We purposely select a frequency high enough so the DC motor does
not start/stop with each individual pulse, but rather responds to the overall average value of the
wave. The average value of a PWM signal is linearly related to its duty cycle and is independent of
its frequency. Let P (P=V*I) be the power to the DC motor, shown in Figure 8.20, when the PP0
signal is high. Notice the circuit in Figure 8.20 is one of the examples previously described in Figure
8.16. Under conditions of constant speed and constant load, the delivered power to the motor is
linearly related to duty cycle.

Delivered Power =
Unfortunately, as speed and torque vary, the developed emf will affect delivered power.
Nevertheless, PWM is a very effective mechanism, allowing the microcontroller to adjust delivered
power. See PWMxxx.zip examples.

Figure 8.20. Pulse width modulation used to vary power delivered to a DC
 motor.
8.8. *Stepper motors
A motor can be evaluated in terms of its maximum speed (RPM), its torque (N-m), and the efficiency
in which it translates electrical power into mechanical power. Sometimes however, we wish to use a
motor to control the rotational position (θ=motor shaft angle) rather than to control the rotational
speed (ω=dθ/dt). Stepper motors are used in applications where precise positioning is more
important than high RPM, high torque, or high efficiency. Stepper motors are very popular for
microcontroller-based embedded systems because of their inherent digital interface. Figure 8.21
shows three stepper motors.

Figure 8.21. Photo of three stepper motors.
The larger motors provide more torque, but require more current. It is easy for a computer to control
both the position and velocity of a stepper motor in an open-loop fashion. Although the cost of a
stepper motor is typically higher than an equivalent DC permanent magnetic field motor, the overall
system cost is reduced because stepper motors may not require feedback sensors. They are used in
printers to move paper and print heads, tapes/disks to position read/write heads, and high-precision
robots. For example, the stepper motor shown previous in Figure 6.3 moves the R/W head from one
track to another on an audio tape recorder.
A bipolar stepper motor has two coils on the stator (the frame of the motor), labeled A and B in
Figures 8.22 and 8.23. Typically, there is always current flowing through both coils. When current
flows through both coils, the motor does not spin (it remains locked at that shaft angle). Stepper
motors are rated in their holding torque, which is their ability to hold stationary against a rotational
force (torque) when current is constantly flowing through both coils. To move a bipolar stepper, we
reverse the direction of current through one (not both) of the coils, see Figure 8.20. To move it again
we reverse the direction of current in the other coil. Remember, current is always flowing through
both coils. Let the direction of the current be signified by up and down. To make the current go up, the
microcontroller outputs a binary 01 to the interface. To make the current go down, it outputs a binary
10. Since there are 2 coils, four outputs will be required (e.g., 01012 means up/up). To spin the motor,
we output the sequence 01012, 01102, 10102, 10012… over and over. Each output causes the motor to
rotate a fixed angle. To rotate the other direction, we reverse the sequence (01012, 10012, 10102,
01102…). There is a North and a South permanent magnet on the rotor (the part that spins). The
amount of rotation caused by each current reversal is a fixed angle depending on the number of teeth
on the permanent magnets.

Figure 8.22. A bipolar stepper has 2 coils, but a unipolar stepper divides those
 two coils into four parts.
For example, the rotor in Figure 8.23 is drawn with one North tooth and one South tooth. If there are n
teeth on the South magnet (also n teeth on the North magnet), then the stepper will move at 90/n
degrees. This means there will be 4n steps per rotation. Because moving the motor involves
accelerating a mass (rotational inertia) against a load friction, after we output a value, we must wait
an amount of time before we can output again. If we output too fast, the motor does not have time to
respond. The speed of the motor is related to the number of steps per rotation and the time in between
outputs. For information on stepper motors see the data sheets web page at
http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~valvano/Datasheets/
Figure 8.23. To rotate this stepper by 18o, the interface flips the direction of one
 of the currents.
The unipolar stepper motor provides for bi-directional currents by using a center tap, dividing each
coil into two parts. In particular, coil A is split into coil A and A’, and coil B is split into coil B and
B’. The center tap is connected to the +V power source and the four ends of the coils can be
controlled with open collector drivers. Because only half of the electro-magnets are energized at one
time, a unipolar stepper has less torque than an equivalent-sized bipolar stepper. However, unipolar
steppers are easier to interface. For example, you can use four copies of the circuit in Figure 8.16 to
interface a stepper motor.
Figure 8.24 shows a circular linked graph containing the output commands to control a stepper motor.
This simple FSM has no inputs, four output bits and four states. There is one state for each output
pattern in the usual stepper sequence 5,6,10,9... The circular FSM is used to spin the motor is a
clockwise direction. Notice the 1-to-1 correspondence between the state graph in Figure 8.24and
the fsm[4] data structure in Program 8.3.

Figure 8.24. This stepper motor FSM has four states. The 4-bit outputs are given
 in binary.

Example 8.2. Design a stepper motor controller than spins the motor at 6 RPM.
Solution: We choose a stepper motor according to the speed and torque requirements of the system. A
stepper with 200 steps/rotation will provide a very smooth rotation while it spins. Just like the DC
motor, we need an interface that can handle the currents required by the coils. We can use a L293 to
interface either unipolar or bipolar steppers that require less than 1 A per coil. In general, the output
current of a driver must be large enough to energize the stepper coils. We control the interface using
an output port of the microcontroller, as shown in Figure 8.25. The circuit shows the interface of a
unipolar stepper, but the bipolar stepper interface is exactly the same except there is no +V
connection to the motor.
Figure 8.25. A unipolar stepper motor interfaced to a microcontroller.
The main program, Program 8.3, begins by initializing the Port D output and the state pointer, pt .
Every 50 ms the program outputs a new stepper command using the bit-specific address. The
function SysTick_Wait10ms() from Program 4.7 generates an appropriate delay between outputs to
the stepper. For a 200 step/rotation stepper, we need to wait 50 ms between outputs to spin at 6 RPM.
When calculating speed, it is important to keep track of the units.

Speed = (1 rotation/200 steps)*(1000ms/s)*(60sec/min)*(1step/50ms) = 6 RPM
This is a FSM with no input, because it always spins at 6 rps.
struct State{
  uint8_t Out;
  const struct State *Next;
  uint32_t Delay;
};
typedef const struct State StateType;
typedef StateType *StatePtr;
StateType fsm[4]={
  {10,&fsm[1],5},
  { 9,&fsm[2],5},
  { 5,&fsm[3],5},
  { 6,&fsm[0],5}
};
const struct State *Pt; // Current State
#define STEPPER (*((volatile uint32_t *)0x4000703C))
int main(void){
  PLL_Init();           // Program 4.6
  SysTick_Init();         // Program 4.7
  SYSCTL_RCGCGPIO_R |= 0x08; // 1) port D clock enabled
  Pt = &fsm[0];
                      // 2) no need to unlock PD3-0
    GPIO_PORTD_AMSEL_R &= ~0x0F;                // 3) disable analog function
    GPIO_PORTD_PCTL_R &= ~0x0000FFFF; // 4) GPIO
    GPIO_PORTD_DIR_R |= 0x0F; // 5) make PD3-0 out
    GPIO_PORTD_AFSEL_R &= ~0x0F;// 6) disable alt func on PD3-0
    GPIO_PORTD_DR8R_R |= 0x0F; // enable 8 mA drive on PD3-0
    GPIO_PORTD_DEN_R |= 0x0F; // 7) enable digital I/O on PD3-0
    while(1){
      STEPPER = Pt->Out;        // step motor
      SysTick_Wait10ms(Pt->Delay);
      Pt = Pt->Next;      // circular linked list
    }
}
    Program 8.3. Stepper motor controller.

To illustrate how easy it is to make changes to this implementation, let’s consider these three
modifications. To make it spin in the other direction, we simply change pointers to sequence in the
other direction. We could also add an input pin and have it spin clockwise or counterclockwise
depending on the input. Each would have two next states depending on the input. To make it spin at a
different rate, we change the wait time. To implement an eight-step sequence (the half-stepping
outputs are 5, 4, 6, 2, 10, 8, 9, 1…), we add the four new states and link all eight states in the desired
sequence.
Checkpoint 8.10: If the stepper motor were to have 36 steps per rotation, how fast would the motor
spin using Program 8.3?
Checkpoint 8.11: What would you change in Program 8.3 to make the motor spin at 30 RPM?
Performance tip: Use a DC motor for applications requiring high torque or high speed, and use a
stepper motor for applications requiring accurate positioning at low speed.
Performance tip: To get high torque at low speed, use a geared DC motor (the motor spins at high
speed, but the shaft spins slowly).
8.9. Exercises
8.1 Assume the baud rate is 9600 bits/sec. Show the serial port output versus time waveform that
occurs when the ASCII characters “ABC” are transmitted one right after another. What is the total
time to transmit the three characters?

8.2 Assume the baud rate is 19200 bits/sec. Show the serial port output versus time waveform that
occurs when the ASCII characters “125” are transmitted one right after another. What is the total time
to transmit the three characters?

8.3 Assume the bus clock is 50 MHz. Write an assembly language subroutine that initializes the serial
port to communicate at 9600 bits/sec, 8-bit data, 1 start bit, and 1 stop bit.

8.4 Considering the voltages shown in Figure 8.2, prove that you can connect an LM3S/TM4C output
to a 7404 input. Similarly, prove that you can connect a 7404 output to an LM3S/TM4C input. Which
logic family types shown in Figure 8.2 allow the output of the digital gate to be connected to an
LM3S/TM4C input?

D8.5 Design an interface for a 64-key keyboard, which is configured with 8 rows and 8 columns.
Show the hardware interface to the microcontroller. Show the initialization ritual. Assume there is
either no key or one key pressed. Write an input subroutine that returns the key number 0 to 63 if a key
is pressed or –1 if no key is pressed. Assume the keys do not bounce.

D8.6 Design an interface for a 20-key keyboard, which is configured with 4 rows and 5 columns.
Show the hardware interface to the microcontroller. Show the initialization ritual. Assume there is
either no key or one key pressed. Write an input subroutine that returns the key number 0 to 19 if a key
is pressed or –1 if no key is pressed. Assume the keys do not bounce.

D8.7 Interface an electromagnetic relay (2 wires) to the microcontroller. The coil requires 250 mA at
5V. Write a ritual to initialize the interface. Write a subroutine, called On , that activates the relay,
and a subroutine, called Off , that deactivates the relay.

D8.8 Interface a solenoid (2 wires) to the microcontroller. The coil requires 100 mA at 12V. Write a
ritual to initialize the interface. Write a subroutine, called Pulse , that activates the solenoid for 10 ms
(then shuts off). No interrupts needed, use SysTick_Wait .

D8.9 Interface a DC motor (2 wires) to the microcontroller. The coil requires 500 mA at 12V. In
addition to the motor output, there are two inputs. When the Go input is high the motor spins, (when
Go is low, no power is delivered). When the motor is spinning, the other input (Direction) determines
the CCW/CW rotational direction. Use a L293 H-bridge driver.
D8.10 There is a microcontroller digital output connected to a microcontroller digital input across a
long cable. The connection has an equivalent capacitance of 25 pF into a 10 MΩ resistance. The
capacitance results from the long cable, and the resistance results from the input impedance of the
receiver microcontroller. What is the time constant of this system? If we operate 10 times slower than
the time constant, what is the maximum period allowed for this system? List two ways to speed up
this transmission.

D8.11 Interface an 8-bit DAC, MAX549 to the LM3S/TM4C SSI port. Write two functions, one to
initialize and one to update both DAC analog outputs.

D8.12 Interface a unipolar stepper motor (5 wires) to the microcontroller. Each coil requires 500 mA
at 12V. There are 200 steps per revolution. There is also a switch input, if the input is low the motor
spins CW at 5 rps. If the input is high the motor spins CCW at 10 rps. Use SysTick_Wait and a FSM.

D8.13 Interface a unipolar stepper motor (5 wires) to the microcontroller. Each coil requires 100 mA
at 6V. There are 36 steps per revolution. There is also a switch input, if the input is low the motor
stops. If the input is high the motor spins at 10 rps. Use SysTick_Wait and a FSM.

D8.14 Interface a bipolar stepper motor (4 wires) to the microcontroller. Each coil requires 500 mA
at 12V. There are 200 steps per revolution. There is also a switch input, if the input is low the motor
stops. If the input is high the motor spins at 5 rps. Use SysTick_Wait and a FSM.
8.10. Lab Assignments
Lab 8.1 Keyboard Device Driver. Interface a matrix keyboard and design a software device driver to
support the functionality of the keyboard.
Lab 8.2 Stepper motor. Interface a stepper motor and three switches. Design a FSM controller that
spins the motor as specified by the switches. One switch determines CW or CCW rotation, one
switch determines fast or slow speed, and the third switch determines stop or go operation.
Lab 8.3 Calculator. Interface both a keyboard and an LCD. Design, implement and test a four-function
calculator using decimal fixed-point math.
Lab 8.4 LCD interface. Interface an LCD to the microcontroller. Develop a software driver (a set of
functions) similar to the Nokia5110 example project.
