Appendix 1. Glossary
1/f noise A fundamental noise in resistive devices arising from fluctuating conductivity. Same as pink
noise.
2’s complement (see two’s complement).
60 Hz noise An added noise from electromagnetic fields caused by either magnetic field induction or
capacitive coupling.
accumulator High-speed storage located in the processor used to perform arithmetic or logical
functions. The accumulators on the ARM Cortex M are Register R0 through R12.
accuracy A measure of how close our instrument measures the desired parameter referred to the
NIST.
acknowledge Clearing the interrupt flag bit that requested the interrupt.
actuator Electro-mechanical or electro-chemical device that allows computer commands to affect the
external world. Examples include motors, relays, solenoids, and speakers.
ADC Analog to digital converter, an electronic device that converts analog signals (e.g., voltage)
into digital form (i.e., integers). The ADC on the TM4C is 12 bits and can sample up to 1 M
samples/sec.
address bus A set of digital signals that connect the CPU, memory and I/O devices, specifying the
location to read or write for each bus cycle. See also control bus and data bus.
aliasing When digital values sampled at fs contain frequency components above 0.5 fs, then the
apparent frequency of the data is shifted into the 0 to 0.5 fs range. See Nyquist theory.
alternatives the total number of possibilities. E.g., an 8-bit number scheme can represent 256
different numbers. An 8-bit digital to analog converter (DAC) can generate 256 different analog
outputs.
arithmetic logic unit (ALU) Component of the processor that performs arithmetic and logic
operations.
arm Activate an individual trigger so that interrupts are requested when that trigger flag is set.
ASCII American Standard Code for Information Interchange, a code for representing characters,
symbols, and synchronization messages as 7 bit, 8-bit or 16-bit binary values.
assembler System software that converts an assembly language program (human readable format)
into object code (machine readable format).
assembly directive Operations included in the program that are not executed by the computer at run
time, but rather are interpreted by the assembler during the assembly process. Same as pseudo-op.
assembly listing Information generated by the assembler in human readable format, typically showing
the object code, the original source code, assembly errors, and the symbol table.
asynchronous protocol a protocol where the two devices have separate and distinct clocks
atomic Software execution that cannot be divided or interrupted. Once started an atomic operation
will run to its completion without interruption. On most computers the assembly language instructions
are atomic. All instructions on the ARM® Cortex™-Mprocessor are atomic except store and load
multiple, STM LDM .
availability The portion of the total time that the system is working. MTBF is the mean time between
failures, MTTR is the mean time to repair, and availability is MTBF/(MTBF+MTTR).
bandwidth The information transfer rate, the amount of data transferred per second. Same as
throughput.
basis Subset from which linear combinations can be used to reconstruct the entire set. The basis of
the 8-bit unsigned number system is 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128.
baud rate In general the baud rate is the total number of bits (information, overhead, and idle) per
time that are transmitted, in a modem application it is the total number of sounds per time are
transmitted.
bi-directional Digital signals that can be either input or output.
biendian The ability to process numbers in both big and little endian formats.
big endian Mechanism for storing multiple byte numbers such that the most significant byte exists first
(in the smallest memory address). See also little endian.
binary A system that has two states, on and off.
binary operation A function that produces its result given two input parameters. For example,
addition, subtraction, and multiplication are binary operations.
binary recursion A recursive technique that makes two calls to itself during the execution of the
function. See also recursion, linear recursion, and tail recursion.
bipolar stepper motor A stepper motor where the current flows in both directions (in/out) along the
interface wires; a stepper with 4 interface wires.
bit Basic unit of digital information taking on the value of either 0 or 1.
bit time The basic unit of time used in serial communication.
blind cycle A software/hardware synchronization method where the software waits a specified
amount of time for the hardware operation to complete. The software has no direct information
(blind) about the status of the hardware.
Board Support Package (BSP) A set of software routines that abstract the I/O hardware such that the
same high-level code can run on multiple computers. Same as hardware abstraction layer (HAL).
borrow During subtraction, if the difference is too small, then we use a borrow to pass the excess
information into the next higher place. For example, in decimal subtraction 36-27 requires a borrow
from the ones to tens place because 6-7 is too small to fit into the 0 to 9 range of decimal numbers.
break or trap A break or a trap is an instrument that halts the processor. When encountered it will
stop your program and jump into the debugger. Therefore, a break halts the software. The condition of
being in this state is also referred to as a break.
breakpoint The place where a break is inserted, the time when a break is encountered, or the time
period when a break is active.
buffered I/O A FIFO queue is placed in between the hardware and software in an attempt to
increase bandwidth by allowing both hardware and software to run in parallel.
burn The process of programming a ROM, PROM or EEPROM.
bus A set of digital signals that connect the CPU, memory and I/O devices, consisting of address
signals, data signals and control signals. See also address bus, control bus and data bus.
bus interface unit (BIU) Component of the processor that reads and writes data from the bus.
busy wait A software/hardware synchronization method where the software continuously reads the
hardware status waiting for the hardware operation to complete. The software usually performs no
work while waiting for the hardware. Same as gadfly. Same as polling.
byte Digital information containing 8 bits.In C, we use char or unsigned char to create a byte. In
C99, we use int8_t or uint8_t to create a byte.In both C and C99, we use char to create an 8-bit
ASCII character.
call graph A graphical way to define how the software/hardware modules interconnect. If a function
in module A invokes a function in module B, then there is an arrow from A to B.
carry During addition, if the sum is too large, then we use a carry to pass the excess information into
the next higher place. For example, in decimal addition 36+27 requires a carry from the ones to tens
place because 6+7 is too big to fit into the 0 to 9 range of decimal numbers.
ceiling Establishing an upper bound on the result of an operation.
checksum The simple sum of the data, usually in finite precision (e.g., 8, 16, 24 bits).
client A programmer/engineer who will use our software and/or hardware. This is typically not the
end-user of the final system rather it is another engineer who will integrate our software and/or
hardware into a larger system.
closed loop control system A control system that includes sensors to measure the current state
variables. These inputs are used to drive the system to the desired state.
CMOS A digital logic system called complementary metal oxide semiconductor. It has properties of
low power and small size. Its power is a function of the number of transitions per second.
cohesion A cohesive module is one such that all parts of the module are related to each other to
satisfy a common objective.
compiler System software that converts a high-level language program (human readable format) into
object code (machine readable format).
complex instruction set computer (CISC) A computer with many instructions, instructions that have
varying lengths, instructions that execute in varying times, many instructions can access memory,
instructions that can read and write memory in the same bus cycle, fewer and more specialized
registers, and many different types of addressing modes. Contrast to RISC.
concurrent programming A computer system that supports two or more software tasks that are
simultaneously active. Typically one task executes at a time, and there are mechanisms to suspend one
task and execute another task. Compare to parallel programming.
control bus A set of digital signals that connect the processor, memory and I/O devices, specifying
when to read or write for each bus cycle. See also address bus and data bus.
control unit (CU) Component of the processor that determines the sequence of operations.
CPU bound A situation where the input or output device is faster than the software. In other words it
takes less time for the I/O device to process data, than for the software to process data.
critical section Locations within a software module, which if an interrupt were to occur at one of
these locations, then an error could occur (e.g., data lost, corrupted data, program crash, etc.) Same
as vulnerable window.
cross-assembler An assembler that runs on one computer but creates object code for a different
computer.
cross-compiler A compiler that runs on one computer but creates object code for a different
computer.
cyber-physical system A system that performs a specific dedicated operation where the computer is
hidden or embedded inside the machine. The system has intelligence in the software and physical
connections to the real world. Same as embedded system.
DAC Digital to analog converter, an electronic device that converts digital signals (i.e., integers) to
analog form (e.g., voltage).
data acquisition system (DAS) A system that collects information, same as instrument.
data bus A set of digital signals that connect the CPU, memory and I/O devices, specifying the value
that is being read or written for each bus cycle. See also address bus and control bus.
data flow graph A block diagram of the system, showing the flow of information. Arrows represent
the flow of data from one module to another.
decibel A measure of the relative amplitude of two voltages: dB = 20 log10(V1/V2). It is also refers to
the relative amplitude of two powers: dB = 10 log10(P1/P2).
denormalized A denormalized number is an unnormalized floating-point number with an exponent of
the smallest possible value. An unnormalized number has a mantissa value less than one. The
mantissa of a normalized floating-point number is greater than or equal to 1, but strictly less than 2.
desk-checking or dry run We perform a desk check (or dry run) by determining in advance, either by
analytical algorithm or explicit calculations, the expected outputs of strategic intermediate stages and
final results for typical inputs. We then run our program and compare the actual outputs with this
template of expected results.
device driver A collection of software routines that perform I/O functions.
digital signal processing Processing of data with digital hardware or software after the signal has
been sampled by the ADC, e.g., filters, detection and compression/decompression.
direction register A bi-directional port configuration register that determines if the port will be an
input or an output.
disarm Deactivate a trigger flag so that interrupts are not requested when that trigger flag is set.
DMA Direct Memory Access is a software/hardware synchronization method where the hardware
itself causes a data transfer between the I/O device and memory at the appropriate time when data
needs to be transferred. The software usually can perform other work while waiting for the hardware.
No software action is required for each individual byte.
double byte Two bytes containing 16 bits. Same as halfword.
double-pole switch Two separate and complete switches that are activated together, same as two-
pole. Contrast with single-pole.
double-throw switch A switch with three contact connections. The center contact will be connected
exactly one of the other two contacts. Contrast with single-throw.
download The process of transferring object code from the host (e.g., the PC) to the target
microcontroller.
drop-out An error that occurs after a right shift or a divide, and the consequence is that an
intermediate result loses its ability to represent all of the values. E.g., I=100*(N/51) can only result in
the values 0, 100, or 200, whereas I=(100*N)/51 properly calculates the desired result.
duty cycle For a periodic digital wave, it is the percentage of time the signal is high.
dynamic efficiency A measure of how fast the program executes.
dynamic RAM Volatile read/write storage built from a capacitor and a single transistor having a low
cost, but requiring refresh. Contrast with static RAM.
EEPROM Electrically erasable programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and easy to
reprogram.
effective address register (EAR) A register that contains the address for the current memory cycle.
embedded computer system A system that performs a specific dedicated operation where the
computer is hidden or embedded inside the machine. The system has intelligence in the software and
physical connections to the real world. Same as cyber-physical system.
emulator An in-circuit emulator is an expensive debugging hardware tool that mimics the processor
pin outs. To debug with an emulator, you would remove the processor chip and attach the emulator
cable into the processor socket. The emulator would sense the processor input signals and recreate
the processor outputs signals on the socket as if a real chip were actually there running at full speed.
Inside the emulator you have internal read/write access to the registers and processor state. Most
emulators allow you to visualize/record strategic information in real time without halting the program
execution. You can also remove ROM chips and insert the connector of a ROM-emulator. This type of
emulator is less expensive, and it allows you to debug ROM-based software systems.
EPROM programmer System hardware/software that burns the object code into the
microcomputer’s EPROM.
EPROM Same as PROM. Electrically programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and
requires external devices to erase and reprogram. It is usually erased using UV light.
erase The process of clearing the information in a PROM or EEPROM. The information bits are
usually all set to logic 1.
EVB Evaluation Board, a product used to develop microcomputer software.
even parity A communication protocol where the number of ones in the data plus a parity bit is an
even number. Contrast with odd parity.
fan out The number of inputs that a single output can drive if the devices are all in the same logic
family.
filter In the debugging context, a filter is a Boolean function or conditional test used to make run-time
decisions. For example, if we print information only if two variables x, y are equal, then the
conditional (x==y) is a filter. Filters can involve hardware status as well.
Finite State Machine (FSM) An abstract design method to build a machine with inputs and outputs.
The machine can be in one of a finite number of states. Which state the system is in represents
memory of previous inputs. The output and next state are a function of the input. There may be time
delays as well.
fixed point A technique where calculations involving nonintegers are performed using a sequence of
integer operations. E.g., 0.123*x is performed in decimal fixed point as (123*x)/1000 or in binary
fixed point as (126*x)>>10.
flash EEPROM Electrically erasable programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and easy
to reprogram. Flash EEPROMs are typically larger than regular EEPROM.
floating A logic state where the output device does not drive high or pull low. The outputs of open
collector and tristate devices can be in the floating state. Same as HiZ.
floor Establishing a lower bound on the result of an operation.
fork Used in parallel programming to create additional software tasks that will run in parallel. See
join.
frame A complete and distinct packet of bits occurring in a serial communication channel.
framing error An error when the receiver expects a stop bit (1) and the input is 0.
friendly Friendly software modifies just the bits that need to be modified, leaving the other bits
unchanged.
full-duplex channel Hardware that allows bits (information, error checking, synchronization or
overhead) to transfer simultaneously in both directions. Contrast with simplex and half-duplex
channels.
full-duplex communication A system that allows information (data, characters) to transfer
simultaneously in both directions.
functional debugging The process of detecting, locating, or correcting functional and logical errors
in a program and the process of instrumenting a program for such purposes is called functional
debugging or often simply debugging. Contrast with performance debugging.
gadfly A software/hardware synchronization method where the software continuously reads the
hardware status waiting for the hardware operation to complete. The software usually performs no
work while waiting for the hardware. Same as busy wait. Same as polling
general purpose computer system A system like the PC or Macintosh with a keyboard, disk and
display that can be programmed for a wide variety of purposes.
half-duplex channel Hardware that allows bits (information, error checking, synchronization or
overhead) to transfer in both directions, but in only one direction at a time. Contrast with simplex and
full-duplex channels.
half-duplex communication a system that allows information to transfer in both directions, but in
only one direction at a time.
halfword Two bytes containing 16 bits. Same as double byte.In C, we use short or unsigned short
to create a halfword. In C99, we use int16_t or uint16_t to create a halfword.
handshake A software/hardware synchronization method where control and status signals go both
directions between the transmitter and receiver. The communication is interlocked meaning each
device will wait for the other.
hard real-time system as one that can guarantee that a process will complete a critical task within a
certain specified range. In data acquisition system, hard real-time means there is an upper bound on
the latency between when a sample is supposed to be taken (every 1/fs) and when the ADC
conversion is actually started. Hard real-time also implies that no ADC samples are missed.
heartbeat A debugging monitor, such as a flashing LED, we add for the purpose of seeing if our
program is running.
hexadecimal A number system that uses base 16.
HiZ A logic state where the output device does not drive high or pull low. The outputs of open
collector and tristate devices can be in the HiZ state. Same as floating.
hold time When latching data into a device with a rising or falling edge of a clock, the hold time is
the time after the active edge of the clock that the data must continue to be valid. Contrast with setup
time.
hysteresis A condition when the output of a system depends not only on the input, but also on the
previous outputs, e.g., a transducer that follows a different response curve when the input is
increasing than when the input is decreasing.
I/O bound A situation where the input or output device is slower than the software. In other words it
takes longer for the I/O device to process data, than for the software to process data.
I/O device A computer component capable of bringing information from the external environment into
the computer (input device), or sending data out from the computer to the external environment (output
device.)
I/O port A hardware device that connects the computer with external components.
IIH Input current when the signal is high.
IIL Input current when the signal is low.
immediate An addressing mode where the operand is a fixed data or address value.
impedance The ratio of the effort (voltage, force, pressure) divided by the flow (current, velocity,
flow).
incremental control system A control system where the actuator has many possible states, and the
system increments or decrements the actuator value depending on either in error is positive or
negative.
indexed An addressing mode where the data or address value for the instruction is located in
memory pointed to by an index register.
infinite impulse response filter (IIR) is a digital filter where the output is a function of an infinite
number of past data samples, usually by making the filter output a function of previous filter outputs.
input capture A mechanism to set a flag and capture the current time (TCNT value) on the rising,
falling or rising&falling edge of an external signal. The input capture event can also request an
interrupt.
input impedance The input voltage divided by the input current. When a 3V input is applied to the
TM4C123 ADC, a maximum of 2µA will flow into the pin. Thus, Zin= 3V/2µA = 1.5MΩ.
instruction register (IR) Register in the control unit that contains the op code for the current
instruction.
instrument An instrument is the code injected into a program for debugging or profiling. This code is
usually extraneous to the normal function of a program and may be temporary or permanent.
Instruments injected during interactive sessions are considered to be temporary because these
instruments can be removed simply by terminating a session. Instruments injected in source code are
considered to be permanent because removal requires editing and recompiling the source. An
example of a temporary instrument occurs when the debugger replaces a regular op code with a
breakpoint instruction. This temporary instrument can be removed dynamically by restoring the
original op code. A print statement added to your source code is an example of a permanent
instrument, because removal requires editing and recompiling.
instrument A system that collects information, same as data acquisition system.
instrumentation The process of injecting or inserting an instrument.
interrupt A software/hardware synchronization method where the hardware causes a special
software program (interrupt handler) to execute when its operation to complete. The software usually
can perform other work while waiting for the hardware.
interrupt flag A status bit that is set by the hardware to signify an external event has occurred. Same
as trigger flag.
interrupt mask A control bit that, if programmed to 1, will cause an interrupt request when the
associated flag is set. Same as arm.
interrupt polling A software function to look and see which of the potential sources requested the
interrupt.
interrupt service routine (ISR) Program that runs as a result of an interrupt.
interrupt vector 32-bit values at the beginning of memory specifying where the software should
execute after an interrupt request. There is a unique interrupt vector for each type of interrupt.
intrusive A characteristic of a debugging instrument when the presence of the collection of
information itself does significantly affect the parameters being measured.
IOH Output current when the signal is high. This is the maximum current that has a voltage above VOH.
IOL Output current when the signal is low. This is the maximum current that has a voltage below VOL.
join Used in parallel programming to combine two or more software tasks into one. Execution after a
join will continue when all software tasks above the join are complete. See fork.
kibibit Stands for kilo-binary-bits, which is 1024 bits or 128 bytes, abbreviated Kibit.
kibibyte Stands for kilo-binary-bytes, which is 1024 bytes or 8192 bits, abbreviated KiB.
latch As a noun, it means a register. As a verb, it means to store data into the register.
latched input port An input port where the signals are latched (saved) on an edge of an associated
strobe signal.
latency In this book latency usually refers to the response time of the computer to external events.
For example, latency is the time between new input becoming available and the time the input is read
by the computer. For example, the time between an output device becoming idle and the time the input
is the computer writes new data to it. There can also be a latency for an I/O device, which is the
response time of the external I/O device hardware to a software command. For a data acquisition
system, the time between the time when the signal should be sampled and the time the ADC is actually
started.
LCD Liquid Crystal Display, where the computer controls the reflectance or transmittance of the
liquid crystal, characterized by its flexible display patterns, low power, low cost, and slow speed.
LED Light Emitting Diode, where the computer controls the electrical power to the diode,
characterized by its simple display patterns, medium power, and high speed.
linear recursion A recursive technique that makes only one call to itself during the execution of the
function. Linear recursive functions are easier to implement iteratively. We draw the execution pattern
as a straight or linear path. See also recursion, binary recursion, and tail recursion.
little endian Mechanism for storing multiple byte numbers such that the least significant byte exists
first (in the smallest memory address). Contrast with big endian.
loader System software that places the object code into the microcomputer’s memory. If the object
code is stored in EEPROM, the loader is also called an EEPROM programmer.
logic analyzer A hardware debugging tool that allows you to visualize many digital logic signals
versus time. Real logic analyzers have at least 32 channels and can have up to 200 channels, with
sophisticated techniques for triggering, saving and analyzing the real-time data.
LSB The least significant bit in a number system is the bit with the smallest significance, usually the
right-most bit. With signed or unsigned integers the significance of the LSB is 1.
maintenance Process of verifying, changing, correcting, enhancing, and extending a system.
mark A digital value of true or logic 1 used in serial communication. Contrast with space.
mask As a verb, mask is the operation that selects certain bits out of many bits, using the logical and
operation. The bits that are not being selected will be cleared to zero. When used as a noun, mask
refers to the specific bits that are being selected.
Mealy FSM A FSM where the both the output and next state are a function of the input and state
measurand A signal measured by a data acquisition system.
mebibit Stands for mega-binary-bits, which is 1,048,576 bits, abbreviated Mibit.
mebibyte Stands for mega-binary-bytes, which is 1,048,576 bytes, abbreviated MiB.
memory A computer component capable of storing and recalling information.
memory-mapped I/O A configuration where the I/O devices are interfaced to the computer in a
manner identical to the way memories are connected, from an interfacing perspective I/O devices and
memory modules shares the same bus signals, from a programmer’s point of view the I/O devices
exist as locations in the memory map, and I/O device access can be performed using any of the
memory access instructions.
Mibit Stands for mega-binary-bits, which is 1,048,576 bits, same as mebibit.
MiB Stands for mega-binary-bytes, which is 1,048,576 bytes, same as mebibyte.
microcomputer An electronic device capable of performing input/output functions containing a
microprocessor, memory, and I/O devices.
microcontroller A single chip microcomputer like the Texas Instruments TM4C123, Freescale 9S12,
Intel 8051, Atmel ATmega328, Atmel SAM3X8E, PIC16, or the Texas Instruments MSP430.
minimally intrusive A characteristic of a debugging instrument when the presence of the collection of
information itself has a small but insignificant effect on the parameters being measured.
mnemonic The symbolic name of an operation code, like mov str push .
monitor or debugger window A monitor is a debugger feature that allows us to passively view
strategic software parameters during the real-time execution of our program. An effective monitor is
one that has minimal effect on the performance of the system. When debugging software on a
windows-based machine, we can often set up a debugger window that displays the current value of
certain software variables.
MSB The most significant bit in a number system is the bit with the greatest significance, usually the
left-most bit. If the number system is signed, then the MSB signifies positive (0) or negative (1).
multiple access circular queue MACQ A data structure used in data acquisition systems to hold the
current sample and a finite number of previous samples.
multi-threaded A system with multiple threads (e.g., main program and interrupt service routines)
that cooperate towards a common overall goal.
negative logic A signal where the true value has a lower voltage than the false value, in digital logic
true is 0 and false is 1, in digital logic true is less than 0.7 volts and false is greater than 2 volts, in
RS232 protocol true is -5.5 volts and false is +5.5 volts. Contrast with positive logic.
nibble 4 binary bits or 1 hexadecimal digit.
nonatomic Software execution that can be divided or interrupted. Most lines of C code require
multiple assembly language instructions to execute, therefore an interrupt may occur in the middle of a
line of C code. The instructionsstore and load multiple, STM LDM , are nonatomic.
nonintrusive A characteristic of a debugging instrument when the presence of the collection of
information itself does not affect the parameters being measured. Nonintrusiveness is the
characteristic or quality of a debugger that allows the software/hardware system to operate normally
as if the debugger did not exist. Intrusiveness is used as a measure of the degree of perturbation
caused in program performance by an instrument. For example, a print statement added to your source
code and single-stepping are very intrusive because they significantly affect the real-time interaction
of the hardware and software. When a program interacts with real-time events, the performance is
significantly altered. On the other hand, an instrument with outputs strategic information on LEDs (that
requires just 1 µs to execute) is much less intrusive. A logic analyzer that passively monitors the
address and data by is completely nonintrusive. An in-circuit emulator is also nonintrusive because
the software input/output relationships will be the same with and without the debugging tool.
noninvasive/invasive Noninvasiveness is the characteristic or quality of a debugger that makes the
order of invocation immaterial. The debugger and the user program co-exist in the same global
environment. On the other hand, an invasive debugger requires the user program to execute within an
environment defined by the debugger. The debugger is invoked first and the program is then loaded
either by the debugger or by the user from within the debugger. Invasiveness is also a measure of the
degree of source code modification to debug or monitor a program. A resident debugger like the
serial monitor is invasive because it exists first and then your program is loaded on top of it. This
program development environment is invasive because the UART interrupts with the serial monitor is
different from the eventual the single chip embedded application. An in-circuit emulator is non-
invasive because it can coexist (be added or deleted) from our system without changing the way our
system runs.
nonreentrant A software module that once started by one thread, cannot be interrupted and executed
by a second thread. Nonreentrant modules usually involve nonatomic accesses to global variables or
I/O ports: read modify write, write followed by read, or a multistep write.
nonvolatile A condition where information is not lost when power is removed. When power is
restored, then the information is in the state that occurred when the power was removed.
nonvolatile RAM Read/write storage that achieves its long term storage ability because it includes a
battery.
normalized The mantissa of a normalized floating-point number is greater than or equal to 1, but
strictly less than 2.
Nyquist Theorem If a input signal is captured by an ADC at the regular rate of fs samples/sec, then
the digital sequence can accurately represent the 0 to ½fs frequency components of the original signal.
object code Programs in machine readable format created by the compiler or assembler.
odd parity A communication protocol where the number of ones in the data plus a parity bit is an odd
number. Contrast with even parity.
op code opcode or operation codeA specific instruction executed by the computer. The op code
along with the operand completely specify the function to be performed. In assembly language
programming, the op code is represented by its mnemonic, like LDR . During execution, the op code
is stored as a machine code loaded in memory.
open collector A digital logic output that has two states low and HiZ. On CMOS circuits, it is
sometimes called open drain.
open drain A CMOS digital logic output that has two states low and HiZ. Often used interchangeably
with the term open collector.
operand The second part of an instruction that specifies either the data or the address for that
instruction. An assembly instruction typically has an op code and an operand (e.g., #55). Instructions
that use inherent addressing mode have no operand field.
operating system System software for managing computer resources and facilitating common
functions like input/output, memory management, and file system.
oscilloscope A hardware debugging tool that allows you to visualize one or two analog signals
versus time.
output impedance A specification of how strong an output signal is. Zout is the open circuit output
voltage divided by the short circuit output current. In the 2-bit DAC made with a 10kΩ and a 20kΩ
resistor, if the both digital signals are high, the open circuit voltage is 3.3V. If the output of the DAC is
shorted, 3.3V/10kΩ=0.33mA will flow through the 10kΩ, and 3.3V/20kΩ=0.165mA will flow
through the 20kΩ, making a total short circuit current of about 0.5mA. Zout = 3.3V/0.5mA = 6.6kΩ
overflow An error that occurs when the result of a calculation exceeds the range of the number
system. For example, with 8-bit unsigned integers, 200+57 will yield the incorrect result of 1.
overrun error An error that occurs when the receiver gets a new frame but the data register and shift
register already have information.
parallel port A port where all signals are available simultaneously. In this book the parallel ports
are 8 bits wide. Some ports have less than 8 bits.
parallel programming A computer system that supports simultaneous execution of two or more
software tasks. Compare to concurrent programming.
PC-relative An addressing mode where the effective address is calculated by its position relative to
the current value of the program counter.
performance debugging or profiling The process of acquiring or modifying timing characteristics
and execution patterns of a program and the process of instrumenting a program for such purposes is
called performance debugging or profiling. Contrast with functional debugging.
periodic polling A software/hardware synchronization method that is a combination of interrupts and
busy wait. An interrupt occurs at a regular rate (periodic) independent of the hardware status. The
interrupt handler checks the hardware device (polls) to determine if its operation is complete. The
software usually can perform other work while waiting for the hardware.
personal computer system A small general purpose computer system having a price low enough for
individual people to afford and used for personal tasks.
port External pins through which the microcomputer can perform input/output. Same as I/O port.
positive logic a signal where the true value has a higher voltage than the false value, in digital logic
true is 1 and false is 0, in digital logic true is greater than 2 volts and false is less than 0.7 volts, in
RS232 protocol true is +5.5 volts and false is -5.5 volts. Contrast with negative logic.
precision For an input signal, it is the number of distinguishable input signals that can be reliably
detected by the measurement. For an output signal, it is the number of different output parameters that
can be produced by the system. For a number system, precision is the number of distinct or different
values of a number system in units of “alternatives”. The precision of a number system is also the
number of binary digits required to represent all its numbers in units of “bits”.
priority When two requests for service are made simultaneously, priority determines which order to
process them. If we are processing a low priority task and a higher priority request is received, we
will suspend the low priority task, execute the high priority task to completion, and then return to the
lower priority task.
private Can be accessed only by software functions in that module. Contrast with public.
private variable A variable that is used by a single module, and not shared with other modules.
process The execution of software that does not necessarily cooperate with other processes. Contrast
with thread. Processes generally do not share global memory or I/O devices.
producer-consumer A multi-threaded system where the producers generate new data, and the
consumers process or output the data.
program counter (PC) A register in the processor that points to the memory containing the instruction
to execute next.
program status register (PSR) Register in the processor that contains the status of the previous ALU
operation, as well as some operating mode flags such as the interrupt enable bit.
PROM Same as EPROM. Programmable read only memory that is nonvolatile and requires external
devices to erase and reprogram. It is usually erased using UV light. Contrast with EEPROM.
promotion Increasing the precision of a number for convenience or to avoid overflow errors during
calculations.
pseudo-code A shorthand for describing a software algorithm. The exact format is not defined, but
many programmers use their favorite high-level language syntax (like C) without paying rigorous
attention to the punctuation.
pseudo op Operations included in the program that are not executed by the computer at run time, but
rather are interpreted by the assembler during the assembly process. Same as assembly directive.
public Can be accessed by any software module. Contrast with private.
public variable A variable that is shared by multiple programs or threads.
pulse width modulation A technique to deliver a variable signal (voltage, power, and energy) using
an on/off signal with a variable percentage of time the signal is on (duty cycle). Same as variable
duty cycle.
RAM Random Access Memory, a type of memory where the information can be stored and retrieved
easily and quickly. Since it is volatile the information is lost when power is removed.
range Includes both the smallest possible and the largest possible signal (input or output). The
difference between the largest and smallest input that can be measured by the instrument. The units are
in the units of the measurand. When precision is in alternatives, range=precision•resolution.
real-time A system that can guarantee an upper bound (worst case) on latency.
real-time computer system A system where time-critical operations occur when needed.
recursion A programming technique where a function calls itself. See also linear recursion, tail
recursion, and binary recursion.
reduced instruction set computer (RISC) A computer with a few instructions, instructions with
fixed lengths, instructions that execute in 1 or 2 bus cycles, only load and store can access memory,
instructions that cannot read and write memory in the same bus cycle, many identical general purpose
registers, and a limited number of addressing modes. Contrast to CISC.
reentrant A software module that can be started by one thread, interrupted and executed by a second
thread. A reentrant module allows multiple threads to properly execute the desired function.
registers High-speed storage located in the processor. The registers in the ARM ® Cortex™-M
processor include R0 through R15.
reproducibility (or repeatability) A parameter specifying how consistent over time the measurement
is when the input remains fixed.
requirements document A formal description of what the system will do in a very complete way, but
not including how it will be done. It should be unambiguous, complete, verifiable, and modifiable.
reset vector The 32-bit value at memory locations 4–7 specifying where the software should start
after power is turned on or after a hardware reset.
resolution For an input signal, it is the smallest change in the input parameter that can be reliably
detected by the measurement. For an output signal, it is the smallest change in the output parameter
that can be produced by the system, range equals precision times resolution, where precision is given
in alternatives.
ritual Software, usually executed once at the beginning of the program, that defines the operational
modes of the I/O ports.
ROM Read Only Memory, a type of memory where the information is programmed into the device
once, but can be accessed quickly. It is low cost, must be purchased in high volume, and can be
programmed only once. See also PROM, EEPROM, and flash EEPROM.
roundoff The error that occurs in a fixed-point or floating-point calculation when the least significant
bits of an intermediate calculation are discarded so the result can fit into the finite precision.
sampling rate The rate at which data is collected in a data acquisition system. Sampling rate applies
to both the ADC while collecting data, and the DAC while outputting data.
scan or scanpoint Any instrument used to produce a side effect without causing a break (halt) is a
scan. Therefore, a scan may be used to gather data passively or to modify functions of a program.
Examples include software added to your source code that simply outputs or modifies a global
variable without halting. A scanpoint is triggered in a manner similar to a breakpoint but a scanpoint
simply records data at that time without halting execution.
scope A logic analyzer or an oscilloscope, hardware debugging tools that allows you to visualize
multiple digital or analog signals versus time.
semaphore A system function with two operations (wait and signal) that provide for thread
synchronization and resource sharing.
sensitivity The sensitivity of a transducer is the slope of the output versus input response. The
sensitivity of a data acquisition system that detects events is the percentage of actual events that are
properly recognized by the system.
serial communication A process where information is transmitted one bit at a time.
serial peripheral interface (SPI) device to transmit data with synchronous serial communication
protocol. The clock is shared on both sides. Same as synchronous serial interface (SSI).
serial port An I/O port where the bits are input or output one at a time.
setup time When latching data into a device with a rising or falling edge of a clock, the setup time is
the time before the active edge of the clock that the data must be valid. Contrast with hold time.
signed two’s complement binary A mechanism to represent signed integers where 1 followed by all
0’s is the most negative number, all 1’s represents the value -1, all 0’s represents the value 0, and 0
followed by all 1’s is the largest positive number.
sign-magnitude binary A mechanism to represent signed integers where the most significant bit is set
if the number is negative, and the remaining bits represent the magnitude as an unsigned binary.
simplex channel Hardware that allows bits (information, error checking, synchronization or
overhead) to transfer only in one direction. Contrast with half-duplex and full-duplex channels.
simplex communication A system that allows information to transfer only in one direction.
simulator A simulator is a software application, which simulates or mimics the operation of a
processor or computer system. Most simulators recreate only simple I/O ports and often do not
effectively duplicate the real-time interactions of the software/hardware interface. On the other hand,
they do provide a simple and interactive mechanism to test software. Simulators are especially useful
when learning a new language, because they provide more control and access to the simulated
machine, than one normally has with real hardware.
single-pole switch One switch that acts independent from other switches in the system. Contrast with
double-pole.
single-throw switch A switch with two contact connections. The two contacts may be connected or
disconnected. Contrast with double-throw.
software interrupt vector The 32-bit value at memory locations in low memory specifying where
the software should go after executing a software interrupt instruction.
software maintenance Process of verifying, changing, correcting, enhancing, and extending software.
source code Programs in human readable format created with an editor.
space A digital value of false or logic 0 used in serial communication. Contrast with mark.
specificity The specificity of a transducer is the relative sensitivity of the device to the signal of
interest versus the sensitivity of the device to other unwanted signals. The specificity of a data
acquisition system that detects events is the percentage of events detected by the system that are
actually true.
stabilize The process of stabilizing a software system involves specifying all its inputs. When a
system is stabilized, the output results are consistently repeatable. Stabilizing a system with multiple
real-time events, like input devices and time-dependent conditions, can be difficult to accomplish. It
often involves replacing input hardware with sequential reads from an array or disk file.
stack Last in first out data structure located in RAM and used to temporarily save information.
stack pointer (SP) A register in the processor that points to the RAM location of the stack.
start bit An overhead bit(s) specifying the beginning of the frame, used in serial communication to
synchronize the receiver shift register with the transmitter clock. See also stop bit, even parity and
odd parity.
static efficiency A measure of program size, which is number of memory bytes required. In an
embedded system we need to specify both RAM size for variables/stack and ROM size for
programs/constants.
static RAM Volatile read/write storage built from three transistors having fast speed, and not
requiring refresh. Contrast with dynamic RAM.
stepper motor A motor that moves in discrete steps.
stop bit An overhead bit(s) specifying the end of the frame, used in serial communication to separate
one frame from the next. See also start bit, even parity and odd parity.
string A sequence of ASCII characters, usually terminated with a zero.
symbol table A mapping from a symbolic name to its corresponding 32-bit address, generated by the
assembler in pass one and displayed in the listing file.
synchronous protocol a system where the two devices share the same clock.
synchronous serial interface (SSI) device to transmit data with synchronous serial communication
protocol. The clock is shared on both sides. Same as serial peripheral interface (SPI).
tachometer a sensor that measures the revolutions per second of a rotating shaft.
tail recursion A technique where the recursive call occurs as the last action taken by the function. See
also recursion, binary recursion, and linear recursion.
thread The execution of software that cooperates with other threads. A thread embodies the action of
the software. One concept describes a thread as the sequence of operations including the input and
output data. Contrast with process.
throughput The information transfer rate, the amount of data transferred per second. Same as
bandwidth.
time constant The time to reach 63.2% of the final output after the input is instantaneously increased.
time profile and execution profile Time profile refers to the timing characteristic of a program and
execution profile refers to the execution pattern of a program.
toggle Change 0 to 1 or 1 to 0. A toggle switch is one that if it is off when you push it, it will turn on.
If it is on when you push it, it will turn off.
transducer A device that converts one type of signal into another type.
trigger flag A status bit that is set by the hardware to signify an external event has occurred. Same as
interrupt flag.
tristate The state of a tristate logic output when HiZ or not driven.
tristate logic A digital logic device that has three output states low, high, and HiZ.
truncation The act of discarding bits as a number is converted from one format to another.
two-pole switch Two separate and complete switches, which are activated together, same as double-
pole.
two’s complement A number system used to define signed integers. The MSB defines whether the
number is negative (1) or positive (0). To negate a two’s complement number, one first complements
(flip from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0) each bit, then add 1 to the number.
unary operation A function that produces its result given a single input parameter. For example,
negate, increment, and decrement are unary operations.
unbuffered I/O The hardware and software are tightly coupled so that both wait for each other
during the transmission of data.
unipolar stepper motor A stepper motor where the current flows in only one direction (on/off) along
the interface wires; a stepper with 5 or 6 interface wires.
universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter (UART) A device to transmit data with asynchronous
serial communication protocol.
unnormalized An unnormalized floating-point number has a mantissa value less than one. The
mantissa of a normalized floating-point number is greater than or equal to 1, but strictly less than 2.
unsigned binary A mechanism to represent unsigned integers where all 0’s represents the value 0,
and all 1’s represents is the largest positive number.
vector An address at the end of memory containing the location of the interrupt service routines. See
also reset vector and interrupt vector.
VIH If the input voltage is above this value, the input is considered high.
VIL If the input voltage is below this value, the input is considered low.
VOH The smallest possible output voltage when the signal is high, and the current is less than IOH.
VOL The largest possible output voltage when the signal is low, and the current is less than IOL.
volatile A condition where information is lost when power is removed. In C, volatile tells the
compiler, the value may change beyond the control of the software itself.
vulnerable window Locations within a software module, which if an interrupt were to occur at one
of these locations, then an error could occur (e.g., data lost, corrupted data, program crash, etc.)
Same as critical section.
white noise A fundamental noise in resistive devices arising from the uncertainty about the position
and velocity of individual molecules. Same as Johnson noise and thermal noise.
word Four bytes containing 32 bits. In C, we use long or unsigned long to create a word. In C99, we
use int32_t or uint32_t to create a word.
workstation A powerful general purpose computer system having a price in the $3K to 50K range
and used for handling large amounts of data and performing many calculations.
XON/XOFF A protocol used by printers to feedback the printer status to the computer. XOFF is sent
from the printer to the computer in order to stop data transfer, and XON is sent from the printer to the
computer in order to resume data transfer.
