Preface

This is the second edition of The Garbage Collection Handbook. How is it that, more than sixty
years after the introduction of garbage collection in 1958 and exactly thirty years1 since
the first International Workshop on Memory Management (the forerunner of the International
Symposium on Memory Management) in 1992, garbage collection in particular and memory
management more generally remain such vital topics of research and development?
    Garbage collection was born in the Lisp programming language. McCarthy [1978] rec-
ollects that the first online demonstration was to an MIT Industrial Liaison Symposium. It
was important to make a good impression but, unfortunately, midway through the demon-
stration, the IBM 7042 exhausted (all of!) its 32k words of memory — McCarthy’s team had
omitted to refresh the Lisp core image from a previous rehearsal — and its Flexowriter
printed, at ten characters per second,

       THE GARBAGE COLLECTOR HAS BEEN CALLED. SOME INTERESTING
       STATISTICS ARE AS FOLLOWS:

and so on at great length, taking all the time remaining for the demonstration. McCarthy
and the audience collapsed in laughter. Over sixty years on now, garbage collection is no
joke but an essential component of modern programming language implementations. In-
deed, Rust (first released in 2012) and Visual Basic (introduced in 1991) are probably the
only widely used languages developed since 1990 not to adopt automatic memory man-
agement of some kind, yet Rust provides a reference counted smart pointer and VB.NET
(2002), a modern incarnation of Visual Basic, relies on the garbage collector in Microsoft’s
Common Language Runtime.
    Garbage collection continues to be a vibrant area of research and is far from a solved
problem. In Blackburn’s words [2022], “Seismic technology shifts, unprecedented scale,
concerns for energy efficiency and security, a diversity of programming languages and
above all, ubiquity, have conspired to make memory management more challenging, in-
teresting, and important than ever.” Memory management sits at the crucial interface
between the hardware and the programming language. It presents deep problems and
challenges, both theoretical and engineering. Garbage collection is probably more impor-
tant and affects more people than ever before. It is in their phones and their browsers; it is
in the servers in the cloud on which so much of modern life depends. Despite the growth
in capacity on every device from the smallest one in your pocket to the largest systems in
enterprise-scale warehouses, memory is not free and efficient access is vital. For example,
    1 By yet another curious chronological coincidence, we started writing the first edition on the tenth anniversary

of the First International Symposium on Memory Management, held in October 1998, itself almost exactly forty years
after the implementation of Lisp started in 1958.
    2 The IBM 704’s legacy to the Lisp world includes the terms car and cdr. The 704’s 36-bit words included two

15-bit parts, the address and decrement parts. Lisp’s list or cons cells stored pointers in these two parts. The
head of the list, the car, could be obtained using the 704’s car ‘Contents of the Address part of Register’ macro
instruction, and the tail, the cdr, with its cdr ‘Contents of the Decrement part of Register’ macro instruction.

recently Hunter et al. [2021] found (and then recovered) 26% of memory that was wasted
due to fragmentation in Google’s warehouse-scale computers: a significant cost in both
financial and energy terms.
    The advantages that garbage collected languages offer to software development are le-
gion. Garbage collection eliminates whole classes of bugs, such as attempting to follow
dangling pointers that still refer to memory that has been reclaimed or worse, reused in
another context. Thus, it helps reduce memory vulnerabilities, by far the most pressing se-
curity concern today. It makes it no longer possible to free memory that has already been
freed. It reduces the chances of programs leaking memory, although it cannot cure all
errors of this kind. It greatly simplifies the construction and use of concurrent data struc-
tures [Herlihy and Shavit, 2008]. Above all, the abstraction offered by garbage collection
provides for better software engineering practice. It simplifies user interfaces and leads to
code that is easier to understand and to maintain, and hence more reliable. By removing
memory management worries from interfaces, it leads to code that is easier to reuse.
    The memory management field has developed at an ever-increasing rate in recent years,
in terms of both software and hardware. In 1996, a typical Intel Pentium processor had a
clock speed of 120 MHz although high-end workstations based on Digital’s Alpha chips
could run as fast as 266 MHz! Today’s top-end processors commonly run at over 3 GHz —
Intel’s recently announced Core i9-12900KS can even run at up to 5.5 GHz! Multicore chips
are ubiquitous. The size of main memory deployed has similarly increased nearly 1000-
fold, from a few megabytes to multiple gigabytes being common in desktop machines
today, and terabytes in servers. Nevertheless, the advances made in the performance of
DRAM memory continue to lag well behind those of processors. At that time, in his first
book, Garbage Collection: Algorithms for Automatic Dynamic Memory Management, (Wiley,
1996), Richard did not argue that “garbage collection is a panacea for all memory man-
agement problems,” and in particular pointed out that “the problem of garbage collection
for hard real-time programming [where deadlines must be met without fail] has yet to
be solved.” Yet by the time of the first edition of this book (2012), hard real-time collec-
tors had moved out of the research laboratory and into commercially deployed systems.
Nevertheless, although many problems have been solved by modern garbage collector im-
plementations, new hardware, new environments and new applications continue to throw
up new research challenges for memory management.
    As Blackburn says, we live in interesting times!

The audience
In this book we have tried to bring together the wealth of experience gathered by automatic
memory management researchers and developers over the past fifty years. The literature
is huge — our online bibliography contains over 3,400 entries at the time of writing. We
discuss and compare the most important approaches and state-of-the-art techniques in a
single, accessible framework. We have taken care to present algorithms and concepts using
a consistent style and terminology. These are described in detail, often with pseudocode
and illustrations. Where it is critical to performance, we pay attention to low level details,
such as the choice of primitive operations for synchronisation or how hardware compo-
nents such as caches influence algorithm design.
    In particular, we address the new challenges presented to garbage collection by ad-
vances in hardware and software over the last couple of decades. The gap in performance
between processors and memory has by and large continued to widen. Processor clock
speeds have increased, more and more cores are being placed on each die and config-
urations with multiple processor modules are common. This book focuses strongly on

the consequences of these changes for designers and implementers of high performance
garbage collectors. Their algorithms must take locality into account since cache perfor-
mance is critical. Increasing numbers of application programs are multithreaded and run
on multicore processors. Memory managers must be designed to avoid becoming a se-
quential bottleneck. On the other hand, the garbage collector itself should be designed to
take advantage of the parallelism provided by new hardware. Richard did not consider at
all how to run multiple collector threads in parallel [Jones, 1996]. He devoted but a single
chapter to incremental and concurrent collection, which seemed exotic then.
    We are sensitive throughout this book to the opportunities and limitations provided by
modern hardware. We address locality issues throughout. From the outset, we assume
that application programs may be multithreaded. Although we cover many of the more
simple and traditional algorithms, we also devote nearly half of the book to discussing
parallel, incremental, concurrent and real-time garbage collection.
    We hope that this survey will help postgraduate students, researchers and developers
who are interested in the implementation of programming languages. The book should
also be useful to undergraduates taking advanced courses in programming languages,
compiler construction, software engineering or operating systems. Furthermore, we hope
that it will give professional programmers better insight into the issues that the garbage
collector faces and how different collectors work and that, armed with this knowledge,
they will be better able to select and configure the choice of collectors that many languages
offer. The almost universal adoption of garbage collection by modern programming lan-
guages makes a thorough understanding of this topic essential for any programmer.

Structure of the book
Chapter 1 starts by considering why automatic storage reclamation is desirable, and briefly
introduces the ways in which different garbage collection strategies can be compared. It
ends with a description of the abstractions and pseudocode notation used throughout the
rest of the book.
    Chapters 2 to 5 discuss the classical garbage collection building blocks in detail. We
look at mark-sweep, mark-compact and copying collection, followed by reference count-
ing. These strategies are covered in depth, with particular focus on their implementa-
tion on modern hardware. Readers looking for a gentler introduction might also consult
Richard’s earlier book Garbage Collection: Algorithms for Automatic Dynamic Memory Man-
agement. Chapter 6 compares the strategies and algorithms covered in those chapters in
depth, assessing their strengths, weaknesses and applicability to different contexts.
    How storage is reclaimed depends on how it is allocated. Chapter 7 considers different
techniques for allocating memory and examines the extent to which automatic garbage
collection leads to allocator policies that are different from those of explicit malloc/free
memory management.
    The first seven chapters make the implicit assumption that all objects in the heap are
managed in the same way. However, there are many reasons why that would be a poor
design. Chapters 8 to 10 consider why we might want to partition the heap into different
spaces, and how we might manage those spaces. We look at generational garbage col-
lection, one of the most successful strategies for managing objects, how to handle large
objects and many other partitioned schemes.
    The interface with the rest of the run-time system is one of the trickiest aspects of build-
ing a collector.3 We devote Chapter 11 to the run-time interface, including finding pointers,
  3 And one that Jones [1996] skipped over!

safe points at which to collect, and read and write barriers, and Chapter 12 to language-
specific concerns such as finalisation and weak references.
    Next we turn our attention to concurrency. We set the scene in Chapter 13 by examining
what modern hardware presents to the garbage collection implementer, and looking at
algorithms for synchronisation, progress, termination and consensus. In Chapter 14 we see
how we can execute multiple collector threads in parallel while all the application threads
are halted. In Chapters 15 to 18, we consider a wide range of concurrent collectors, in
which we relax this ‘stop-the-world’ requirement in order to allow collection to take place
with only the briefest, if any, interruptions to the user program. Chapter 19 takes this to
its most challenging extreme, garbage collection for hard real-time systems. Chapters 20
and 21 are completely new to this second edition, addressing energy-aware collection and
collection of persistent systems.
    At the end of each chapter, we offer a summary of issues to consider. These are intended
to provoke the reader into asking what requirements their system has and how they can
be met. What questions need to be answered about the behaviour of the client program,
their operating system or the underlying hardware? These summaries are not intended as
a substitute for reading the chapter. Above all, they are not intended as canned solutions,
but we hope that they will provide a focus for further analysis.
    Finally, what is missing from the book? We have only considered automatic techniques
for memory management embedded in the run-time system. Thus, even when a language
specification mandates garbage collection, we have not discussed in much depth other
mechanisms for memory management that it may also support. The most obvious example
is the use of ‘regions’ [Tofte and Talpin, 1994], most prominently used in the Real-Time
Specification for Java. We only pay attention briefly to questions of region inferencing or
stack allocation and very little at all to other compile-time analyses intended to replace, or
at least assist, garbage collection. Neither do we address how best to use techniques such
as reference counting in the client program, although this is popular in languages like C++.
Finally, the last two decades have seen little new research on distributed garbage collection.
In many ways, this is a shame since we expect lessons learnt in that field also to be useful
to those developing collectors for the next generation of machines with heterogeneous
collections of highly non-uniform memory architectures. Nevertheless, we do not discuss
distributed garbage collection here.

e-book
The book is available either in print or as an e-book. The e-book has a number of enhance-
ments over the print version. In particular, it is heavily hyperlinked. There are clickable
links from every reference to its target (chapter, section, algorithm, figure, table and so on).
Clicking on a citation will take the reader to its entry in the bibliography, many of which
have a digital object identifier (‘doi’), in turn a link to the original paper. Each entry in the
bibliography also includes a list of pages from which it was cited; these are links back to
the referring citations. Similarly, entries in the index contain links to the pages where the
entry was mentioned. Finally, technical terms in the text have been linked to their entries
in the glossary.

Online resources
The web page accompanying the book can be found at

                              http://www.gchandbook.org

It includes a number of resources including our comprehensive bibliography. The bibliog-
raphy at the end of this book contains over 600 references. However, our comprehensive
online database contains over 3,400 garbage collection related publications. This database
can be searched online or downloaded as B IB TEX or PDF. As well as details of the article,
papers, books, theses and so on, the bibliography also contains abstracts for some entries
and URLs or DOIs for most of the electronically available ones.
     We continually strive to keep this bibliography up to date as a service to the commu-
nity. Richard (R.E.Jones@kent.ac.uk) would be very grateful to receive further entries (or
corrections).

Updates in the second edition
This second edition is testament to the continued progress in garbage collection both aca-
demically and in major deployed systems. We aimed to include significant work within
our scope up through the first half of 2022. While all chapters have seen some revision and
refinement, the more significant changes include: considerable revision of the discussions
of finalisation and weak references, plus managing changing object layout needed for dy-
namic languages in Chapter 12; collection on GPUs in Chapter 14; expanded discussion of
barriers including load barriers in Chapter 15; expanded discussion of the Garbage-First
(G1) collector in Chapter 16 and Chapter 17; discussion of new collectors including Col-
lie, Transactional Sapphire, Platinum, ZGC and Shenandoah, and updated discussion of
Pauseless and C4 in Chapter 17; and discussion of the high-performance reference counter,
LXR, in Chapter 18. We have added entirely new chapters on energy-aware collection
(Chapter 20) and collection of persistent systems based on byte-addressable non-volatile
memory (Chapter 21). The glossary and bibliography expanded substantially as has the in-
dex. While memory management continues to be a dynamic field of work, we believe this
new edition captures the most important developments of the last decade, maintaining the
utility and relevance of this handbook.
http://taylorandfrancis.com
Acknowledgements

We thank our many colleagues for their support for the original and this new edition.
It is certain that without their encouragement (and pressure), this work would not have
reached completion. In particular, we thank David Bacon, Steve Blackburn, Hans Boehm,
Cliff Click, David Detlefs, Daniel Frampton, Robin Garner, Barry Hayes, Laurence Hellyer,
Maurice Herlihy, Martin Hirzel, Abhinav Jangda, Tomáš Kalibera, Roman Kennke, Doug
Lea, Simon Marlow, Alan Mycroft, Rupesh Nasre, Cosmin Oancea, Erik Österlund, Erez
Petrank, Fil Pizlo, Tony Printezis, John Reppy, Thomas Schatzl, Peter Sewell, David Sieg-
wart, Gil Tene, Tomoharu Ugawa and Mario Wolczko, all of whom have answered our
many questions or given us excellent feedback on early drafts. We thank others whose
keen eyes have spotted errors in the first edition, including Roberto Cometti, Neil Dhar,
Raffaello Giulietti, Tsuneyasu Komiya, Atusi Maeda, Hayley Patton and Carl Shapiro. We
also pay tribute to the many computer scientists who have worked on automatic memory
management since 1958: without them there would be nothing to write about. In par-
ticular, we acknowledge Tomoharu Ugawa and Carl Ritson, co-authors with Richard, of
the works on Transactional Sapphire [Ritson et al., 2014; Ugawa et al., 2014, 2018], and Al-
bert Yang and Tobias Wrigstad for their deep dive into ZGC [Yang and Wrigstad, 2022] on
which we draw heavily in Section 17.4 and Section 17.5, respectively. We are extremely
grateful to Thomas Schatzl, Erik Österlund and Roman Kennke for patiently explaining
to us the nitty-gritty details of the Garbage-First (G1) (Section 10.4 and Section 16.5), ZGC
and Shenandoah (Section 17.5) collectors.
     We are very grateful to Randi Cohen (now Slate), our long-suffering editor at Taylor &
Francis, for her support and patience. She has always been quick to offer help and slow
to chide us for our tardiness. Dare we recall Douglas Adams, “I love deadlines. I like the
whooshing sound they make as they fly by”? We also thank Elizabeth Haylett and Kate
Pool from the Society of Authors4 for their advice, which we recommend highly.
                                                    Richard Jones, Antony Hosking, Eliot Moss

    Above all, I am grateful to Robbie. How she has borne the stress of another edition
of this book, whose writing has yet again stretched well beyond the planned deadline, I
will never know. I owe you everything! I also doubt whether this book would have seen
the light of day without the inexhaustible enthusiasm of my co-authors. Tony, Eliot, it has
been a pleasure and an honour writing with knowledgeable and diligent colleagues.
                                                                                Richard Jones

   In the summer of 2002, Richard and I hatched plans to write a follow-up to his 1996
book. There had been lots of new work on GC in those six years, and it seemed there was
  4 http://www.societyofauthors.org.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                                      xxxiv

demand for an update. Little did we know then that it would be another nine years before
the current volume would appear. Richard, your patience is much appreciated. As concep-
tion turned into concrete planning, Eliot’s offer to pitch in was gratefully accepted; with-
out his sharing the load we would still be labouring anxiously. Much of the early planning
and writing was carried out while I was on sabbatical with Richard in 2008, with funding
from the United Kingdom’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council and the
United States’ National Science Foundation whose support we gratefully acknowledge.
Mandi, without your encouragement and willingness to live out our own Canterbury Tale
this project would not have been possible.
                                                                            Antony Hosking

   Thank you to my co-authors for inviting me into their project, already largely conceived
and being proposed for publication. You were a pleasure to work with (as always) and tol-
erant of my sometimes idiosyncratic writing style. A formal thank you is also due to the
Royal Academy of Engineering, who supported my visit to the UK in November 2009,
which greatly advanced the book. Other funding agencies supported the work indirectly
by helping us attend conferences and meetings at which we could gain some face-to-face
working time for the book as well. And most of all, many thanks to my ‘girls,’ who en-
dured my absences, physical and otherwise. Your support was essential and is deeply
appreciated!
   For the second edition: Thanks are again due to my family, especially for their tolerance
of my work on the book during what was supposed to be vacation, and to Robbie Jones for
hosting me for three weeks in Canterbury as we kicked off the second edition revisions.

                                                                                 Eliot Moss
Authors

Richard Jones is Emeritus Professor of Computer Systems at the School of Computing,
University of Kent, Canterbury. He received a BA in Mathematics from Oxford University
in 1976. He spent a few years teaching before returning to higher education at the Uni-
versity of Kent, where he has remained ever since, receiving an MSc in Computer Science
in 1989. In 1998, he co-founded the International Symposium on Memory Management,
of which he was the inaugural Programme Chair. He has published numerous papers on
garbage collection, heap visualisation and electronic publishing, and he regularly sits on
the programme committees of leading international conferences. He was made an Hon-
orary Fellow of the University of Glasgow in 2005 in recognition of his research and schol-
arship in dynamic memory management. He was named a Distinguished Scientist of the
Association for Computing Machinery in 2006, and in 2014 made a Fellow of the British
Computer Society, a Fellow of the RSA and a member of AITO. He is married, with three
children, and in his spare time he cycles and sails, including racing a Dart 18 catamaran.

Antony Hosking is Professor in the School of Computing at the Australian National Uni-
versity. He received a BSc in Mathematical Sciences from the University of Adelaide,
Australia, in 1985 and an MSc in Computer Science from the University of Waikato, New
Zealand, in 1987. He continued his graduate studies at the University of Massachusetts
Amherst, receiving a PhD in Computer Science in 1995. His work is in the area of program-
ming language design and implementation, with specific interests in database and persis-
tent programming languages, object-oriented database systems, dynamic memory man-
agement, compiler optimisations and architectural support for programming languages
and applications. He was named a Distinguished Scientist of the Association for Com-
puting Machinery in 2012, a member of AITO in 2013 and is a Member of the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. He regularly serves on programme and steering
committees of major conferences, mostly focused on programming language design and
implementation. He is married, with five children. When the opportunity arises, he most
enjoys sitting somewhere behind the bowler’s arm on the first day of any Test match at the
Adelaide Oval.

Eliot Moss is Professor Emeritus in the Manning College of Information and Computer
Sciences at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. He received a BSEE in 1975, MSEE
in 1978 and PhD in Computer Science in 1981, all from the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, Cambridge. After four years of military service, he joined the Computer Science
faculty at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. He works in the area of program-
ming languages and their implementation and has built garbage collectors since 1978. In
addition to his research on automatic memory management, he is known for his work on
persistent programming languages, virtual machine implementation, transactional pro-
gramming and transactional memory. He worked with IBM researchers to license the

AUTHORS                                                                               xxxvi

Jikes RVM Java virtual machine for academic research, which eventually led to its release
as an open source project. In 2007 he was named a Fellow of the Association for Comput-
ing Machinery and in 2009 a Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
In 2012 he was co-recipient of the Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing for
work on transactional memory. He served for four years as Secretary of the Association
for Computing Machinery’s Special Interest Group on Programming Languages and has
served on many programme and steering committees of the significant venues related to
his areas of research. Ordained a priest of the Episcopal Church in 2005, he is now retired
from that vocation as well. He is married, with two adult children. He enjoys listening
to recorded books, movie-going and the company of cats and has been known to play the
harp.
