Chapter 1

Introduction

Developers are increasingly turning to managed languages and run-time systems for the many
virtues they offer, from the increased security they bestow to code to the flexibility they
provide by abstracting away from operating system and architecture. The benefits of man-
aged code are widely accepted [Butters, 2007]. Because many services are provided by the
virtual machine, programmers have less code to write. Code is safer if it is type-safe and if
the run-time system verifies code as it is loaded, checks for resource access violations and
the bounds of arrays and other collections, and manages memory automatically. Deploy-
ment costs are lower since it is easier to deploy applications to different platforms, even if
the mantra ‘write once, run anywhere’ is over-optimistic. Consequently, programmers can
spend a greater proportion of development time on the logic of their application.
    Almost all modern programming languages make use of dynamic memory allocation.
This allows objects to be allocated and deallocated even if their total size was not known
at the time that the program was compiled, and if their lifetime may exceed that of the
subroutine activation1 that allocated them. A dynamically allocated object is stored in a
heap, rather than on the stack (in the activation record or stack frame of the procedure that
allocated it) or statically (whereby the name of an object is bound to a storage location
known at compile or link time). Heap allocation is particularly important because it allows
the programmer to:

   • choose dynamically the size of new objects (thus avoiding program failure through
     exceeding hard-coded limits on arrays);

   • define and use recursive data structures such as lists, trees and maps;

   • return newly created objects to the parent procedure (allowing, for example, factory
     methods);

   • return a function as the result of another function (for example, closures or suspensions
     in functional languages, or futures or streams in concurrent ones).

Heap allocated objects are accessed through references. Typically, a reference is a pointer to
the object (that is, the address in memory of the object). However, a reference may alterna-
tively refer to an object only indirectly, for instance through a handle which in turn points
to the object. Handles offer the advantage of allowing an object to be relocated (updating
its handle) without having to change every reference to that object/handle throughout the
program’s memory.
  1 We tend to use the terms method, function, procedure and subroutine interchangeably.

                                   A                 B                C

Figure 1.1: Premature deletion of an object may lead to errors. Here B has
        been freed. The live object A now contains a dangling pointer. The space
        occupied by C has leaked: C is not reachable but it cannot be freed.

1.1     Explicit deallocation
Any non-trivial program, running in a finite amount of memory, will need from time to
time to recover the storage used by objects that are no longer needed by the computation.
Memory used by heap objects can be reclaimed using explicit deallocation (for example,
with C’s free or C++’s delete operator) or automatically by the run-time system, using
reference counting [Collins, 1960] or a tracing garbage collector [McCarthy, 1960]. Manual
reclamation risks programming errors; these may arise in two ways.
    Memory may be freed prematurely, while there are still references to it. Such a reference
is called a dangling pointer (see Figure 1.1). If the program subsequently follows a dangling
pointer, the result is unpredictable. The application programmer has no control over what
happens to deallocated memory, so the run-time system may choose, among other options,
to clear (fill with zeroes) the space used by the deleted object, to allocate a new object in
that space or to return that memory to the operating system. The best that the programmer
can hope for is that the program crashes immediately. However, it is more likely that it will
continue for millions of cycles before crashing (making debugging difficult) or simply run
to completion but produce incorrect results (which might not even be easy to detect). One
way to detect dangling references is to use fat pointers. These can be used to hold the ver-
sion number of their target as well as the pointer itself. Operations such as dereferencing
must then check that the version number stored in the pointer matches that stored in the
object. However, this approach is mostly restricted to use with debugging tools because of
its overhead, and it is not completely reliable.2
    The second kind of error is that the programmer may fail to free an object no longer
required by the program, leading to a memory leak. In small programs, leaks may be benign
but in large programs they are likely to lead either to substantial performance degradation
(as the memory manager struggles to satisfy new allocation requests) or to failure (if the
program runs out of memory). Often a single incorrect deallocation may lead to both
dangling pointers and memory leaks (as in Figure 1.1).
    Programming errors of this kind are particularly prevalent in the presence of sharing,
when two or more subroutines may hold references to an object. This is even more prob-
lematic for concurrent programming when two or more threads may reference an object.
With the increasing ubiquity of multicore processors, considerable effort has gone into the
construction of libraries of data structures that are thread-safe. Algorithms that access
these structures need to guard against a number of problems, including deadlock, livelock
and ABA errors.3 Automatic memory management eases the construction of concurrent
algorithms significantly (for example, by eliminating certain ABA problems). Without this,
programming solutions are much more complicated [Herlihy and Shavit, 2008].
    The issue is more fundamental than simply being a matter of programmers’ needing to
take more care. Difficulties of correct memory management are often inherent to the pro-
   2 Tools such as the memcheck leak detector used with the valgrind open source instrumentation framework

(see http://valgrind.org) are more reliable, but even slower. There are also a number of commercially
available programs for helping to debug memory issues.
   3 ABA error: a memory location is written (A), overwritten (B) and then overwritten again with the previous

value A (see Chapter 13).

gramming problem in question.4 More generally, safe deallocation of an object is complex
because, as Wilson [1994] points out, “liveness is a global property,” whereas the decision
to call free on a variable is a local one.
    So how do programmers cope in languages not supported by automatic dynamic mem-
ory management? Considerable effort has been invested in resolving this dilemma. The
key advice has been to be consistent in the way that they manage the ownership of ob-
jects [Belotsky, 2003; Cline and Lomow, 1995]. Belotsky [2003] and others offer several
possible strategies for C++. First, programmers should avoid heap allocation altogether,
wherever possible. For example, objects can be allocated on the stack instead. When the
objects’ creating method returns, the popping of the stack will free these objects automat-
ically. Secondly, programmers should pass and return objects by value, by copying the
full contents of a parameter/result rather than by passing references. Clearly both of these
approaches remove all allocation/deallocation errors, but they do so at the cost of both
increased memory pressure and the loss of sharing. In some circumstances it may be ap-
propriate to use custom allocators, for example, that manage a pool of objects. At the end
of a program phase, the entire pool can be freed as a whole.
    C++ has seen several attempts to use special pointer classes and templates to improve
memory management. These overload normal pointer operations in order to provide safe
storage reclamation. However, such smart pointers do have several limitations.               The
auto_ptr class template cannot be used with the Standard Template Library [Boehm and
Spertus, 2009], and was removed in the C++17 standard. It was replaced by an improved
unique_ptr that provides strict ownership semantics that allow the target object to be
deleted when the unique pointer is. The C++11 standard also introduced reference counted
shared_ptr. Rust provides analogous library types, perhaps with more safety enforced
automatically when used by multiple threads. Reference counted pointers are unable to
manage self-referential (cyclic) data structures. Most smart pointers are provided as li-
braries, which restricts their applicability if efficiency is a concern. Possibly, they are most
appropriately used to manage very large blocks, references to which are rarely assigned
or passed, in which case they might be significantly cheaper than tracing collection. On
the other hand, without the cooperation of the compiler and run-time system, reference
counted pointers are not an efficient, general purpose solution to the management of small
objects, especially if pointer manipulation is to be thread-safe.
    Despite years of effort, memory safety remains a problem. The Chromium Project’s
web page reports that 70% of all Chrome’s 912 high or critical security bugs are memory
safety problems, of which more than half are ‘use after free’ bugs.5 They considered that
just running more processes in their own restricted environments (‘sandboxes’) would not
solve this problem. Speaking at a security conference in February 2019, a Microsoft engi-
neer said that around 70% of all security updates released for Microsoft products over the
past twelve years were fixes for memory safety vulnerabilities.6 Again ‘use after free’ was
a major vector for attacks. Microsoft was able to substantially reduce this vulnerability7
with MemGC, a conservative garbage collector for the Document Object Model (DOM) in
Internet Explorer and Edge. Other projects are looking at languages such as Rust that pro-
vide compile-time safety checks. However, the memory safety features of such languages
are demonstrably harder to use compared with garbage collection [Coblenz et al., 2022].

   4 “When C++ is your hammer, everything looks like a thumb,” Steven M. Haflich, Chair of the NCITS/J13

technical committee for ANSI standard for Common Lisp.
   5 https://www.chromium.org/Home/chromium-security/memory-safety/
   6 https://www.zdnet.com/article/chrome-70-of-all-security-bugs-are-memory-

safety-issues/
   7 https://www.zdnet.com/article/microsoft-were-creating-a-new-rust-based-

programming-language-for-secure-coding/

    The plethora of strategies for safe manual memory management throws up yet another
problem. If it is essential for the programmer to manage object ownership consistently,
which approach should she adopt? This is particularly problematic when using library
code. Which approach does the library take? Do all the libraries used by the program
follow the same approach?

1.2    Automatic dynamic memory management
Automatic dynamic memory management resolves many of these issues. Garbage collection
(GC) prevents creation of dangling pointers: an object is only reclaimed when there is no
pointer to it from a reachable object. Conversely, in principle all garbage is guaranteed
to be freed — any object that is unreachable will eventually be reclaimed by the collector
— with two caveats. The first is that tracing collection uses a definition of ‘garbage’ that is
decidable and may not include all objects that will never be accessed again. The second
is that in practice, as we shall see in later chapters, garbage collector implementations
may choose for efficiency reasons not to reclaim some objects. Only the collector releases
objects so the double-freeing problem cannot arise. All reclamation decisions are deferred
to the collector, which has global knowledge of the structure of objects in the heap and the
threads that can access them. The problems of explicit deallocation were largely due to
the difficulty of making a global decision in a local context. Automatic dynamic memory
management simply finesses this problem.
     Above all, memory management is a software engineering issue. Well-designed pro-
grams are built from components (in the loosest sense of the term) that are highly cohesive
and loosely coupled. Increasing the cohesion of modules makes programs easier to main-
tain. Ideally, a programmer should be able to understand the behaviour of a module from
the code of that module alone, or at worst a few closely related modules. Reducing the cou-
pling between modules means that the behaviour of one module is not dependent on the
implementation of another module. As far as correct memory management is concerned,
this means that modules should not have to know the rules of the memory management
game played by other modules. In contrast, explicit memory management goes against
sound software engineering principles of minimal communication between components;
it clutters interfaces, either explicitly through additional parameters to communicate own-
ership rights, or implicitly by requiring programmers to conform to particular idioms. Re-
quiring code to understand the rules of engagement limits the reusability of components
and complicated interfaces.
     The key argument in favour of garbage collection is not just that it simplifies coding
— which it does — but that it uncouples the problem of memory management from inter-
faces, rather than scattering it throughout the code. It improves reusability. This is why
garbage collection, in one form or another, has been a requirement of almost all modern
languages (see Table 1.1). There is substantial evidence that managed code, including au-
tomatic memory management, reduces development costs [Butters, 2007]. Unfortunately,
most of this evidence is anecdotal or compares development in different languages and
systems (hence comparing more than just memory management strategies), and few de-
tailed comparative studies have been performed. A notable exception is that of Coblenz
et al. [2022], comparing coding in Rust with and without garbage collection support. They
found that garbage collection indeed dramatically reduced coding time, at least for novice
programmers. One author has suggested as long ago as 1985 that memory management
should be the prime concern in the design of software for complex systems [Nagle, 1995].
Rovner [1985] estimated that 40% of development time for Xerox’s Mesa system was spent
on getting memory management correct. Possibly the strongest corroboration of the case

          ActionScript (2000)        Algol-68 (1965)             APL (1964)
          AppleScript (1993)         AspectJ (2001)              Awk (1977)
          Beta (1983)                C# (1999)                   Cyclone (2006)
          Managed C++ (2002)         Cecil (1992)                Cedar (1983)
          Clean (1984)               CLU (1974)                  D (2007)
          Dart (2011)                Dylan (1992)                Dynace (1993)
          E (1997)                   Eiffel (1986)               Elasti-C (1997)
          Emerald (1988)             Erlang (1990)               Euphoria (1993)
          F# (2005)                  Fortress (2006)             Green (1998)
          Go (2010)                  Groovy (2004)               Haskell (1990)
          Hope (1978)                Icon (1977)                 Java (1994)
          JavaScript (1994)          Liana (1991)                Limbo (1996)
          Lingo (1991)               Lisp (1958)                 LotusScript (1995)
          Lua (1994)                 Mathematica (1987)          MATLAB (1970s)
          Mercury (1993)             Miranda (1985)              ML (1990)
          Modula-3 (1988)            Oberon (1985)               Objective-C (2007–)
          Obliq (1993)               Perl (1986)                 Pike (1996)
          PHP (1995)                 Pliant (1999)               POP-2 (1970)
          PostScript (1982)          Prolog (1972)               Python (1991)
          R (1993)                   Rexx (1979)                 Ruby (1993)
          Sather (1990)              Scala (2003)                Scheme (1975)
          Self (1986)                SETL (1969)                 Simula (1964)
          SISAL (1983)               Smalltalk (1972)            SNOBOL (1962)
          Squeak (1996)              Swift (2014)                Tcl (1990)
          Theta (1994)               VB.NET (2001)               VBScript (1996)
          Visual Basic (1991)        VHDL (1987)                 X10 (2004)
          YAFL (1993)

Table 1.1: A selection of languages that rely on garbage collection
           Online sources: Dictionary of Programming Languages, Wikipedia and Google

for automatic dynamic memory management is an indirect, economic one: the continued
existence of a wide variety of vendors and tools for detection of memory errors.
    We do not claim that garbage collection is a silver bullet that will eradicate all memory-
related programming errors or that it is applicable in all situations. Memory leaks are
one of the most prevalent kinds of memory error. Although garbage collection tends to
reduce the chance of memory leaks, it does not guarantee to eliminate them. If an object
structure becomes unreachable to the rest of the program (for example, through any chain
of pointers from the known roots), then the garbage collector will reclaim it. Since this is
the only way that an object can be deleted, dangling pointers cannot arise. Furthermore, if
deletion of an object causes its children to become unreachable, they too will be reclaimed.
Thus, neither of the scenarios of Figure 1.1 is possible. However, garbage collection cannot
guarantee the absence of space leaks. It has no answer to the problem of a data structure
that is still reachable, but grows without limit (for example, if a programmer repeatedly
adds data to a cache but never removes objects from that cache), or that is reachable and
simply never accessed again.
    Automatic dynamic memory management is designed to do just what it says. Some
critics of garbage collection have complained that it is unable to provide general resource
management, for example, to close files or windows promptly after their last use. How-
ever, this is unfair. Garbage collection is not a universal panacea. It attacks and solves

a specific question: the management of memory resources. Nevertheless, the problem of
general resource management in a garbage collected language is a substantial one. With
explicitly managed systems there is a straightforward and natural coupling between mem-
ory reclamation and the disposal of other resources. Automatic memory management in-
troduces the problem of how to structure resource management in the absence of a natural
coupling. However, it is interesting to observe that many resource release scenarios re-
quire something akin to a collector in order to detect whether the resource is still in use
(reachable) from the rest of the program.

1.3    Comparing garbage collection algorithms
In this book we discuss a wide range of collectors, each designed with different workloads,
hardware contexts and performance requirements in mind. Unfortunately, it is never pos-
sible to identify a ‘best’ collector for all configurations. For example, Fitzgerald and Tarditi
[2000] found in a study of 20 benchmarks and six collectors that for every collector there
was at least one benchmark that would run at least 15% faster with a more appropriate
collector. Singer et al. [2007b] applied machine learning techniques to predict the best col-
lector configuration for a particular program. Others have explored allowing Java virtual
machines to switch collectors as they run if they believe that the characteristics of the work-
load being run would benefit from a different collector [Printezis, 2001; Soman et al., 2004].
In this section, we examine the metrics by which collectors can be compared. Nevertheless,
such comparisons are difficult in both principle and practice. Details of implementation,
locality and the practical significance of the constants in algorithmic complexity formulae
make them less than perfect guides to practice. Moreover, the metrics are not independent
variables. Not only does the performance of an algorithm depend on the topology and
volume of objects in the heap, but also on the access patterns of the application. Worse,
the tuning options in production virtual machines are interconnected. Variation of one
parameter to achieve a particular goal may lead to other, contradictory effects.

Safety
The prime consideration is that garbage collection should be safe: the collector must never
reclaim the storage of live objects. However, safety comes with a cost, particularly for
concurrent collectors (see Chapter 15). The safety of conservative collection, which receives
no assistance from the compiler or run-time system, may in principle be vulnerable to
certain compiler optimisations that disguise pointers [Jones, 1996, Chapter 9].

Throughput and cycles consumed
A common goal for end users is that their programs should run faster. However, there
are several aspects to this. One is that the overall time spent in garbage collection should
be as low as possible. This is commonly referred to in the literature as the mark/cons ratio,
comparing the early Lisp activities of the collector (‘marking’ live objects) and the mutator
(creating or ‘consing’ new list cells). However, the user is most likely to want the appli-
cation as a whole (mutator plus collector) to execute in as little time as possible. In most
well-designed configurations, much more CPU time is spent in the mutator than the col-
lector. Therefore, it may be worthwhile trading some collector performance for increased
mutator throughput. For example, systems managed by mark-sweep collection occasion-
ally perform more expensive compacting phases in order to reduce fragmentation so as

to improve mutator allocation performance (and possibly mutator performance more gen-
erally). Throughput and wall-clock time may not be the only metrics on interest here,
especially in the context of parallel and concurrent collectors which devote several threads
to garbage collection. Different collectors may consume very different numbers of CPU cy-
cles that could otherwise be used by other applications on the same host, be it a personal
computer or a shared server [Cai et al., 2022].

Completeness and promptness
Ideally, garbage collection should be complete: eventually, all garbage in the heap should be
reclaimed. However, this is not always possible nor even desirable. Pure reference count-
ing collectors, for example, are unable to reclaim cyclic garbage (self-referential structures).
For performance reasons, it may be desirable not to collect the whole heap at every collec-
tion cycle. For example, generational collectors segregate objects by their age into two
or more regions called generations (we discuss generational garbage collection in Chap-
ter 9). By concentrating effort on the youngest generation, generational collectors can both
improve total collection time and reduce the average pause time for individual collections.
    Concurrent collectors interleave the execution of mutators and collectors; the goal of
such collectors is to avoid, or at least bound, interruptions to the user program. One con-
sequence is that objects that become garbage after a collection cycle has started may not be
reclaimed until the end of the next cycle; such objects are called floating garbage. Hence, in a
concurrent setting it may be more appropriate to define completeness as eventual reclama-
tion of all garbage, as opposed to reclamation within one cycle. Different collection algo-
rithms may vary in their promptness of reclamation, again leading to time/space trade-offs.

Pause time and latency
On the other hand, an important requirement may be to minimise the collector’s intru-
sion on program execution. Many collectors introduce pauses into a program’s execution
because they stop all mutator threads while collecting garbage. It is clearly desirable to
make these pauses as short as possible. This might be particularly important for interac-
tive applications or servers handling transactions (when failure to meet a deadline might
lead to the transaction being retried, thus building up a backlog of work). However, mech-
anisms for limiting pause times may have side effects, as we shall see in more detail in
later chapters. For example, generational collectors address this goal by frequently and
quickly collecting a small nursery region, and only occasionally collecting larger, older
generations. Clearly, when tuning a generational collector, there is a balance to be struck
between the sizes of the generations, and hence not only the pause times required to collect
different generations but also the frequency of collections. However, because the sources
of some inter-generational pointers must be recorded, generational collection imposes a
small tax on pointer write operations by the mutator.
    Parallel collectors stop the world to collect but reduce pause times by employing multi-
ple threads. Concurrent and incremental collectors aim to reduce pause times still further
by occasionally performing a small quantum of collection work interleaved or in parallel
with mutator actions. This too requires taxation of the mutator in order to ensure correct
synchronisation between mutators and collectors. As we shall see in Chapter 15, there are
different ways to handle this synchronisation. The choice of mechanism affects both space
and time costs. It also affects termination of a garbage collection cycle. The cost of the
taxation on mutator time depends on how and which manipulations of the heap by the
mutator (loads or stores) are recorded. The costs on space, and also collector termination,
depends on how much floating garbage (see below) a system tolerates. Multiple mutator

and collector threads add to the complexity. In any case, decreasing pause time will tend
to increase overall processing time (decrease processing rate).
     Maximum or average pause times on their own are not adequate measures. Low pause
times do not necessarily translate to low application latency [Cai et al., 2022]. It is also im-
portant that the mutator makes progress. The distribution of pause times is therefore also
of interest. There are a number of ways that pause time distributions may be reported. The
simplest might be a measure of variation such as standard deviation or a graphical repre-
sentation of the distribution. More interesting measures include minimum mutator utili-
sation (MMU) and bounded mutator utilisation (BMU). Both the MMU [Cheng and Blelloch,
2001] and BMU [Sachindran et al., 2004] measures seek to display concisely the (minimum)
fraction of time spent in the mutator, for any given time window. The x-axis of Figure 1.2
represents time, from 0 to total execution time, and its y-axis the fraction of CPU time spent
in the mutator (utilisation). Thus, not only do MMU and BMU curves show total garbage
collection time as a fraction of overall execution time (the y-intercept, at the top right of the
curves is the mutators’ overall share of processor time), but they also show the maximum
pause time (the longest window for which the mutator’s CPU utilisation is zero) as the
x-intercept. In general, curves that are higher and more to the left are preferable since they
tend towards a higher mutator utilisation for a smaller maximum pause. Note that the
MMU is the minimum mutator utilisation (y) in any time window (x). As a consequence,
it is possible for a larger window to have a lower MMU than a smaller window, leading
to dips in the curve. In contrast, BMU curves give the MMU in that time window or any
larger one. Monotonically increasing BMU curves are perhaps more intuitive than MMU.
     However, measuring MMU is problematic. It is often difficult to disentangle overhead
due to the garbage collector from mutator activity. For example, concurrent collectors may
inject synchronisation code (barriers) around mutator read or write operations. A collector
that requires an expensive barrier may therefore lead to a higher mutator utilisation than
one using a cheaper barrier. For latency-sensitive workloads, query-time percentiles may
be a more appropriate metric.

Space overhead
The goal of memory management is safe and efficient use of space. Different memory
managers, both explicit and automatic, impose different space overheads. Some garbage
collectors may impose per-object space costs (for example, to store reference counts); oth-
ers may be able to smuggle these overheads into objects’ existing layouts (for example, a
mark bit can often be hidden in a header word, or a forwarding pointer may be written
over user data). Collectors may have a per-heap space overhead. For example, copying
collectors divide the heap into two semispaces. Only one semispace is available to the mu-
tator at any time; the other is held as a copy reserve into which the collector will evacuate
live objects at collection time. Collectors may require auxiliary data structures. Tracing
collectors need mark stacks to guide the traversal of the pointer graph in the heap; they
may also store mark bits in separate bitmap tables rather than in the objects themselves.
Concurrent collectors, or collectors that divide the heap into independently collected re-
gions, require remembered sets that record where the mutator has changed the value of
pointers, or the locations of pointers that span regions, respectively.

Energy use
As discussed further in Chapter 20, energy consumed by computing devices is in many
cases a first-order concern. While reducing execution time will tend to reduce energy con-
sumption, many factors come into play, particularly in concurrent systems. There are two

                                                                     100%

                              MMU                                    80%

                              BMU
                                                                     60%

                                                                     40%

                                                                     20%

                                                                     0%
                   1           10         100        1000        10000

                                         time (ms)

Figure 1.2: Minimum mutator utilisation and bounded mutator utilisation
      curves display concisely the (minimum) fraction of time spent in the mutator,
      for any given time window. MMU is the minimum mutator utilisation (y) in
      any time window (x) whereas BMU is the minimum mutator utilisation in
      that time window or any larger one. In both cases, the x-intercept gives the
      maximum pause time and the y-intercept is the overall fraction of processor
      time used by the mutator.

primary metrics that have been used with respect to energy consumption. The first is just
energy consumed, which is simply power integrated over time. However, promptness
of computation is often also important, so a blended metric, energy-delay product, can be
more appropriate. This product simply multiplies the time needed by a computation by
the energy it consumes.
    Both energy and energy-delay product can be affected by choice of memory manage-
ment technique and by a variety of other system parameters such as the number of mutator
and collector threads and processor clock speeds. Garbage collection by its nature tends
to do many memory accesses and often exhibits less locality than does application code.
Because memory accesses are both time- and energy-consuming, how a system collects
therefore makes a difference in how it consumes energy.

Optimisations for specific languages
Garbage collection algorithms can also be characterised by their applicability to different
language paradigms. Functional languages in particular have offered a rich vein for op-
timisations related to memory management. Some languages, such as ML, distinguish
mutable from immutable data. Pure functional languages, such as Haskell, go further and
do not allow the user to modify any values (programs are referentially transparent). Inter-
nally, however, they typically update data structures at most once (from a ‘thunk’ to weak
head normal formal); this gives multi-generation collectors opportunities to promote fully
evaluated data structures eagerly (see Chapter 9). Authors have also suggested complete
mechanisms for handling cyclic data structures with reference counting. Declarative lan-
guages may also allow other mechanisms for efficient management of heap spaces. Any
data created in a logic language after a ‘choice point’ becomes unreachable after the pro-
gram backtracks to that point. With a memory manager that keeps objects laid out in the

heap in their order of allocation, memory allocated after the choice point can be reclaimed
in constant time. Conversely, different language definitions may make specific require-
ments of the collector. The most notable are the ability to deal with a variety of pointer
strengths and the need for the collector to cause dead objects to be finalised.

Scalability and portability
The final metrics we identify here are scalability and portability. With the prevalence of
multicore hardware on the desktop, laptops and even portable devices such as tablets and
mobile phones (rather than just in large servers), it is becoming increasingly important
that garbage collection can take advantage of the parallel hardware on offer. Furthermore,
parallel hardware is increasing in scale (number of cores and sockets) and heterogeneous
processors have become common. The demands on servers are also increasing, as heap
sizes move into the hundreds of gigabytes or even terabytes and as transaction loads in-
crease. A number of collection algorithms depend on support from the operating system or
hardware (for instance, by protecting pages or by double mapping virtual memory space,
or on the availability of certain atomic operations on the processor). Such techniques are
not necessarily portable.

1.4      A performance disadvantage?
We conclude the discussion of the comparative merits of automatic and manual dynamic
memory management by asking if automatic memory management must be at a per-
formance disadvantage compared with manual techniques. In general, the cost of auto-
matic dynamic memory management is highly dependent on application behaviour and
even hardware, making it impossible to offer simple estimates of overhead. Nevertheless,
a long-running criticism of garbage collection has been that it is slow compared to ex-
plicit memory management and imposes unacceptable overheads, both in terms of overall
throughput and in pauses for garbage collection. While it is true that automatic memory
management does impose a performance penalty on the program, it is not as much as is
commonly assumed. Furthermore, explicit operations like malloc and free also impose
a significant cost. Hertz et al. [2005] measured the true cost of garbage collection for a
variety of Java benchmarks and collection algorithms. They instrumented a Java virtual
machine to discover precisely when objects became unreachable, and then used the reach-
ability trace as an oracle to drive a simulator, measuring cycles and cache misses. They
compared a wide variety of garbage collector configurations against different implementa-
tions of malloc/free: the simulator invoked free at the point where the trace indicated
that an object had become garbage. Although, as expected, results varied between both
collectors and explicit allocators, Hertz et al. found that garbage collectors could match the
execution time performance of explicit allocation provided they were given a somewhat
larger heap (25% to 56% more than the minimum required). Sareen and Blackburn [2022]
found similar results — 15% to 27% for the immix collector depending on the explicit allo-
cator with which it is compared.8
    More recently, Cai et al. [2022] developed a method to identify a lower bound for the
overhead of garbage collection. For a given application, they distil out explicit garbage
collection costs (such as costs during stop-the-world pauses), and repeat this to find the
minimum distilled cost from running the application with different collectors. The lower
   8 It is often cited that Hertz et al. [2005] found that garbage collectors require a heap two to five times larger

that explicit allocators to offer comparable performance, but that compares two different explicit allocators. See
footnote 5 of Sareen and Blackburn [2022].

bound overhead is then the total cost of running the application less the minimum distilled
cost. Usefully, this methodology is run-time and algorithm independent: it can be applied
to different metrics, such as throughput, cycles executed, cache misses and so on. On the
DaCapo9 suite of medium-sized benchmarks for Java, they found throughput overheads
from 3% to 94%, depending on the algorithm and the size of the heap provided.

1.5    Experimental methodology
One of the most welcome changes over the past two decades or so has been the improve-
ment in experimental methodology reported in the literature on memory management.
Nevertheless, it remains clear that reporting standards in computer science have some way
to go before they match the quality of the very best practice in the natural or social sciences.
Mytkowicz et al. [2008] find measurement bias to be “significant and commonplace.”
    In a study of a large number of papers on garbage collection, Georges et al. [2007] found
the experimental methodology, even where reported, to be inadequately rigorous in many
cases. Many reported performance improvements were sufficiently small, and the reports
lacking in statistical analysis, to raise questions of whether any confidence could be placed
in the results. Errors introduced may be systematic or random. Systematic errors are
largely due to poor experimental practice and can often be reduced by more careful de-
sign of experiments. Random errors are typically due to non-determinism in the system
under measurement. By their nature, these are unpredictable and often outside the exper-
imenter’s control; they should be addressed statistically.
    The use of synthetic or small scale, ‘toy’, benchmarks has long been criticised as inad-
equate [Zorn, 1989]. Such benchmarks risk introducing systematic errors because they do
not reflect the interactions in memory allocation that occur in real programs, or because
their working sets are sufficiently small that they exhibit locality effects that real programs
would not. Wilson et al. [1995a] provide an excellent critique of such practices. Fortunately,
other than for stress testing, synthetic and toy benchmarks have been largely abandoned
in favour of larger scale benchmark suites, consisting of widely used programs that are
believed to represent a wide range of typical behaviour (for example, the DaCapo suite for
Java). However, the availability of and access to benchmark sets that represent enterprise-
scale applications remains problematic.
    Experiments with benchmark suites that contain a large number of realistic programs
can introduce systematic bias. Managed run-times, in particular, offer several opportu-
nities for the introduction of systematic errors. Experimenters need to take care to dis-
tinguish the context that they are trying to examine: are they interested in start-up costs
(important, for example, for short-lived programs) or in the steady state? For the latter, it
is important to exclude system warm-up effects such as class loading and dynamic code
optimisation. In both cases, it is probably important to disregard cold-start effects such
as latency caused by loading the necessary files into the disk cache: thus Georges et al.
[2007] advocate running several invocations of the virtual machine and benchmark and
discarding the first.
    Dynamic (or run-time) compilation is a major source of non-determinism and is par-
ticularly difficult to deal with when comparing alternative algorithms. One solution is to
remove it. Compiler replay [Blackburn et al., 2006a] allows the user to record which methods
are optimised, and to which level, in a preparatory run of the benchmark. This record can
then be used by the virtual machine to ensure the same level of optimisation in subsequent,
performance runs. However, a problem with this approach is that alternative implemen-
  9 https://dacapobench.org [Blackburn et al., 2006a]

tations typically execute different methods, particularly in the component under test. It is
not clear which compilation record should be used. Two separate ones? Their intersection?
    Sound experimental practice requires that outcomes are valid even in the presence of
bias (for example, random errors). This requires repetitions of the experiment and statis-
tical comparison of the results. To be able to state with confidence that one approach is
superior to another requires that, first, a confidence level is stated and, second, confidence
intervals for each alternative are derived from the results and that these intervals are found
not to overlap. Georges et al. [2007] offer a statistically rigorous methodology to address
non-deterministic and unpredictable errors (including the effects of dynamic compilation).
They advocate invoking one instance of the virtual machine and executing a benchmark
many times until it reaches a steady state (that is, when the coefficient of variation10 for
the last k benchmark iterations falls below some preset threshold). These k iterations can
then be used to compute a mean for the benchmark under steady state. By repeating this
process, an overall mean and a confidence interval can be computed. Better, the whole
distribution (or at least more than one or two moments of it) should be reported.
    Garbage collection research needs thorough performance reports. A single ‘spot’ figure,
even if decorated with a confidence interval, is not sufficient. The reason is that memory
management involves space and time trade-offs. In most circumstances, one way to re-
duce collection times is to increase the size of the heap (up to a certain point — after that
locality effects typically cause execution times to deteriorate). Thus, no experiment that
reports a figure for just a single heap size can be taken seriously. It is vital, therefore, that
environments allow the user to control the size of heaps (and spaces within those heaps) in
order to understand fully the performance characteristics of a particular memory manage-
ment algorithm. We firmly advocate this even for production virtual machines which may
automatically adapt sizes for optimal performance; while automatic adaptation might be
appropriate for end users, researchers and developers need more insight.
    The chaotic nature of garbage collection reinforces this requirement. By calling garbage
collection chaotic, we mean that small changes in configuration can, and commonly do,
lead to large changes in behaviour. One example is the scheduling of collections. Even
a small change to the point at which a garbage collection occurs may mean that a large
data structure either remains reachable or becomes garbage. This can have large effects
not only on the cost of the current collection but also on how soon the next collection will
occur, thus making such variation self-amplifying. By providing results for a range of heap
sizes (often expressed in terms of multiples of the smallest heap size in which a program
will run to completion), such ‘jitter’ is made readily apparent.

1.6     Terminology and notation
We conclude this chapter by explaining the notation used in the rest of the book. We also
give more precise definitions of some of the terms used earlier.
     First, a note about units of storage. We adopt the convention that a byte comprises
8 bits. Similarly, we use the terms kilobyte (KB), megabyte (MB), gigabyte (GB) and ter-
abyte (TB) to mean a corresponding power-of-two multiple of the unit byte (210 , 220 , 230 ,
240 , respectively), in flagrant disregard for the standard definitions of the SI decimal pre-
fixes. A word is a sequence of contiguous bytes large enough to contain a memory address
(pointer), typically 32 or 64 bits, and often required to be aligned on a particular byte
boundary (4 or 8 bytes).

 10 The coefficient of variation is the standard deviation divided by the mean.

                                                object                                    object
                       reference                                   reference
          Roots

                                                fields

Figure 1.3: Roots, heap cells and references. Objects, denoted by rectangles,
        may be divided into a number of fields, delineated by dashed lines. Refer-
        ences are shown as solid arrows.

The heap
The heap is either a contiguous array of memory words or organised into a set of discon-
tiguous blocks of contiguous words. A granule is the smallest unit of allocation, typically
a word or double-word, depending on alignment requirements. A chunk is a large contigu-
ous group of granules. A cell is a generally smaller contiguous group of granules and may
be allocated or free, or even wasted or unusable for some reason.
    An object is a cell allocated for use by the application. An object is usually assumed to be
a contiguous array of addressable bytes or words, divided into slots or fields, as in Figure 1.3
(although some memory managers for real-time or embedded systems may construct an
individual large object as a pointer structure, this structure is not revealed to the user
program). A field may contain a reference or some other scalar non-reference value such
as an integer. A reference is either a pointer to a heap object or the distinguished value
null.11 A reference will be the canonical pointer to the object, usually to its head (that is, its
first address), or it may point to some offset from the head. An object will sometimes also
have a header field which stores metadata used by the run-time system, commonly (but not
always) stored at the head of an object. A derived pointer is a pointer obtained by adding an
offset to an object’s canonical pointer. An interior pointer is a derived pointer to an internal
object field.
    A block is an aligned chunk of a particular size, usually a power of two. For com-
pleteness, we mention also that a frame (when not referring to a stack frame) means a large
2k sized portion of address space, and a space is a possibly discontiguous collection of
chunks, or even objects, that receive similar treatment by the system. A page is as defined
by the hardware and operating system’s virtual memory mechanism, and a cache line (or
cache block) is as defined by its cache. A card is a 2k aligned chunk, smaller than a page,
related to some schemes for remembering cross-space pointers (Section 11.8).
    The heap is often characterised as an object graph, which is a directed graph whose nodes
are heap objects and whose directed edges are the references to heap objects stored in their
fields. An edge is a reference from a source node or a root (see below) to a destination node.

The mutator and the collector
Following Dijkstra et al. [1976, 1978], a garbage-collected program is divided into two semi-
independent parts.

    • The mutator executes application code, which allocates new objects and mutates the
      object graph by changing reference fields so that they refer to different destination
      objects. These reference fields may be contained in heap objects as well as other
      places known as roots, such as static variables, thread stacks and so on. As a result of
  11 Note that some of the algorithms we present later assume that the numeric value of null is less than the

numeric value of any other reference. Since the numeric value of null is typically 0, this usually holds, but those
algorithms may require adjustment if a particular implementation uses some other distinguished value for null.

     such reference updates, any object can end up disconnected from the roots, that is,
     unreachable by following any sequence of edges from the roots.

   • The collector executes garbage collection code, which discovers unreachable objects
     and reclaims their storage.

A program may have more than one mutator thread, but these threads together can usually
be thought of as a single actor over the heap. Equally, there may be one or more collector
threads running in parallel.

The mutator roots
Separately from the heap memory, we assume some finite set of mutator roots, represent-
ing pointers held in storage that is directly accessible to the mutator without going through
other objects. By extension, objects in the heap referred to directly by the roots are called
root objects. The mutator visits objects in the graph by loading pointers from the current
set of root objects (adding new roots as it goes). The mutator can also discard a root by
overwriting the root pointer’s storage with some other reference (that is, null or a pointer
to another object). We denote the set of (addresses of) the roots by Roots.
    In practice, the roots usually comprise static/global storage and thread-local storage
(such as thread stacks) containing pointers through which mutator threads can directly
manipulate heap objects. As mutator threads execute over time, their state (and so their
roots) will change.
    In a type-safe programming language, once an object becomes unreachable in the heap,
and the mutator has discarded all root pointers to that object, then there is no way for the
mutator to reacquire a pointer to the object. The mutator cannot ‘rediscover’ the object
arbitrarily (without interaction with the run-time system) — there is no pointer the mutator
can traverse to it and arithmetic construction of new pointers is prohibited. A variety of
languages support finalisation of at least some objects. These appear to the mutator to be
‘resurrected’ by the run-time system. Our point is that the mutator cannot gain access to
any arbitrary unreachable object by its efforts alone.

References, fields and addresses
In general, we shall refer to a heap node N by using its memory address (though this need
not necessarily be the initial word of an object, but may be to some appropriate standard
point in the layout of the object’s data and metadata, which we call the canonical pointer).
Given an object (at address) N, we can refer to arbitrary fields of the object — which may
or may not contain pointers — by treating the object as an array of fields: the ith field
of an object N will be denoted N [i ], counting fields from 0; the number of fields of N is
written N . We write the usual C syntax for dereferencing a (non-null) pointer p as * p.
Similarly, we use & to obtain the address of a field. Thus, we write &N [i ] for the address of
the ith field of N. Given an object (at address) N the set Pointers( N ) denotes the set of
(addresses of) pointer fields of N. More formally:
    Pointers( N ) = { a | a =&N [i ], ∀i : 0 ≤ i < N where N [i ] is a pointer}
For convenience, we write Pointers to denote the set of all pointer fields of all objects
in the heap. Similarly, Nodes denotes the set of all (allocated) objects in the heap. For
convenience, we will also treat the set Roots as a pseudo-object (separate from the heap),
and define Pointers(Roots)=Roots synonymously. By implication, this allows us to
write Roots[i ] to refer to the ith root field.

Liveness, correctness and reachability
An object is said to be live if it will be accessed at some time in the future execution of the
mutator. A garbage collector is correct only if it never reclaims live objects. Unfortunately,
liveness is an undecidable property of programs: there is no way to decide for an arbitrary
program whether it will ever access a particular heap object or not.12 Just because a pro-
gram continues to hold a pointer to an object does not mean it will access it. Fortunately,
we can approximate liveness by a property that is decidable: pointer reachability. An object
N is reachable from an object M if N can be reached by following a chain of pointers, start-
ing from some field f of M. By extension, an object is only usable by a mutator if there is a
chain of pointers from one of the mutator’s roots to the object.
    More formally (in the mathematical sense that allows reasoning about reachability), we
can define the immediate ‘points-to’ relation → f as follows. For any two heap nodes M, N
in Nodes, M → f N if and only if there is some field location f =&M [i ] in Pointers( M )
such that * f = N. Similarly, Roots → f N if and only if there is some field f in Roots such
that * f = N. We say that N is directly reachable from M, written M → N, if there is some
field f in Pointers( M ) such that M → f N (that is, some field f of M points to N). Then,
the set of reachable objects in the heap is the transitive referential closure from the set of
Roots under the → relation, that is, the least set

   reachable = { N ∈ Nodes | (∃r ∈ Roots : r → N ) ∨ (∃ M ∈ reachable : M → N )}          (1.1)

    An object that is unreachable in the heap, and not pointed to by any mutator root, can
never be accessed by a type-safe mutator. Conversely, any object reachable from the roots
may be accessed by the mutator. Thus, liveness is more profitably defined for garbage col-
lectors by reachability. Unreachable objects are certainly dead and can safely be reclaimed.
But any reachable object may still be live and must be retained. Although we realise that
doing so is not strictly accurate, we will tend to use live and dead interchangeably with
reachable and unreachable, and garbage as synonymous with unreachable.

Pseudocode
We use a common pseudocode to describe garbage collection algorithms. We offer these
algorithm fragments as illustrative rather than definitive, preferring to resolve ambiguities
informally in the text rather than formally in the pseudocode. Our goal is a concise and
representative description of each algorithm rather than a fully fledged implementation.
    Indentation denotes the extent of procedure bodies and the scope of control statements.
The assignment operator is ← and the equality operator is =. Otherwise, we use C-style
symbols for the other logical and relational operators, such as || (conditional or), && (con-
ditional and), ≤, ≥, ̸=, % (modulus) and so on.

The allocator
The heap allocator can be thought of as functionally orthogonal to the collector, though in
practice some pairings of allocator and collector implemention strategies make more sense
than others. The allocator supports two operations: allocate, which reserves the under-
lying memory storage for an object, and free which returns that storage to the allocator
for subsequent reuse. The size of the storage reserved by allocate is passed as an op-
tional parameter; when omitted, the allocation is of a fixed-size object, or the size of the
object is not necessary for understanding of the algorithm. Where necessary, we may pass
 12 The undecidability of liveness is a corollary of the halting problem.

further arguments to allocate, for example to distinguish arrays from other objects, or
arrays of pointers from those that do not contain pointers, or to include other information
necessary to initialise object headers.

Mutator read and write operations
As they execute, mutator threads perform several operations of interest to the collector:
New, Read and Write. We adopt the convention of naming mutator operations with a
leading upper-case letter, as opposed to lower-case for collector operations. Generally,
these operations have the expected behaviour: allocating a new object, reading an object
field or writing an object field. Specific memory managers may augment these basic op-
erations with additional functionality that turns the operation into a barrier: an action that
results in synchronous or asynchronous communication with the collector. We distinguish
read barriers and write barriers.

New(). The New operation obtains a new heap object from the heap allocator which returns
the address of the first word of the newly allocated object. The mechanism for actual
allocation may vary from one heap implementation to another, but collectors usually need
to be informed that a given object has been allocated in order to initialise metadata for that
object, and before it can be manipulated by the mutator. The trivial default definition of
New simply allocates.
    New():
       return allocate()

Read(src,i). The Read operation accesses an object field in memory (which may hold a
scalar or a pointer) and returns the value stored at that location. Read generalises memory
loads and takes two arguments: (a pointer to) the object and the (index of its) field being
accessed. We allow src=Roots if the field src[i] is a root (that is, &src[i]∈Roots). The
default, trivial definition of Read simply returns the contents of the field.
    Read(src, i):
       return src[i]

Write(src,i,val). The Write operation modifies a particular location in memory. It
generalises memory stores and takes three arguments: (a pointer to) the source object and
the (index of its) field to be modified, plus the (scalar or pointer) value to be stored. Again,
if src=Roots, then the field src[i] is a root (that is, &src[i]∈Roots). The default, trivial
definition of Write simply updates the field.
    Write(src, i, val):
       src[i] ← val

Atomic operations
In the face of concurrency among mutator threads, among collector threads, and between
the mutator and collector, all collector algorithms require that certain code sequences
appear to execute atomically. For example, stopping mutator threads makes the task of
garbage collection appear to occur atomically: the mutator threads will never access the

heap in the middle of garbage collection. Moreover, when running the collector concur-
rently with the mutator, the New, Read and Write operations may need to appear to exe-
cute atomically with respect to the collector and/or other mutator threads. To simplify the
exposition of collector algorithms we will usually leave implicit the precise mechanism
by which atomicity of operations is achieved, simply marking them with the keyword
atomic. The meaning is clear: all the steps of an atomic operation must appear to execute
indivisibly and instantaneously with respect to other operations. That is, other operations
will appear to execute either before or after the atomic operation, but never interleaved
between any of the steps that constitute the atomic operation. For discussion of different
techniques to achieve atomicity as desired, see Chapter 11 and Chapter 13.

Sets, multisets, sequences and tuples
We use abstract data structures where this clarifies the discussion of an algorithm. We use
mathematical notation where it is appropriate but does not obscure simpler concepts. For
the most part, we will be interested in sets and tuples, and simple operations over them to
add, remove or detect elements.
   We use the usual definition of a set as a collection of distinct (that is, unique) elements.
The cardinality of a set S, written S , is the number of its elements.
   In addition to the standard set notation, we also make use of multisets. A multiset’s
elements may have repeated membership in the multiset. The cardinality of a multiset is
the total number of its elements, including repeated memberships. The number of times
an element appears is its multiplicity. We adopt the following notation:
   • [ ] denotes the empty multiset
   • [ a, a, b] denotes the multiset containing two as and one b
   • [ a, b] + [ a] = [ a, a, b] denotes multiset union
   • [ a, a, b] − [ a] = [ a, b] denotes multiset subtraction
  A sequence is an ordered list of elements. Unlike a set (or multiset), order matters. Like a
multiset, the same element can appear multiple times at different positions in the sequence.
We adopt the following notation:
   • () denotes the empty sequence
   • ( a, a, b) denotes the sequence containing two as followed by a b
   • ( a, b) · ( a) = ( a, b, a) denotes appending of the sequence ( a) to ( a, b)
   While a tuple of length k can be thought of as being equivalent to a sequence of the same
length, we sometimes find it convenient to use a different notation to emphasise the fixed
length of a tuple as opposed to the variable length of a sequence, and so on. We adopt the
notation below for tuples; we use only tuples of length two or more.
   • ⟨ a1 , ..., ak ⟩ denotes the k-tuple whose ith member is ai , for 1 ≤ i ≤ k
http://taylorandfrancis.com
