Chapter 2

Mark-sweep garbage collection

All garbage collection schemes are based on one of four fundamental approaches: mark-
sweep collection, copying collection, mark-compact collection, reference counting or some combi-
nation of these. Different collectors may combine these approaches in different ways, for
example, by collecting one region of the heap with one method and another part of the
heap with a second method. The next four chapters focus on these four basic styles of
collection. In Chapter 6 we compare their characteristics.
    For now we shall assume that the mutator is running one or more threads, but that there
is a single collector thread. All mutator threads are stopped while the collector thread runs.
For most systems, it is not safe to interrupt a mutator at any point in its execution in order
to perform a garbage collection. A collection can only be started at a point where (i) the
collector is guaranteed to be able to find all live objects (for instance, it must be able to
find all roots), and (ii) the mutator is guaranteed to be able to resume correctly after the
collection (which, in some algorithms, may have moved objects). The points where these
requirements hold are called GC safe-points. Mutators will check whether a collection is
needed at several points in the code. These must include object allocation sites and points
at which a thread may suspend, but may include other places in the code such as loop
back-edges. These points are called GC check-points. A GC check-point must be a GC safe-
point. We look at the details of GC safe-points in Section 11.6.
    This stop-the-world approach simplifies the construction of collectors considerably.
From the perspective of the mutator threads, collection appears to execute atomically: no
mutator thread will see any intermediate state of the collector, and the collector will not see
interference with its task by the mutator threads. We can assume that each mutator thread
is stopped at a point where it is safe to examine its roots. Stopping the world provides a
snapshot of the heap, so we do not have to worry about mutators rearranging the topology
of objects in the heap while the collector is trying to determine which objects are live. This
also means that there is no need to synchronise the collector thread with other collector
threads as it returns free space or with the allocator as it tries to acquire space. We avoid
the question of how multiple mutator threads can acquire fresh memory until Chapter 7.
There are more complex run-time systems that employ parallel collector threads or allow
mutator and collector threads to execute concurrently; we discuss them in later chapters.
    We encourage readers to familiarise themselves with the collectors in the next four
chapters before progressing to the more advanced collectors covered in later chapters. Ex-
perienced readers may wish to skip the descriptions of the basic algorithms, although we
hope that the accounts of more sophisticated ways to implement these collectors will prove
of interest. We refer readers who find some of the material in these four chapters rather too
compressed to Chapters 2 to 6 of Jones [1996], where the classical algorithms are covered
in greater detail with more examples.

   The goal of an ideal garbage collector is to reclaim the space used by every object that
will no longer be used by the program. Any automatic memory management system has
three tasks:

  1. to allocate space for new objects;

  2. to identify live objects;1 ; and

  3. to reclaim the space occupied by dead objects.

These tasks are not independent. In particular, the way space is reclaimed affects how fresh
space is allocated. As we noted in Chapter 1, true liveness is an undecidable problem.
Instead, we turn to an over-approximation of the set of live objects: pointer reachability
(defined on page 15). We accept an object as live if and only if it can be reached by following
a chain of references from a set of known roots. By extension, an object is dead, and its
space can be reclaimed, if it cannot be reached though any such chain of pointers. This is a
safe estimate. Although some objects in the live set may never be accessed again, all those
in the dead set are certainly dead.
    The first algorithm that we look at is mark-sweep collection [McCarthy, 1960]. It is a
straightforward embodiment of the recursive definition of pointer reachability. Collec-
tion operates in two phases. In the first, the collector traverses the graph of objects, start-
ing from the roots (registers, thread stacks, global variables) through which the program
might immediately access objects, and then following pointers and marking each object
that it finds. Such a traversal is called tracing. In the second, sweeping phase, the collector
examines every object in the heap: any unmarked object is deemed to be garbage and its
space reclaimed.
    Mark-sweep is an indirect collection algorithm. It does not detect garbage per se, but
rather identifies all the live objects and then concludes that anything else must be garbage.
Note that it needs to recalculate its estimate of the set of live objects at each invocation.
Not all garbage collection algorithms behave like this. Chapter 5 examines a direct collec-
tion method, reference counting. Unlike indirect methods, direct algorithms determine the
liveness of an object from the object alone, without recourse to tracing.

2.1     The mark-sweep algorithm
From the viewpoint of the garbage collector, mutator threads perform just three opera-
tions of interest, New, Read and Write, which each collection algorithm must redefine
appropriately (the default definitions were given in Chapter 1 on page 16). The mark-
sweep interface with the mutator is very simple. If a thread is unable to allocate a new
object, the collector is called and the allocation request is retried (Algorithm 2.1). To em-
phasise that the collector operates in stop-the-world mode, without concurrent execution
of the mutator threads, we mark the collect routine with the atomic keyword. If there
is still insufficient memory available to meet the allocation request, then heap memory is
exhausted. Often this is a fatal error. However, in some languages, New may raise an ex-
ception in this circumstance that the programmer may be able to catch. If memory can
be released by deleting references (for example, to cached data structures which could be
recreated later if necessary), then the allocation request could be repeated.
     Before traversing the object graph, the collector must first prime the marker’s work
list with starting points for the traversal (markFromRoots in Algorithm 2.2). Each root
object is marked and then added to the work list (we defer discussion of how to find
  1 Or, more or less equivalently, to identify dead ones.

Algorithm 2.1: Mark-sweep: allocation

 1   New():
 2      ref ← allocate()
 3      if ref = null                                             /* Heap is full */
 4          collect()
 5          ref ← allocate()
 6          if ref = null                                    /* Heap is still full */
 7             error "Out of memory"
 8      return ref
 9

10   atomic collect():
11      markFromRoots()
12      sweep(HeapStart, HeapEnd)

Algorithm 2.2: Mark-sweep: marking

 1   markFromRoots():
 2      initialise(worklist)
 3      for each fld in Roots
 4         ref ← *fld
 5         if ref ̸= null && not isMarked(ref)
 6            setMarked(ref)
 7            add(worklist, ref)
 8            mark()
 9

10   initialise(worklist):
11      worklist ← empty
12

13   mark():
14      while not isEmpty(worklist)
15          ref ← remove(worklist)                            /* ref is marked */
16          for each fld in Pointers(ref)
17             child ← *fld
18             if child ̸= null && not isMarked(child)
19                setMarked(child)
20                add(worklist, child)

Algorithm 2.3: Mark-sweep: sweeping

 1   sweep(start, end):
 2      scan ← start
 3      while scan < end
 4         if isMarked(scan)
 5            unsetMarked(scan)
 6         else free(scan)
 7         scan ← nextObject(scan)

roots to Chapter 11). An object can be marked by setting a bit (or a byte), either in the
object’s header or in a side table. If an object cannot contain pointers, then because it has
no children there is no need to add it to the work list. Of course the object itself must
still be marked. In order to minimise the size of the work list, markFromRoots calls
mark immediately. Alternatively, it may be desirable to complete scanning the roots of
each thread as quickly as possible. For instance, a concurrent collector might wish to stop
each thread only briefly to scan its stack and then traverse the graph while the mutator is
running. In this case, mark (line 8) could be moved outside the loop.
     For a single-threaded collector, the work list could be implemented as a stack. This
leads to a depth-first traversal of the graph. If mark bits are co-located with objects, it has
the advantage that the elements that are processed next are those that have been marked
most recently, and hence are likely to still be in the hardware cache. As we shall see re-
peatedly, it is essential to pay attention to cache behaviour if the collector is not to sacrifice
performance. Later we discuss techniques for improving locality.
     Marking the graph of live objects is straightforward. References are removed from the
work list, and the targets of their fields marked, until the work list is empty. Note that in
this version of mark, every item in the work list has its mark bit set. If a field contains a
null pointer or a pointer to an object that has already been marked, there is no work to do;
otherwise, the target is marked and added to the work list.
     Termination of the marking phase is enforced by not adding already marked objects
to the work list, so that eventually the list will become empty. At this point, every object
reachable from the roots will have been visited and its mark bit will have been set. Any
unmarked object is therefore garbage.
     The sweep phase returns unmarked nodes to the allocator (Algorithm 2.3). Typically,
the collector sweeps the heap linearly, starting from the bottom, freeing unmarked nodes
and resetting the mark bits of marked nodes in preparation for the next collection cycle.
Note that we can avoid the cost of resetting the mark bit of live objects if the sense of the
bit is switched between one collection and the next.
     We will not discuss the implementation of allocate and free until Chapter 7, but
note that the mark-sweep collector imposes constraints upon the heap layout. First, this
collector does not move objects. The memory manager must therefore be careful to try to
reduce the chance that the heap becomes so fragmented that the allocator finds it difficult
to meet new requests, which would lead to the collector being called too frequently, or in
the worst case, preventing the allocation of new memory at all. Second, the sweeper must
be able to find each node in the heap. In practice, given a node, sweep must be able to
find the next node even in the presence of padding introduced between objects in order to
observe alignment requirements. Thus, nextObject may have to parse the heap instead
of simply adding the size of the object to its address (line 7 in Algorithm 2.3); we also
discuss heap parsability in Chapter 7.

                                                                       Roots

      mark stack

                     A                         B                         C

Figure 2.1: Marking with the tricolour abstraction. Black objects and their
        children have been processed by the collector. The collector knows of grey
        objects but has not finished processing them. White objects have not yet been
        visited by the collector (and some will never be).

2.2      The tricolour abstraction
It is very convenient to have a concise way to describe the state of objects during a collec-
tion (have they been marked, are they in the work list, and so on). The tricolour abstraction
[Dijkstra et al., 1976, 1978] is a useful characterisation of tracing collectors that permits rea-
soning about collector correctness in terms of invariants that the collector must preserve.
Under the tricolour abstraction, tracing collection partitions the object graph into black
(presumed live) and white (possibly dead) objects. Initially, every node is white; when a
node is first encountered during tracing, it is shaded grey; when it has been scanned and
its children identified, it is coloured black. Conceptually, an object is black if the collector
has finished processing it, and grey if the collector knows about it but has not yet finished
processing it (or needs to process it again). We use the term shading to mean colouring
a white object grey; shading a grey or black object has no effect. By analogy with object
colour, fields can also be given a colour: grey when the collector first encounters them, and
black once traced by the collector. Some collectors even add these colours to pointers ex-
plicitly. This analogy also allows reasoning about the mutator roots as if the mutator were
an object [Pirinen, 1998]. A grey mutator has roots that have not yet been scanned by the
collector. A black mutator has roots that have already been scanned by the collector (and
do not need to be scanned again). Tracing makes progress through the heap by moving
the collector wavefront (the grey objects) separating black objects from white objects until
all reachable objects have been traced black.
     Objects are coloured by mark-sweep collection as follows. Figure 2.1 shows a simple
object graph and a mark stack (implementing the work list), mid-way through the mark
phase. Any objects held on the mark stack will be visited again, and so are grey. Any object
that has been marked, and is not on the stack, is black (the root of the graph in the figure).
All other objects are white (currently, A, B and C). However, once mark has completed its
traversal of the graph, the mark stack will be empty (no grey nodes), only C will remain
white (garbage), and all other nodes will have been marked (black).
     The algorithm preserves an important invariant: at the end of each iteration of the
marking loop, there are no references from black to white objects. Thus any white object
that is reachable must be reachable from a grey object. If this invariant were to be broken,
then a live descendant of a black object might not be marked (and hence would be freed in-
correctly) since the collector does not process black nodes further. The tricolour view of the

state of garbage collection is particularly useful when algorithms for concurrent garbage
collection are considered, where mutator threads run concurrently with the collector.

2.3    Improving mark-sweep
It is not uncommon for an application’s performance to be dominated by its cache be-
haviour. The latency to load a value from main memory is possibly hundreds of clock
cycles, whereas the latency for Level 1 caches may be only three or four cycles. Caches im-
prove performance because applications typically exhibit good temporal locality: if a mem-
ory location has been accessed recently, it is likely that it will be accessed again soon, and
so it is worth caching its value. Applications may also exhibit good spatial locality: if a
location is accessed, it is likely that adjacent locations will also be accessed soon. Modern
hardware can take advantage of this property in two ways. Rather than transferring single
words between a cache and lower levels of memory, each entry in the cache (a cache line or
cache block) holds a fixed number of bytes, typically 32 to 128 bytes. Secondly, processors
may use hardware prefetching. For example, many modern micro-architectures can detect a
regular stride in the memory access pattern and fetch streams of data in advance. Explicit
prefetching instructions are also commonly available for program-directed prefetching.
    Unfortunately, garbage collectors do not behave like typical applications. The tempo-
ral locality of mark-sweep collection is poor. In the mark phase, the collector typically
reads and writes an object’s header just once, since most objects are not shared (that is,
they are referenced by just one pointer), although a small number of objects may be very
popular [Printezis and Garthwaite, 2002]. The mark bit is read, and set if the object has not
already been marked: it is unlikely to be accessed again in this phase. Typically, the header
also contains a pointer to type information (possibly also an object itself), needed so that
the collector can find the reference fields in this object. This information may contain either
a descriptor identifying these fields, or it may be code that will mark and push the object’s
descendants onto the mark stack. Because programs only use a limited number of types,
and their frequency distribution is heavily skewed in favour of a small number of heavily
used types, type information may be a good candidate for caching. But, otherwise, objects
tend to be touched just once in this phase. Hardware prefetching is not tuned for this kind
of pointer chasing.
    We now consider ways to improve the performance of a mark-sweep collector.

2.4    Bitmap marking
Space for a mark bit can usually be found in an object header word. Alternatively, mark
bits can be stored in a separate bitmap table to the side of the heap, with a bit associated
with every address at which an object might be allocated. The space needed for the bitmap
depends on the object alignment requirements of the virtual machine. Either a single bit-
map can be used or, in a block-structured heap (treated in Chapter 7), a separate bitmap can
be used for each block. The latter organisation has the advantage that no space is wasted
if the heap is not contiguous. Per-block bitmaps might be stored in the blocks. However,
placing the bitmap at a fixed position in each block risks degrading performance. This is
because the bitmaps will contend for the same sets in a set-associative cache. Also, access-
ing the bitmap implies touching the page. Thus it may be better to use more instructions
to access the bit rather than to incur locality overheads due to paging and cache associa-
tivity. To avoid the cache associativity issue, the position of the bitmap in the block can be
varied by computing some simple hash of the block’s address to determine an offset for

the bit map. Alternatively, the bitmap can be stored to the side [Boehm and Weiser, 1988],
but using a table that is somehow indexed by block, perhaps by hashing. This avoids both
paging and cache conflicts.
    Bitmaps suffice if there is only a single marking thread. Otherwise, setting a bit in a
bitmap is vulnerable to losing updates to races, whereas setting a bit in an object header
only risks setting the same bit twice: the operation is idempotent. Instead of a bitmap, byte
maps are commonly used (at the cost of an eight-fold increase in space), thereby making
marking races benign. Alternatively, a bitmap must use a synchronised operation, such as
compare-and-swap or atomic fetch-and-or, to set a bit. In practice, matters are often more
complicated for header bits in systems that allow marking concurrently with mutators,
since header words are typically shared with mutator data such as locks or hash codes.
With care, it may be possible to place this data and mark bits in different bytes of a header
word. Otherwise, even mark bits in headers must be set atomically.
    Mark bitmaps have a number of potential advantages. We identify these now, and then
examine whether they materialise in practice on modern hardware. A bitmap stores marks
much more densely than if they are stored in object headers. Consider how mark-sweep
behaves with a mark bitmap. With a bitmap, marking will not modify any object, but
will only read pointer fields of live objects. Other than loading the type descriptor field,
no other part of pointer-free objects will be accessed. Sweeping will not read or write to
any live object although it may overwrite fields of garbage objects as part of freeing them
(for example to link them into a free-list). Thus bitmap marking is likely to modify fewer
words, and to dirty fewer cache lines so less data needs to be written back to memory.
    Bitmap marking dates to at least Lisp 1.5 but was adopted for a conservative collector
designed to provide automatic memory management for uncooperative languages like C
[Boehm and Weiser, 1988]. Type-accurate systems can precisely identify every slot that con-
tains a pointer, whether it is in an object, the stack frame of a thread or some other root.
Conservative collectors, on the other hand, do not receive this level of support from the
compiler or run-time system and so have to make conservative decisions on pointer iden-
tity. If the value held in a slot looks sufficiently like an object reference, it is assumed to be
one. We discuss the problems of pointer finding in more detail in Chapter 11. Conservative
collection may interpret a slot as a pointer when it is not; this has two consequences for
safety. First, the collector must not alter the value stored in any location owned by the
mutator (including objects and roots). This rules out all algorithms that move objects since
this would require updating every reference to a moved object. It also rules out storing
mark bits in object headers since the ‘object’ in question might not be an object if it was
reached by following a false pointer. Setting or clearing a bit might destroy user data. Sec-
ond, it is very useful to minimise the chance of the mutator interfering with the collector’s
data. Adding a header word for the collector’s use, contiguous to every object, is riskier
than keeping collector metadata such as mark bits in a separate data structure.
    Bitmap marking was also motivated by the concern to minimise the amount of paging
caused by the collector [Boehm, 2000]. However, in modern systems, any paging at all due
to the collector is generally considered unacceptable. The question for today is whether
bitmap marking can improve cache performance. There is considerable evidence that ob-
jects tend to live and die in clusters [Hayes, 1991; Jones and Ryder, 2008]. Many allocators
will tend to allocate these objects close to each other. Sweeping with a bitmap has two ad-
vantages. It allows the mark bits of clusters of objects to be tested and cleared in groups as
the common case will be that either every bit/byte is set or every bit/byte is clear in a map
word. A corollary is that it is simple from the bitmap to determine whether a complete
block of objects is garbage, thus allowing the whole block to be returned to the allocator.
    Many memory managers use a block-structured heap (for example, Boehm and Weiser
[1988]; see Chapter 7). A straightforward implementation might reserve a prefix of each

Algorithm 2.4: Printezis and Detlefs bitmap marking

 1   mark():
 2      cur ← nextInBitmap()
 3      while cur < HeapEnd                 /* marked ref is black if and only if ref < cur */
 4          add(worklist, cur)
 5          markStep(cur)
 6          cur ← nextInBitmap()
 7

 8   markStep(start):
 9      while not isEmpty(worklist)
10         ref ← remove(worklist)                                          /* ref is marked */
11         for each fld in Pointers(ref)
12            child ← *fld
13            if child ̸= null && not isMarked(child)
14               setMarked(child)
15               if child < start
16                   add(worklist, child)

block for its bitmap. As previously discussed, this leads to unnecessary cache conflicts and
page accesses, so collectors tend to store bitmaps separately from user data blocks.
    Garner et al. [2007] adopt a hybrid approach, associating each block in a segregated fits
allocator’s data structure with a byte in a map, as well as marking a bit in object headers.
The byte is set if and only if the corresponding block contains at least one object. The byte
map of used/unused blocks thus allows the sweeper to determine easily which blocks are
completely empty (of live objects) and can be recycled as a whole. This has two advan-
tages. Both the bit in the object header and the byte in the byte map, corresponding to
the block in which the object resides, can be set without using synchronised operations.
Furthermore, there are no data dependencies on either write (which might lead to cache
stalls), and writing the byte in the byte map is unconditional.
    Printezis and Detlefs [2000] use bitmaps to reduce the amount of space used for mark
stacks in a mostly-concurrent, generational collector. First, as usual, mutator roots are
marked by setting a bit in the map. Then, the marking thread linearly searches this bit-
map, looking for live objects. Algorithm 2.4 strives to maintain the invariant that marked
objects below the current ‘finger’, cur in the mark routine, are black and those above it are
grey. When the next live (marked) object cur is found, it is pushed onto the stack and we
enter the usual marking loop to restore the invariant: objects are popped from the stack
and their children marked recursively until the mark stack is empty. If an item is below
cur in the heap, it is pushed onto the mark stack; otherwise, its processing is deferred to
later in the linear search. The main difference between this algorithm and Algorithm 2.1 is
its conditional insertion of children onto the stack at line 15. Objects are only marked re-
cursively (thus consuming mark stack space) if they are behind the black wavefront which
moves linearly through the heap. Although the complexity of this algorithm is propor-
tional to the size of the space being collected, in practice searching a bitmap is cheap.
    A similar approach can be used to deal with mark stack overflow. When the stack
overflows, this is noted and the object is marked but not pushed onto the stack. Marking
continues until the stack is exhausted. Now we must find those marked objects that could

Algorithm 2.5: Lazy sweeping with a block-structured heap

 1   atomic collect():
 2      markFromRoots()
 3      for each block in Blocks
 4         if not isMarked(block)                          /* no objects marked in this block? */
 5            add(blockAllocator, block)                      /* return block to block allocator */
 6         else
 7            add(reclaimList, block)                        /* queue block for lazy sweeping */
 8

 9   atomic allocate(sz):
10      result ← remove(sz)                                  /* allocate from size class for sz */
11      if result = null                                      /* if no free slots for this size. . . */
12         lazySweep(sz)                                                         /* sweep a little */
13         result ← remove(sz)
14      return result                                                     /* if still null, collect */
15

16   lazySweep(sz):
17      repeat
18         block ← nextBlock(reclaimList, sz)
19         if block ̸= null
20            sweep(start(block), end(block))
21            if spaceFound(block)
22               return
23      until block = null                /* reclaim list for this size class is empty */
24      allocSlow(sz)                                           /* get an empty block */
25

26   allocSlow(sz):                                                     /* allocation slow path */
27      block ← allocateBlock()                                     /* from the block allocator */
28      if block ̸= null
29         initialise(block, sz)

not be added to the stack. The collector searches the heap, looking for any marked objects
with one or more unmarked children and continues the trace from these children. The
most straightforward way to do this is with a linear sweep of the heap. Sweeping a bitmap
will be more efficient than examining a bit in the header of each object in the heap.

2.5     Lazy sweeping
The complexity of the mark phase is O( L), where L is the size of the live data in the heap;
the complexity of the sweep phase is O( H ) where H is the size of the heap. Since H > L, at
first sight it might seem that the mark-sweep algorithm is dominated by the cost of sweep-
ing. However, in practice, this is not the case. Chasing pointers in the mark phase leads
to unpredictable memory access patterns, whereas sweep behaviour is more predictable.
Further, the cost of sweeping an object tends to be much less than the cost of tracing it. One
way to improve the cache behaviour of the sweep phase is to prefetch objects. In order to
avoid fragmentation, allocators supporting mark-sweep collectors typically lay out objects

of the same size consecutively (see Chapter 7 on page 98) leading to a fixed stride as a block
of same-sized objects is swept. Not only does this pattern allow software prefetching, but
it is also ideal for the hardware prefetching mechanisms found in modern processors.
     Can the time for which the mutators are stopped during the sweep phase be reduced
or even eliminated? We observe two properties of objects and their mark bits. First, once
an object is garbage, it remains garbage: it can neither be seen nor be resurrected by a mu-
tator.2 Second, mutators cannot access mark bits. Thus, the sweeper can be executed in
parallel with mutator threads, modifying mark bits and even overwriting fields of garbage
objects to link them into allocator structures. The sweeper (or sweepers) could be executed
as separate threads, running concurrently with the mutator threads, but a simple solution
is to use lazy sweeping [Hughes, 1982]. Lazy sweeping amortises the cost of sweeping by
having the allocator perform the sweep. Rather than a separate sweep phase, the responsi-
bility for finding free space is devolved to allocate. At its simplest, allocate advances
the sweep pointer until it finds sufficient space in a sequence of unmarked objects. How-
ever, it is more practical to sweep a block of several objects at a time.
     Algorithm 2.5 shows a lazy sweeper that operates on a block of memory at a time. It
is common for allocators to place objects of the same size class into a block (we discuss this
in detail in Chapter 7). Each size class will have one or more current blocks from which
it can allocate and a reclaim list of blocks not yet swept. As usual the collector will mark
all live objects in the heap, but instead of eagerly sweeping the whole heap, collect will
simply return any completely empty blocks to the block level allocator (line 5). All other
blocks are added to the reclaim queue for their size class. Once the stop-the-world phase
of the collection cycle is complete, the mutators are restarted. The allocate method first
attempts to acquire a free slot of the required size from an appropriate size class (in the
same way as Algorithm 7.7 would). If that fails, the lazy sweeper is called to sweep one or
more remaining blocks of this size class, but only until the request can be satisfied (line 12).
However, it may be the case that no blocks remain to be swept or that none of the blocks
swept contained any free slots. In this case, the sweeper attempts to acquire a whole fresh
block from a lower level block allocator. This fresh block is initialised by setting up its
metadata — for example, threading a free-list through its slots or creating a mark byte
map. However, if no fresh blocks are available, the collector must be called.
     There is a subtle issue that arises from lazy sweeping a block-structured heap such as
one that allocates from different size classes. Hughes [1982] worked with a contiguous
heap and thus guaranteed that the allocator would sweep every node before it ran out
of space and invoked the garbage collector again. However, lazily sweeping separate size
classes does not make this guarantee since it is almost certain that the allocator will exhaust
one size class (and all the empty blocks) before it has swept every block in every other size
class. This leads to two problems. First, garbage objects in unswept blocks will not be
reclaimed, leading to a memory leak. If the block also contains a truly live object, this leak
is harmless since these slots would not have been recycled anyway until the mutator made
a request for an object of this size class. Second, if all the objects in the unswept block
subsequently become garbage, we have lost the opportunity to reclaim the whole block
and recycle it to more heavily used size classes.
     The simplest solution is to complete sweeping all blocks in the heap before starting
to mark. However, it might be preferable to give a block more opportunities to be lazily
swept. Garner et al. [2007] trade some leakage for avoiding some sweeps. They achieve
this for the Jikes RVM Java virtual machine with the MMTk memory management toolkit
[Blackburn et al., 2004b] by marking objects with a bounded integer rather than a bit. This
  2 Some finalisation schemes can resurrect objects, but that is done by the collector, not the mutator.

does not usually add space costs since there is often room to use more than one bit if marks
are stored in object headers, and separate mark tables often mark with bytes rather than
bits. Each collection cycle increments modulo 2K the value used as the mark represent-
ing ‘live’, where K is the number of mark bits used, thus rolling the mark back to zero
on overflow. In this way, the collector can distinguish between an object marked in this
cycle and one marked in a previous cycle. Only marks equal to the current mark value
are considered to be set. Marking value wrap-around is safe because, immediately before
the wrap-around, any live object in the heap is either unmarked (allocated since the last
collection) or has the maximum mark bit value. Any object with a mark equal to the next
value to be used must have been marked last some multiple of 2K collections ago. There-
fore, it must be floating garbage and will not be visited by the marker. This potential leak
is addressed somewhat by block marking. Whenever the MMTk collector marks an object,
it also marks its block. If none of the objects in a block has been marked with the current
value, then the block will not have been marked either and so will be reclaimed as a whole
at line 5 in Algorithm 2.5. Given the tendency for objects to live and die in clumps, this is
an effective tactic.
    Lazy sweeping offers a number of benefits. It has good locality: object slots tend to
be used soon after they are swept. It reduces the algorithmic complexity of mark-sweep
to be proportional to the size of the live data in the heap, the same as semispace copying
collection, which we discuss in Chapter 4. In particular, Boehm [1995] suggests that mark
and lazy sweep will perform best in the same circumstance that copying performs best:
when most of the heap is empty, as the lazy sweep’s search for unmarked objects will
terminate quickly. In practice, the mutator’s cost of initialising objects is likely to dominate
the cost of sweeping and allocation.

2.6    Cache misses in the marking loop
We have seen how prefetching can improve the performance of the sweep phase. We now
examine how it can also be employed to advantage in the mark phase. For example, by
densely packing mark bits into a bitmap, the number of cache misses incurred by testing
and setting marks can be reduced. However, cache misses will be incurred as the fields
of an unmarked object are read as part of the traversal. Thus, much of the potential cache
advantage of using mark bitmaps in the mark phase will be lost as object fields are loaded.
    If an object is pointer-free, it is not necessary to load any of its fields. Although matters
will vary by language and by application, it is likely that the heap may contain a significant
volume of objects with no user-defined pointer fields. Whether or not an object contains
pointers is an aspect of its type. One way that this can be determined is from the type
information slot in an object’s header. However, it is also possible to obtain information
about an object from its address, for example if objects with similar characteristics are lo-
cated together. Lisp systems have often used a big bag of pages allocation (BiBoP) technique,
allocating objects of only one type (such as cons cells) on a page, thus allowing type infor-
mation to be compactly associated with the page rather than each object [Foderaro et al.,
1985]. Similarly, pointer-full and pointer-free objects can be segregated. Pointers them-
selves can also encode type information [Steenkiste, 1987; Steenkiste and Hennessy, 1988].
    Boehm [2000] observes that marking dominates collection time, with the cost of fetch-
ing the first pointer from an object accounting for a third of the time spent marking on
an Intel Pentium III system. He suggests prefetching on grey: fetching the first cache line
of an object as that object is greyed (added to the mark stack, line 20 of Algorithm 2.2),
and prefetching a modest number of cache lines ahead as very large objects are scanned.

                                                   add()

                                           child

                                                                       remove()

                                    addr                         obj
                    mark stack                          FIFO

                                                   prefetch()

Figure 2.2: Marking with a FIFO prefetch buffer. As usual, references are
       added to the work list by being pushed onto the mark stack. However, to
       remove an item from the work list, the oldest item is removed from the FIFO
       buffer and the entry at the top of the stack is inserted into it. The object to
       which this entry refers is prefetched so that it should be in the cache by the
       time this entry leaves the buffer.

Algorithm 2.6: Marking with a FIFO prefetch buffer

 1   add(worklist, item):
 2      markStack ← getStack(worklist)
 3      push(markStack, item)
 4

 5   remove(worklist):
 6      markStack ← getStack(worklist)
 7      addr ← pop(markStack)
 8      prefetch(addr)
 9      fifo ← getFifo(worklist)
10      prepend(fifo, addr)
11      return remove(fifo)

However, this technique relies on the timing of the prefetch. If the cache line is prefetched
too soon, it may be evicted from the cache before it is used. If it is fetched too late, then the
cache miss will occur anyway.
    Cher et al. [2004] observe that the fundamental problem is that cache lines are fetched
in a breadth-first, first-in, first-out (FIFO), order but the mark-sweep algorithm traverses the
graph depth-first, last-in, first-out (LIFO). Their solution is to insert a first-in, first-out queue
in front of the mark stack (Figure 2.2 and Algorithm 2.6). As usual, when mark adds an
object to its work list, a reference to the object is pushed onto a mark stack. However, when
mark wants to acquire an object from the work list, a reference is popped from the mark
stack but inserted into the queue, and the oldest item in the queue is returned to mark. The
reference popped from the stack is also prefetched, the length of the queue determining the
prefetch distance. Prefetching a few lines beyond the popped reference will help to ensure
that sufficient fields of the object to be scanned are loaded without cache misses.

Algorithm 2.7: Marking graph edges rather than nodes

 1   mark():
 2      while not isEmpty(worklist)
 3          obj ← remove(worklist)
 4          if not isMarked(obj)
 5             setMarked(obj)
 6             for each fld in Pointers(obj)
 7                child ← *fld
 8                if child ̸= null
 9                   add(worklist, child)

    Prefetching the object to be marked through the first-in, first-out queue enables mark
to load the object to be scanned without cache misses (lines 16–17 in Algorithm 2.2). How-
ever, testing and setting the mark of the child nodes will incur a cache miss (line 18).
Garner et al. [2007] realised that mark’s tracing loop can be restructured to offer greater
opportunities for prefetching. Algorithm 2.2 added each node of the live object graph to
the work list exactly once; an alternative would be to traverse and add each edge exactly
once. Instead of adding children to the work list only if they are unmarked, this algorithm
inserts the children of unmarked objects unconditionally (Algorithm 2.7). Edge enqueu-
ing requires more instructions to be executed and leads to larger work lists than node
enqueuing since graphs must contain more edges than nodes (Garner et al. suggest that
typical Java applications have about 40% more edges than nodes). However, if the cost of
adding and removing these additional work list entries is sufficiently small then the gains
from reducing cache misses will outweigh the cost of this extra work. Algorithm 2.7 hoists
marking out of the inner loop. The actions that might lead to cache misses, isMarked and
Pointers, now operate on the same object obj, which has been prefetched through the
first-in, first-out queue, rather than on different objects, obj and its children, as previously.
Garner et al. observe that tracing edges rather than nodes can improve performance even
without software prefetching, speculating that the structure of the loop and the first-in,
first-out queue enables more aggressive hardware speculation through more predictable
access patterns.

2.7    Issues to consider
Despite its antiquity as the first algorithm developed for garbage collection [McCarthy,
1960], there are many reasons why mark-sweep collection remains an attractive option for
developers and users today.

Mutator overhead
Mark-sweep in its simplest form imposes no overhead on mutator read and write opera-
tions. In contrast, reference counting (which we introduce in Chapter 5) imposes a signifi-
cant overhead on the mutator. However, note that mark-sweep is also commonly used as
a base algorithm for more sophisticated collectors which do require some synchronisation
between mutator and collector. Both generational collectors (Chapter 9), and concurrent
and incremental collectors (Chapter 15), require the mutator to inform the collector when
they modify pointers. However, the overhead of doing so is typically small, a few percent
of overall execution time.

Throughput
Combined with lazy sweeping, mark-sweep offers good throughput. The mark phase
is cheap compared to other collection methods, and is dominated by the cost of pointer
chasing. It simply needs to set a bit or byte for each live object discovered, in contrast
to algorithms like semispace copying collection (Chapter 4) or mark-compact (Chapter 3)
which must copy or move objects. On the other hand, like all the tracing collectors in these
initial chapters, mark-sweep requires that all mutators be stopped while the collector runs.
The pause time for collection depends on the program being run and its input, but can
easily extend to several seconds or worse for large systems.

Space usage
Mark-sweep has significantly better space usage than approaches based on semispace
copying. It also potentially has better space usage than reference counting algorithms.
Mark bits can often be stored at no cost in spare bits in object headers. Alternatively, if a
side bitmap table is used, the space overhead depends on object alignment requirements;
                                                     1     1
it will be no worse than 1/alignment of the heap ( 32  or 64 of the heap, depending on archi-
tecture), and possibly better depending on alignment restrictions. Reference counting, on
the other hand, requires a full slot in each object header to store counts (although this can
be reduced if a limit is placed on the maximum reference count stored). Copying collectors
make even worse use of available memory, dividing the available heap into two equally
sized semispaces, only one of which is used by the mutator at any time. On the debit
side, non-compacting collectors, like mark-sweep and reference counting, require more
complex allocators, such as segregated fits free-lists. The structures needed to support
such collectors impose a further, non-negligible overhead. Furthermore, non-compacting
collectors can suffer from fragmentation, thus increasing their effective space usage.
    However, mark-sweep is a tracing algorithm. Like other tracing algorithms, it must
identify all live objects in a space before it can reclaim the memory used by any dead
objects. This is an expensive operation and so should be done infrequently. This means
that tracing collectors must be given some headroom in which to operate in the heap. If
the live objects occupy too large a proportion of the heap, and the allocators allocate too
fast, then a mark-sweep collector will be called too often: it will thrash. For moderate to
large heaps, the headroom necessary may be between 20% and 50% of the heap [Jones,
1996] though Hertz and Berger [2005] and Sareen and Blackburn [2022] show that, in order
to provide the same throughput, Java programs managed by mark-sweep collection may
need a heap about 25% to 50% larger than if it were to be managed by explicit deallocation.

To move or not to move?
Not moving objects has both advantages and disadvantages. Its benefit is that it makes
mark-sweep a suitable candidate for use in uncooperative environments where there is
no communication between language compiler and garbage collector (see Chapter 11).
Without type-accurate information about the mutators’ roots and the fields of objects, they
cannot be updated with the new locations of moved objects — the putative ‘root’ might not
be a pointer but other user data. In some cases, hybrid mostly-copying collection is possible
[Bartlett, 1988a; Hosking, 2006]. Here, a program’s roots must be treated conservatively (if
it looks like a pointer, assume it is a pointer), so the collector cannot move their referents.
However, type-accurate information about the layout of objects is available to the collector
so it can move others that are not otherwise pinned to their location.

    Safety in uncooperative systems managed by a conservative collector precludes the col-
lector’s modifying user data, including object headers. It also encourages placing collector
metadata separate from user or other run-time system data, to reduce the risk of modifi-
cation by the mutator. For both reasons, it is desirable to store mark bits in bitmaps rather
than object headers.
    The problem with not moving objects is that, in long-running applications, the heap
tends to become fragmented. Non-moving memory allocators require space O(log max         min )
larger than the minimum possible, where min and max are the smallest and largest possible
object sizes [Robson, 1971, 1974]. Thus a non-compacting collector may have to be called
more frequently than one that compacts. Note that all tracing collectors need sufficient
headroom (say, 20% to 50%) in the heap in order to avoid thrashing the collector.
    To avoid having performance suffer due to excessive fragmentation, many production
collectors that use mark-sweep to manage a portion of the heap also periodically use an-
other algorithm such as mark-compact to defragment it. This is particularly true if the
application does not maintain fairly constant ratios of object sizes or allocates many very
large objects. If the application allocates more large objects than it previously did, the re-
sult may be many small holes in the heap no longer being reused for new allocations of
objects of the same size. Conversely, if the application begins to allocate smaller objects
than before, these smaller objects might be allocated in gaps previously occupied by larger
objects, with the remaining space in each gap being wasted. However, careful heap man-
agement can reduce the tendency to fragment by taking advantage of objects’ tendency to
live and die in clumps [Dimpsey et al., 2000; Blackburn and McKinley, 2008]. Allocation
with segregated-fits can also reduce the need to compact. For instance, the Riptide col-
lector [Pizlo, 2017] for the WebKit browser engine, used by the Safari browser and many
other applications, does not move objects.
http://taylorandfrancis.com
