Chapter 3

Mark-compact garbage collection

Fragmentation1 can be a problem for non-moving collectors. Although there may be space
available in the heap, either there may be no contiguous chunk of free space sufficiently
large to handle an allocation request, or the time taken to allocate may become excessive
as the memory manager has to search for suitable free space. Allocators may alleviate this
problem by storing small objects of the same size together in blocks [Boehm and Weiser,
1988] especially, as we noted earlier, for applications that do not allocate many very large
objects and whose sets of different objects sizes do not change much. However, many
long-running applications, when managed by non-moving collectors, will fragment the
heap and performance will suffer.
    In this and the next chapter we discuss two strategies for compacting live objects in
the heap in order to eliminate external fragmentation. The major benefit of a compacted
heap is that it allows very fast sequential allocation simply by testing against a heap limit
and ‘bumping’ a free pointer, thus often called a bump pointer, by the size of the allocation
request (we discuss allocation mechanisms further in Chapter 7). The strategy we consider
in this chapter is in-place compaction2 of objects into one end of the same region. In the
next chapter we discuss a second strategy, copying collection — the evacuation of live objects
from one region to another (for example, between semispaces).
    Mark-compact algorithms operate in a number of phases. The first phase is always
a marking phase, which we discussed in the previous chapter. Then, further compacting
phases compact the live data by relocating objects and updating the pointer values of all
live references to objects that have moved. The number of passes over the heap, the order
in which these are executed and the way in which objects are relocated varies from algo-
rithm to algorithm. The compaction order has locality implications. Any moving collector
may rearrange objects in the heap in one of three ways.

Arbitrary: objects are relocated without regard for their original order or whether they
     point to one another.

Linearising: objects are relocated so that they are adjacent to related objects, such as ones
     to which they refer, which refer to them, which are siblings in a data structure, and
     so on, as far as this is possible.

Sliding: objects are slid to one end of the heap, squeezing out garbage, thereby maintain-
     ing their order of placement in the heap.
  1 We discuss fragmentation in more detail in Section 7.3.
  2 Often called compactifying in older papers.

    Most compacting collectors of which we are aware use arbitrary or sliding orders. Ar-
bitrary order compactors are simple to implement and fast to execute, particularly if all
nodes are of a fixed size, but lead to poor spatial locality for the mutator because related
objects may be dispersed to different cache lines or virtual memory pages. All modern
mark-compact collectors implement sliding compaction, which does not interfere with
mutator locality by changing the relative order of object placement. Copying collectors
can even improve mutator locality by varying the order in which objects are laid out by
placing them close to their parents or siblings. Conversely, experiments with a collector
that compacts in an arbitrary order confirm that its rearrangement of objects’ layout can
lead to drastic reductions in application throughput [Abuaiadh et al., 2004].
    Compaction algorithms may impose further constraints. Arbitrary order algorithms
handle objects of only a single size or compact objects of different sizes separately. Com-
paction may require two or three passes through the heap. It may be necessary to provide
an extra slot in object headers to hold relocation information; such an overhead is likely to
be significant for a general purpose memory manager. Compaction algorithms may im-
pose restrictions on pointers. For example, in which direction may references point? Are
interior pointers allowed? We discuss the issues they present in Chapter 11.
    We examine several styles of compaction algorithm. First, we introduce Edwards’s
Two-Finger collector [Saunders, 1974]. Although this algorithm is simple to implement
and fast to execute, it disturbs the layout of objects in the heap. The second compacting
collector is a widely used sliding collector, the Lisp 2 algorithm. However, unlike the Two-
Finger algorithm, it requires an additional slot in each object’s header to store its forwarding
address, the location to which it will be moved. Our third example, Jonkers’s threaded
compaction [1979], slides objects without any space overhead. However, it makes two
passes over the heap, both of which tend to be expensive. The final class of compacting
algorithms that we consider are fast, modern sliding collectors that similarly require no
per-object storage overhead. Instead, they compute forwarding addresses on the fly. All
compaction algorithms are invoked as follows:
    atomic collect():
       markFromRoots()
       compact()

3.1    Two-finger compaction
Edwards’s Two-Finger algorithm [Saunders, 1974] is a two-pass, arbitrary order algorithm,
designed to compact regions containing objects of a fixed size. The idea is simple: given
the volume of live data in the region to be compacted, we know where the high-water
mark of the region will be after compaction. Live objects above this threshold are moved
into gaps below the threshold. Algorithm 3.1 starts with two pointers or ‘fingers’, free
which points to the start of the region of fixed-size slots and scan which starts at the end
of the region. The first pass repeatedly advances the free pointer until it finds a gap (an
unmarked object) in the heap, and retreats the scan pointer until it finds a live object. If
the free and scan fingers pass each other, the phase is complete. Otherwise, the object
at scan is moved into the gap at free, overwriting a field of the old copy (at scan) with
a forwarding address, and the process continues. This is illustrated in Figure 3.1, where
object A has been moved to its new location A′ and some slot of A (say, the first slot) has
been overwritten with the address A′ . Note that the quality of compaction depends on the
size of the gap at free closely matching the size of the live object at scan. Unless this
algorithm is used on fixed-size objects, the degree of defragmentation might be very poor

                                        high-water
                                           mark

           A'      free                               scan                    A

Figure 3.1: Edwards’s Two-Finger algorithm. Live objects at the top of the
       heap are moved into free gaps at the bottom of the heap. Here, the object at
       A has been moved to A′ . The algorithm terminates when the free and scan
       pointers meet.

Algorithm 3.1: The Two-Finger compaction algorithm

 1   compact():
 2      relocate(HeapStart, HeapEnd, slotSize)
 3      updateReferences(HeapStart, free, slotSize)
 4

 5   relocate(start, end, slotSize):
 6      free ← start
 7      scan ← end
 8

 9      while free < scan
10         while isMarked(free)
11            unsetMarked(free)
12            free ← free + slotSize                                      /* find next hole */
13

14              while not isMarked(scan) && scan > free
15                 scan ← scan − slotSize              /* find previous live object */
16

17              if scan > free
18                 unsetMarked(scan)
19                 move(scan, free)
20                 *scan ← free           /* leave forwarding address (destructively) */
21                 free ← free + slotSize
22                 scan ← scan − slotSize
23

24   updateReferences(start, end, slotSize):
25      for each fld in Roots          /* update roots that pointed to moved objects */
26         ref ← *fld
27         if ref ≥ end
28            *fld ← *ref             /* use the forwarding address left in first pass */
29

30      scan ← start
31      while scan < end                              /* update fields in live region */
32         for each fld in Pointers(scan)
33            ref ← *fld
34            if ref ≥ end
35               *fld ← *ref         /* use the forwarding address left in first pass */
36         scan ← scan + slotSize                                      /* next object */

indeed, since the algorithm would leave holes where the next free gap is smaller than the
size of the object to move, or in the worst case, might not compact the region at all if there
is no gap sufficiently large to accommodate the first object to be moved. At the end of
this phase, free points at the high-water mark. The second pass updates the old values
of pointers that referred to locations beyond the high-water mark with the forwarding
addresses found in those locations, that is, with the objects’ new locations.
    The benefits of this algorithm are that it is simple and fast, doing minimal work at each
iteration. It has no memory overhead, since forwarding addresses are written into slots
above the high-water mark only after the live object at that location has been relocated:
no information is destroyed. The algorithm supports interior pointers. Its memory access
patterns are predictable, and hence provide opportunities for prefetching (by either hard-
ware or software) which should lead to good cache behaviour in the collector. The scan
pointer movement in relocate requires that the heap (or at least the live objects) can be
parsed ‘backwards’, which is not a problem as objects are fixed-size here. Unfortunately,
the order of objects in the heap that results from this style of compaction is arbitrary, and
this tends to harm the mutator’s locality. Nevertheless, it is easy to imagine how mutator
locality might be improved somewhat. Since related objects tend to live and die together
in clumps, rather than moving individual objects, we could move groups of consecutive
live objects into large gaps. In the remainder of this chapter, we look at sliding collectors
which maintain the layout order of the mutator.

3.2    The Lisp 2 algorithm
The Lisp 2 collector (Algorithm 3.2) is widely used, either in its original form or adapted
for parallel collection [Flood et al., 2001]. It can be used with objects of varying sizes and,
although it makes three passes over the heap, each iteration does little work (compared,
for example, with threaded compactors). Although all mark-compact collectors have rela-
tively poor throughput, a complexity study by Cohen and Nicolau [1983] found the Lisp 2
compactor to be the fastest of the compaction algorithms they studied. However, they did
not take cache or paging behaviour into account, which is an important factor as we have
seen before. The chief drawback of the Lisp 2 algorithm is that it requires an additional
full-slot field in every object header to store the address to which the object is to be moved;
this field can also be used for the mark bit.
    The first pass over the heap (after marking) computes the location to which each live
object will be moved, and stores this address in the object’s forwardingAddress field
(Algorithm 3.2). The computeLocations routine takes three arguments: the addresses
of the start and the end of the region of the heap to be compacted, and the start of the
region into which the compacted objects are to be moved. Typically the destination region
will be the same as the region being compacted, but parallel compactor threads may use
their own distinct source and destination regions. The computeLocations procedure
moves two ‘fingers’ through the heap: scan iterates through each object (live or dead) in
the source region, and free points to the next free location in the destination region. If the
object discovered by scan is live, it will (eventually) be moved to the location pointed to
by free so free is written into its forwardingAddress field, and is then incremented
by the size of the object (plus any alignment padding). If the object is dead, it is ignored.
    The second pass (updateReferences in Algorithm 3.2) updates the roots of mutator
threads and references in marked objects so that they refer to the new locations of their
targets, using the forwarding address stored in each about-to-be-relocated object’s header
by the first pass. Finally, in the third pass, relocate moves each live (marked) object in a
region to its new destination.

Algorithm 3.2: The Lisp 2 compaction algorithm

 1   compact():
 2      computeLocations(HeapStart, HeapEnd, HeapStart)
 3      updateReferences(HeapStart, HeapEnd)
 4      relocate(HeapStart, HeapEnd)
 5

 6   computeLocations(start, end, toRegion):
 7      scan ← start
 8      free ← toRegion
 9      while scan < end
10         if isMarked(scan)
11            forwardingAddress(scan) ← free
12            free ← align(free + size(scan))
13         scan ← nextObject(scan)
14

15   updateReferences(start, end):
16      for each fld in Roots                                     /* update roots */
17         ref ← *fld
18         if ref ̸= null
19            *fld ← forwardingAddress(ref)
20

21      scan ← start                                              /* update fields */
22      while scan < end
23         if isMarked(scan)
24            for each fld in Pointers(scan)
25               if *fld ̸= null
26                  *fld ← forwardingAddress(*fld)
27         scan ← nextObject(scan)
28

29   relocate(start, end):
30      scan ← start
31      while scan < end
32         if isMarked(scan)
33            dest ← forwardingAddress(scan)
34            move(scan, dest)
35            unsetMarked(dest)
36         scan ← nextObject(scan)

                        A                     B                C

                                                  info
                                              N

                            (a) Before threading: three objects refer to N

                        A                     B                C

                               info

                                              N

         (b) After threading: all pointers to N have been ‘threaded’ so that the objects that
         previously referred to N can now be found from N. The value previously stored
         in the header word of N, which is now used to store the threading pointer, has
         been (temporarily) moved to the first field (in A) that referred to N.

Figure 3.2: Threading pointers

    Notice that the direction of the passes (upward, from lower to higher addresses in our
code) is opposite to the direction in which the objects will move (downward, from higher
to lower addresses). This guarantees that when the third pass copies an object, it is to
a location that has already been vacated. Some parallel compactors that divide the heap
into blocks slide the contents of alternating blocks in opposite directions. This results in
larger ‘clumps’, and hence larger free gaps, than sliding each block’s contents in the same
direction [Flood et al., 2001]. An example is shown in Figure 14.8.
    This algorithm can be improved in several ways. Data can be prefetched in similar
ways as for the sweep phase of mark-sweep collectors. Adjacent garbage can be merged
after line 10 of computeLocations in order to improve the speed of subsequent passes.

3.3    Threaded compaction
The most immediate drawbacks of the Lisp 2 algorithm are (i) that it requires three com-
plete passes over the heap, and (ii) that space is added to each object for a forwarding
address. The one is the consequence of the other. Sliding compacting garbage collection is
a destructive operation which overwrites old copies of live data with new copies of other
live data. It is essential to preserve forwarding address information until all objects have
been moved and all references updated. The Lisp 2 algorithm is non-destructive at the cost
of requiring an extra slot in the object header to store the forwarding address. The Two-
Finger algorithm is non-destructive because the forwarding addresses are written beyond
the live data high-water mark into objects that have already been moved, but it reorders
objects arbitrarily which is undesirable.
    Fisher [1974] solved the pointer update problem with a different technique, threading,
that requires no extra storage yet supports sliding compaction. Threading needs there to be
sufficient room in object headers to store an address (if necessary overwriting other data),
which is not an onerous requirement, and that pointers can be distinguished from other

Algorithm 3.3: Jonkers’s threaded compactor

 1   compact():
 2      updateForwardReferences()
 3      updateBackwardReferences()
 4

 5   thread(ref):                                                       /* thread a reference */
 6      if *ref ̸= null
 7         *ref, **ref ← **ref, ref
 8

 9   update(ref, addr):                      /* unthread all references, replacing with addr */
10      tmp ← *ref
11      while isReference(tmp)
12         *tmp, tmp ← addr, *tmp
13      *ref ← tmp
14

15   updateForwardReferences():
16      for each fld in Roots
17         thread(*fld)
18

19      free ← HeapStart
20      scan ← HeapStart
21      while scan ≤ HeapEnd
22         if isMarked(scan)
23            update(scan, free)           /* forward refs to scan set to free */
24            for each fld in Pointers(scan)
25               thread(fld)
26            free ← free + size(scan)
27         scan ← scan + size(scan)
28

29   updateBackwardReferences():
30      free ← HeapStart
31      scan ← HeapStart
32      while scan ≤ HeapEnd
33         if isMarked(scan)
34            update(scan, free)                      /* backward refs to scan set to free */
35            move(scan, free)                                 /* slide scan back to free */
36            free ← free + size(scan)
37         scan ← scan + size(scan)

values, which may be harder. The best known threading is probably that due to Morris
[1978, 1979, 1982] but Jonkers [1979] imposes fewer restrictions (for example, on the direc-
tion of pointers). The goal of threading is to allow all references to a node N to be found
from N. It does so by temporarily reversing the direction of pointers. Figure 3.2 shows
how fields previously referring to N can be found by following the threaded pointers from
N. Notice that, after threading as in Figure 3.2b, the contents info of N’s header has been
written into a pointer field of A. When the collector chases the pointers to unthread and
update them, it must be able to recognise that this field does not hold a threaded pointer.

    Jonkers requires two passes over the heap, the first to thread references that point for-
ward in the heap, and the second to thread backward pointers (see Algorithm 3.3). The
first pass starts by threading the roots. It then sweeps through the heap, start to finish,
computing a new address free for each live object encountered, determined by summing
the volume of live data encountered so far. It is easiest to understand this algorithm by
considering a single marked (live) node N. When the first pass reaches A, it will thread
the reference to N. By the time that the pass reaches N, all the forward pointers to N will
have been threaded (see Figure 3.2b). This pass can then update all the forward references
to N by following this chain and writing the value of free, the address of the location to
which N will be moved, into each previously referring slot. When it reaches the end of
the chain, the collector will restore N’s info header word. The next step on this pass is
to increment free and thread N’s children. By the end of this pass, all forward references
will have been updated to point to their new locations and all backward pointers will have
been threaded. The second pass similarly updates references to N, this time by following
the chain of backward pointers. This pass also moves N.
    The chief advantage of this algorithm is that it does not require any additional space,
although object headers must be large enough to hold a pointer (which must be distin-
guishable from a normal value). However, threading algorithms suffer a number of dis-
advantages. They modify each pointer field of live objects twice, once to thread and once
to unthread and update references. Threading requires chasing pointers so is just as cache
unfriendly as marking but has to chase pointers three times (marking, threading and un-
threading) in Jonkers’s algorithm. Martin [1982] claimed that combining the mark phase
with the first compaction pass improved collection time by a third, but this is a testament to
the cost of pointer chasing and modifying pointer fields. Because Jonkers modifies point-
ers in a destructive way, it is inherently sequential and so cannot be used for concurrent
compaction. For instance, in Figure 3.2b, once the references to N have been threaded,
there is no way to discover that the first pointer field of B held a reference to N (unless
that pointer is stored at the end of the chain as an extra slot in A’s header, defeating the
goal of avoiding additional storage overhead). Threading is also problematic for heaps
that mingle ordinary and meta-objects because reversing pointers means that the collector
cannot obtain the object layout information stored in those meta-objects. One solution is to
segregate meta-objects in a separate heap, but Onozawa et al. [2021] solve this by placing
ordinary objects at one end of a monolithic heap and meta-objects at the other; their al-
gorithm threads pointers in ordinary objects before those in the meta-objects (which have
a fixed layout) and then slides ordinary objects towards one end of the heap and meta-
objects towards the other. Finally, Jonkers does not support interior pointers, which may
be an important concern for some environments. However, the threaded compactor from
Morris [1982] can accommodate interior pointers at the cost of an additional tag bit per
field, and the restriction that the second compaction pass must be in the opposite direction
to the first (adding to the problem of heap parsability).

3.4    One-pass algorithms
If we are to reduce the number of passes a sliding collector makes over the heap to two
(one to mark and one to slide objects), and avoid the expense of threading, then we must
store forwarding addresses in a side table that is preserved throughout compaction. Abua-
iadh et al. [2004] and Kermany and Petrank [2006] both designed high performance mark-
compact algorithms for multiprocessors that do precisely this. The former is a parallel
stop-the-world algorithm (it employs multiple compaction threads); the latter, the Com-

                                             offsetInBlock (3)          Mark-bit vector

                                                     block (2)           Heap (before)
                                                                 old
             0                1                 2                  3
                                                                          Offset vector

                                                       ]
                                                 [block
                                           offset                          Heap(a!er)

                                     new
             0                                  2                  3
                        offsetInBlock

Figure 3.3: The heap (before and after compaction) and metadata used by
       Compressor [Kermany and Petrank, 2006]. Bits in the mark bit vector indi-
       cate the start and end of each live object. Words in the offset vector hold the
       address to which the first live object that starts in their corresponding block
       will be moved. Forwarding addresses are not stored but are calculated when
       needed from the offset and mark bit vectors.

pressor, can also be configured to be concurrent (allowing mutator threads to run along-
side collector threads) and incremental (periodically suspending a mutator thread briefly
to perform a small quantum of compaction work). We discuss the parallel, concurrent
and incremental aspects of these algorithms in later chapters. Here, we focus on the core
compaction algorithms in a stop-the-world setting.
    Both algorithms use a number of side tables or vectors. Common to many collectors,
marking uses a bitmap with one bit for each granule (say, a word). Marking sets the bits
corresponding to all (or, more efficiently, the first and the last) granules of each live object.
For example, bits 44–51 are set for the object marked old in Figure 3.3. By scrutinising the
mark bitmap in the compaction phase, the collector can calculate the size of any contiguous
run of live objects.
    Second, a table is used to store forwarding addresses. It would be prohibitively ex-
pensive to do this for every object (especially if we assume that objects are word-aligned)
so both these algorithms divide the heap into small, equal-sized blocks (256 or 512 bytes,
respectively). The offset table stores the forwarding address of the first live object in
each block. The new locations of the other live objects in a block can be computed on the
fly from the offset and mark bit vectors. Similarly, given a reference to any object, we can
compute its block number and thus derive its forwarding address from the entry in the
offset table and the mark bits for that block. This allows the algorithms to replace multi-
ple passes over the full heap to relocate objects and to update pointers with a single pass
over the mark bit vector to construct the offset vector and a single pass over the heap (after
marking) to move objects and update references by consulting these summary vectors. Re-
ducing the number of heap passes has consequent advantages for locality. Let us consider
the details as they appear in Algorithm 3.4.
    After marking is complete, the computeLocations routine passes over the mark bit
vector to produce the offset vector. Essentially, it performs the same calculation as in
Lisp 2 (Algorithm 3.2) but does not need to touch any object in the heap. For example,
consider the first marked object in block 2, shown with a bold border in Figure 3.3. Bits 4–7
and 12–15 are set in the first block, and bits 6–11 in the second (in this example, each block
comprises 16 slots). This represents 14 granules (words) that are marked in the bitmap

Algorithm 3.4: Compressor

 1   compact():
 2      computeLocations(HeapStart, HeapEnd, HeapStart)
 3      updateReferencesRelocate(HeapStart, HeapEnd)
 4

 5   computeLocations(start, end, toRegion):
 6      loc ← toRegion
 7      block ← getBlockNum(start)
 8      for b ← 0 to numBits(start, end)−1
 9         if b % BITS_IN_BLOCK = 0                    /* crossed block boundary? */
10            offset[block] ← loc            /* first object will be moved to loc */
11            block ← block + 1
12         if bitmap[b] = MARKED
13            loc ← loc + BYTES_PER_BIT          /* advance by size of live objects */
14

15   newAddress(old):
16      block ← getBlockNum(old)
17      return offset[block] + offsetInBlock(old)
18

19   updateReferencesRelocate(start, end):
20      for each fld in Roots
21         ref ← *fld
22         if ref ̸= null
23            *fld ← newAddress(ref)
24      scan ← start
25      while scan < end
26         scan ← nextMarkedObject(scan)                                        /* use the bitmap */
27         for each fld in Pointers(scan)                                    /* update references */
28            ref ← *fld
29            if ref ̸= null
30               *fld ← newAddress(ref)
31         dest ← newAddress(scan)
32         move(scan, dest)

before this object. Thus the first live object in block 2 will be relocated to the 14th slot in the
heap. This address is recorded in the offset vector for the block (see the dashed arrow
marked offset[block] in the figure).
    Once the offset vector has been calculated, the roots and live fields are updated to
reflect the new locations. The Lisp 2 algorithm had to separate the updating of references
and moving of objects because relocation information was held in the heap and object
movement destroyed this information as relocated objects are slid over old objects. In con-
trast, Compressor-type algorithms relocate objects and update references in a single pass,
updateReferencesRelocate in Algorithm 3.4. This is possible because new addresses
can be calculated reasonably quickly from the mark bitmap and the offset vector on
the fly: Compressor does not have to store forwarding addresses in the heap. Given the
address of any object in the heap, newAddress obtains its block number (through shift
and mask operations) and uses this as an index into the offset vector. The offset vec-
tor gives the forwarding address of the first object in that block. Compressor must then

consult the bitmap for that block to discover how much live data precedes this object in its
block, and therefore how much to add to the offset. This can be done in constant time by
a table lookup. For example, the old object in the figure has an offset of 6 marked slots in
its block so it is moved to slot 20: offset[block]=14 plus offsetInBlock(old)=6.

3.5    Issues to consider
Is compaction necessary?
Mark-sweep garbage collection uses less memory than other techniques such as copying
collection (which we discuss in the next chapter). Furthermore, since it does not move
objects, a mark-sweep collector only needs to identify (a superset of) the roots of the col-
lection; it does not need to modify them. Both of these considerations may be important in
environments where memory is tight or where the run-time system cannot provide type-
accurate identification of references (see Section 11.2).
    Being a non-moving collector, mark-sweep is vulnerable to fragmentation. Using a par-
simonious allocation strategy like segregated-fits (see Section 7.4) reduces the likelihood of
fragmentation becoming a problem, provided that the application does not allocate very
many large objects and that the set of object sizes does not change much. However, frag-
mentation is certainly likely to be a problem if a general-purpose, non-moving allocator is
used to allocate a wide variety of objects in a long-running application. For this reason,
most production Java virtual machines use moving collectors that can compact the heap.

Throughput costs of compaction
Sequential allocation in a compacted heap is fast. If the heap size is large compared to the
amount of memory available, mark-compact is an appropriate moving collection strategy
since it has half the memory requirements of copying collectors. Algorithms like Compres-
sor are also easier to use with multiple collector threads than many copying algorithms (as
we shall see in Chapter 14). There is, of course, a price to be paid. Mark-compact collection
is likely to be slower than either mark-sweep or copying collection. Furthermore, many
compaction algorithms incur additional overheads or place restrictions on the mutator.
     Mark-compact algorithms offer worse throughput than mark-sweep or copying collec-
tion largely because they tend to make more passes over objects in the heap; Compressor
and other region-evacuating algorithms are exceptions. Each pass tends to be expensive,
not least because many require access to type information and object pointer fields, and
these are the costs that tend to dominate after ‘pointer chasing’, as we saw in Chapter 2. A
common solution is to run with mark-sweep collection for as long as possible, switching to
mark-compact collection only when fragmentation metrics suggest that this be profitable
[Printezis, 2001; Soman et al., 2004].

Long-lived data
It is not uncommon for long-lived or even immortal data to accumulate near the beginning
of the heap in moving collectors. Copying collectors handle such objects poorly, repeatedly
copying them from one semispace to another. On the other hand, generational collectors
(which we examine in Chapter 9) deal with these well, by moving them to a different space
which is only collected infrequently. However, a generational solution might not be accept-
able if heap space is tight. It is also obviously not a solution if the space being collected is
the oldest generation of a generational collector! Mark-compact, however, can simply elect
not to compact objects in this ‘sediment’. Hanson [1977] was the first to observe that these

objects tended to accumulate at the bottom of the ‘transient object area’ in his SITBOL sys-
tem. His solution was to track the height of this ‘sediment’ dynamically, and simply avoid
collecting it unless absolutely necessary, at the expense of a small amount of fragmenta-
tion. Sun Microsystems’ HotSpot Java virtual machine used mark-compact as the default
collector for its old generation. It too avoids compacting objects in the user-configurable
‘dense prefix’ of the heap [Sun Microsystems, 2006]. If bitmap marking is used, the extent
of a live prefix of desired density can be determined simply by examining the bitmap.

Locality
Mark-compact collectors may preserve the allocation order of objects in the heap or they
may rearrange them arbitrarily. Although arbitrary order collectors may be faster than
other mark-compact collectors and impose no space overheads, the mutator’s locality is
likely to suffer from an arbitrary scrambling of object order. Sliding compaction has a
further benefit for some systems: the space occupied by all objects allocated after a certain
point can be reclaimed in constant time, just by retreating the free space pointer.

Limitations of mark-compact algorithms
A wide variety of mark-compact collection algorithms has been proposed. A fuller account
of many older compaction strategies can be found in Chapter 5 of Jones [1996]. Many of
these have properties that may be undesirable or unacceptable. The issues to consider
include what space overheads may be incurred to store forwarding pointers (although
this cost will be lower than that of a copying collector); break table methods smuggle this
overhead into the gaps between objects as they are being compacted but come with signif-
icant time overheads [Haddon and Waite, 1967; Fitch and Norman, 1978; Strandh, 2014].
Some compaction algorithms place restrictions on the mutator. Simple compactors like
the Two-Finger algorithm can only manage fixed-size objects. It is certainly possible to
segregate objects by size class, but in this case, to what extent is compaction necessary?
Threaded compaction requires that it be possible to distinguish pointers from non-pointer
values temporarily stored in pointer fields. Threading is also incompatible with concur-
rent collection because it (temporarily) destroys information in pointer fields. Morris’s
[1978,1979,1982] threaded algorithm also restricts the direction in which references may
point. Finally, most compaction algorithms preclude the use of interior pointers: the Two-
Finger algorithm is an exception.
