Chapter 4

Copying garbage collection

So far we have seen that mark-sweep has comparatively cheap collection costs but may
suffer from fragmentation. Given that garbage collection should only account for a small
proportion of overall execution time in any well-configured system, it is essential that over-
heads on the mutator are kept to a minimum and, in particular, that allocation is fast, since
mutator costs dominate those of the collector. Mark-compact collectors eliminate fragmen-
tation and support very fast, ‘bump pointer’ allocation (see Chapter 7) but require multiple
passes over live objects, and can significantly increase collection times. In this chapter, we
discuss a third style of tracing garbage collection, semispace copying [Fenichel and Yochel-
son, 1969; Cheney, 1970]. Copying compacts the heap, thus allowing fast allocation, yet
only requires a single pass over the live objects in the heap. Its chief disadvantage is that
it reduces the size of the available heap by half. It also requires processing all the bytes of
each object rather than only the pointers.

4.1      Semispace copying collection
Basic copying collectors divide the heap into two equally sized semispaces, called fromspace
and tospace. For simplicity, Algorithm 4.1 assumes that the heap is one contiguous region
of memory, but this is not essential. New objects are allocated in tospace by incrementing
the value of a free pointer if there is sufficient room.1 Otherwise, the role of the two
semispaces is flipped (line 2 in Algorithm 4.2) before the collector copies all live objects from
what is now the fromspace to the tospace. This collector simply picks out — evacuating or
scavenging — live objects from the old semispace. At the end of the collection, all live
objects will have been placed in a dense prefix of tospace. The collector simply abandons
fromspace (and the objects it contains) until the next collection. In practice, however, many
collectors will zero that space for safety during the initialisation of the next collection cycle
(see Chapter 11 where we discuss the interface with the run-time system).
    After initialisation, semispace copying collectors populate their work list by copying
the root objects into tospace (line 4). Copied but not yet scanned objects are grey. Each
pointer field of a grey object will hold either null or a reference to a fromspace object. The
copying scan traces each grey field, updating it to point to the tospace replica of its target.
When the trace visits a fromspace object, forward checks whether it has been evacuated
(forwarded) yet. If not, the object is copied now to the location in tospace to which free
points, and the free pointer is incremented by the size of the object (as for allocation).
   1 Note: our allocate and copy routines ignore issues of alignment and padding, and also the possibility that

a copied object may have a different format, such as an explicit rather than an implicit hash code for Java objects.

Algorithm 4.1: Semispace copying garbage collection: initialisation and allocation. For
simplicity this assumes that the heap is a single contiguous region.

 1   createSemispaces():
 2      tospace ← HeapStart
 3      extent ← (HeapEnd − HeapStart) / 2                              /* size of a semispace */
 4      top ← fromspace ← HeapStart + extent
 5      free ← tospace
 6

 7   atomic allocate(size):
 8      result ← free
 9      newfree ← result + size
10      if newfree > top
11         return null                                   /* signal ‘Memory exhausted’ */
12      free ← newfree
13      return result

It is essential that collectors preserve the topology of live objects in the tospace copy of
the heap. This is achieved by storing the address of each tospace object as a forwarding
address in its old fromspace replica when the object is copied (line 34). The forward
routine, tracing from a tospace field, uses this forwarding address to update the field,
regardless of whether the copy was made in this tracing step or a previous one (line 22).
Collection is complete when all tospace objects have been scanned.
    Unlike most mark-compact collectors, semispace copying does not require any extra
space in object headers. Any slot in a fromspace object can be used for the forwarding ad-
dress (at least, in stop-the-world implementations), since that copy of the object is not used
after the collection. This makes copying collection suitable even for header-less objects.

Work-list implementations

Like all tracing collectors, semispace copying needs a work list of objects to process. The
work list can be implemented in different ways, leading to different orders of traversing
the object graph and different space requirements. Fenichel and Yochelson [1969] imple-
mented the work list as a simple auxiliary stack, just like the mark-sweep collectors de-
scribed in Chapter 2 did. Copying is complete when the stack is empty.
    The elegant Cheney scanning algorithm [Cheney, 1970] uses the grey objects in tospace
as a first-in, first-out queue. It requires no additional storage other than a single pointer,
scan, which points to the next unscanned object. When the semispaces are flipped, both
the free and scan pointers are set to point to (the start of) tospace (see initialise in
Algorithm 4.3). After the root objects are copied, the work list — the set of grey objects —
comprises precisely those (copied but unscanned) objects between scan and free. This
invariant is maintained throughout the collection. The scan pointer is advanced as to-
space fields are scanned and updated (line 9). Collection is complete when the work list is
empty: when the scan pointer catches up with the free pointer. Thus, the actions of this
implementation are very simple. To check termination, isEmpty does no more than com-
pare the scan and free pointers; remove just returns the scan pointer; and no action is
required to add work to the work list.

Algorithm 4.2: Semispace copying garbage collection

 1   atomic collect():
 2      flip()
 3      initialise(worklist)                                                    /* empty */
 4      for each fld in Roots                                           /* copy the roots */
 5         process(fld)
 6      while not isEmpty(worklist)                            /* copy transitive closure */
 7         ref ← remove(worklist)
 8         scan(ref)
 9

10   flip():                                                       /* switch semispaces */
11      fromspace, tospace ← tospace, fromspace
12      top ← tospace + extent
13      free ← tospace
14

15   scan(ref):
16      for each fld in Pointers(ref)
17         process(fld)
18

19   process(fld):                 /* update field with reference to tospace replica */
20      fromRef ← *fld
21      if fromRef ̸= null
22         *fld ← forward(fromRef)                 /* update with tospace reference */
23

24   forward(fromRef):
25      toRef ← forwardingAddress(fromRef)
26      if toRef = null                                       /* not copied (not marked) */
27         toRef ← copy(fromRef)
28      return toRef
29

30   copy(fromRef):                  /* copy object and return forwarding address */
31      toRef ← free
32      free ← free + size(fromRef)
33      move(fromRef, toRef)
34      forwardingAddress(fromRef) ← toRef                                /* mark */
35      add(worklist, toRef)
36      return toRef

Algorithm 4.3: Copying with Cheney’s work list

 1   initialise(worklist):
 2      scan ← free
 3

 4   isEmpty(worklist):
 5      return scan = free
 6

 7   remove(worklist):
 8      ref ← scan
 9      scan ← scan + size(scan)
10      return ref
11

12   add(worklist, ref):
13      /* nop */

An example
Figure 4.1 shows an example of how a Cheney scan would copy L, a linked list structure
with pointers to the head and tail of the list. Figure 4.1a shows fromspace before the collec-
tion starts. At the start of the collection, the roles of the semispaces are flipped and L, which
we assume is directly reachable from the roots, is copied to tospace (advancing the free
pointer) and a forwarding reference to the new location L′ is written into L (for instance,
over the first field). The scan pointer points to the first object in tospace (Figure 4.1b). The
collector is now ready to start copying the transitive closure of the roots. The scan pointer
points to the first object to process. L′ holds references to A and E in fromspace, so these
objects are evacuated to the location pointed at by free in tospace (advancing free), the
references in L′ are updated to point to the new locations A′ and E′ (Figure 4.1c), and scan
is advanced to the next grey object. Note that the collector is finished with L′ so it is concep-
tually black, whereas the next objects to scan, A′ and E′ , are grey. This process is repeated
for each tospace object until the scan and free pointers meet (Figure 4.1f). Observe that,
in Figure 4.1e, D′ holds a reference to E, which has already been copied. The referring field
in D′ is therefore updated with the forwarding address stored in E, thereby preserving the
shape of the graph. As with other tracing algorithms, copying garbage collection can cope
with all shapes of graphs, including cyclic data structures, preserving sharing properly.

4.2    Traversal order and locality
Mutator and collector locality can have a significant impact on program performance. As
we saw in the previous chapter, the collector can harm the mutator’s locality, and hence its
performance, if it moves objects to arbitrary new locations without regard for either pointer
relationships or the original allocation order [Abuaiadh et al., 2004]. However, there is a
performance trade-off between locality benefits for the mutator, and for the collector and
the frequency of collections. Compare mark-sweep and copying collection. Mark-sweep
collectors have twice as much usable heap space available as do copying collectors, and
hence will perform half as many collections, all other things being equal. Consequently,
we might expect that mark-sweep collection offers better overall performance. Blackburn
et al. [2004a] found that this was indeed the case for collection in tight heaps, where they
used a segregated-fits allocator for the non-moving collector. Conversely, in large heaps

       L

       A                     B                   C                  D           E

                                                                                    Fromspace
                                                                                      Tospace
                                  (a) Fromspace after flip but before tracing

       L

       A                      B                  C                  D           E

                                                                                    Fromspace
                                                                                      Tospace

           L'

    scan                    free
                                             (b) Copy the root, L

       L

       A                     B                   C                  D           E

                                                                                    Fromspace
                                                                                      Tospace

           L'          A'              E'

                scan                                 free
                                             (c) Scan L’s replica

Figure 4.1: Cheney copying garbage collection: an example

       L

       A                B                     CC                  D                  E

                                                                                           Fromspace
                                                                                                Tospace

           L'      A'               E'             B'

                            scan                              free
                                   (d) Scan A’s replica, and so on. . .

       L

       A                B                     C                   D                  E

                                                                                           Fromspace
                                                                                                Tospace

           L'      A'               E'             B'       C'               D'

                                                                      scan               free
                                          (e) Scan C’s replica.

       L

       A                B                     C                   D                  E

                                                                                           Fromspace
                                                                                                Tospace

           L'      A'               E'             B'       C'               D'

                                                                                  scan   free
                (f) Scan D’s replica. scan=free so collection is complete.

Figure 4.1 (continued): Cheney copying garbage collection: an example

                                                            1

                              2                                                        3

                   4                     5                               6                           7

              8          9         10              11           12               13            14         15

                                             (a) The tree to copy

                        Depth-first 1     2     4        8   9   5    10 11       3    6    12 13     7   14 15

                       Breadth-first 1    2     3        4   5   6    7       8   9    10 11 12 13 14 15

          Hierarchical decomposi on 1    2     3        4   8   9    5   10 11        6    12 13     7   14 15

            Online object reordering 1   2     3        7   5   11 10        4   15 14     6    13   9   8     12

                         (b) Placement of objects in the heap after copying

Figure 4.2: Copying a tree with different traversal orders. Each row shows
       how a traversal order lays out objects in tospace, assuming that three objects
       can be placed on a page (indicated by the thick borders). For online object
       reordering, prime numbered (bold italic) fields are considered to be hot.

the locality benefits to the mutator of sequential allocation outweighed the space efficiency
of mark-sweep collection, leading to better miss rates at all levels of the cache hierarchy.
This was particularly true for newly allocated objects which tend to experience higher
mutation rates than older objects [Blackburn and McKinley, 2003].
    The Blackburn et al. [2004a] study did object copying depth-first. In contrast, Cheney’s
copying collector traverses the graph breadth-first. Although this is implemented by a
linear scan of — and hence predictable access to — the work list of grey tospace objects,
breadth-first copying adversely affects mutator locality because it tends to separate parents
and children. The table in Figure 4.2b compares the effect of different traversal orders
on object layout, given the tree in Figure 4.2a. Each row shows where different tracing
orders would place objects in tospace. If we examine row 2, we see that breadth-first
traversal only places objects 2 and 3 near their parent. In this section we look more closely
at traversal order and its consequences for locality.
    White [1980] suggested long ago that the garbage collector could be used to improve
the performance of the mutator. Both copying and compacting garbage collectors move
objects, thus potentially affecting the mutators’ locality patterns. Sliding is generally con-
sidered to be best order for mark-compact algorithms since it preserves the order of layout
of objects established by the allocator. This is a safe, conservative policy, but can we do bet-
ter? Mark-compact algorithms condense the heap in place, either by moving objects into
holes (arbitrary order compactors) or by sliding live data (only overwriting garbage or ob-
jects that have already been moved), and thus have no opportunity for more locality-aware
reorganisation. However, any collector that evacuates live objects to a fresh region of the
heap without destroying the original data can rearrange their layout so as to improve the
performance of the mutator.
    Unfortunately, there are two reasons why we cannot find an optimal layout of objects
which minimises the number of cache misses suffered by the program. First of all, the
collector cannot know what the pattern of future accesses to objects will be. But worse,

Algorithm 4.4: Approximately depth-first copying [Moon, 1984] (we assume that objects
do not span pages)

 1   initialise(worklist):
 2      scan ← free
 3      partialScan ← free
 4

 5   isEmpty(worklist):                                                      /* as per Cheney */
 6      return scan = free
 7

 8   remove(worklist):
 9      if (partialScan < free)
10         ref ← partialScan                      /* prefer secondary scan */
11         partialScan ← partialScan + size(partialScan)
12      else
13         ref ← scan                                      /* primary scan */
14         scan ← scan + size(scan)
15      return ref
16

17   add(worklist, ref):       /* secondary scan on the most recently allocated page */
18      partialScan ← max(partialScan, startOfPage(ref))

Petrank and Rawitz [2002] show that the placement problem is NP-complete: even given
perfect knowledge of future accesses, there is no efficient algorithm to compute an optimal
placement. The only practical solution is to use heuristics. One possibility is to use past
behaviour as a predictor of future behaviour. Some researchers have used either profiling,
on the assumption that programs behave similarly for different inputs [Calder et al., 1998],
or online sampling, assuming that behaviour remains unchanged from one period to the
next [Chilimbi et al., 1999]. Another heuristic is to preserve allocation order, as sliding com-
paction does. A third strategy is to try to place children close to one of their parents, since
the only way to access a child is by loading a reference from one of its parents. Cheney’s
algorithm uses breadth-first traversal, but its unfortunate consequence is that it separates
related data, tending to co-locate distant cousins rather than parents and children. Depth-
first traversal (row one), on the other hand, tends to place children closer to their parents.
     Early studies of the locality benefits of different copying orders focused on trying to
minimise page faults: the goal was to place related items on the same page. Stamos found
that simulations of Smalltalk systems suggested that depth-first ordering gave a modest
improvement over breadth-first ordering but worse paging behaviour than the original
object creation order [Stamos, 1982; Blau, 1983; Stamos, 1984]. However, Wilson et al.
[1991] argue that these simulations ignore the topology of real Lisp and Smalltalk pro-
grams which tended to create wide but shallow trees, rooted in hash tables, designed to
spread their keys in order to avoid clashes.
     If we are prepared to pay the cost of an auxiliary last-in, first-out marking stack, then
the Fenichel and Yochelson algorithm leads to a depth-first traversal. However, it is possi-
ble to obtain a pseudo-depth-first traversal without paying the space costs that come from
using a stack. Moon [1984] modified Cheney’s algorithm to make it ‘approximately depth-
first’. He added a second, partialScan pointer in addition to the primary scan pointer
(see Figure 4.3). Whenever an object is copied, Moon’s algorithm starts a secondary scan
from the last page of tospace that has not been completely scanned. Once the last tospace

                                               page

                                 scan                   partialScan            free

Figure 4.3: Moon’s approximately depth-first copying. Each block represents
       a page. As usual, scanned fields are black, and copied but not yet scanned
       ones are grey. Free space is shown in white.

                                                                     S             X
                                                        add()

                                                child           C              Y          Z

                                                                                   Fromspace

                                                                               remove()

                                        addr                             obj
                    mark stack                              FIFO
                                                                                       Tospace
                                                        prefetch()

                                                                         X     S Y Z C

Figure 4.4: A FIFO prefetch buffer (discussed in Chapter 2) does not improve
       locality with copying as distant cousins (C, Y, Z), rather than parents and
       children, tend to be placed together.

page has been scanned, the primary scan continues from the first incompletely scanned
page (Algorithm 4.4). In effect, the work list is implemented as a pair of Cheney queues.
The advantage of this hierarchical decomposition scheme is that it is more effective than pure
breadth-first search at depositing parents on the same page as their children. The hierar-
chical decomposition line of Figure 4.2b shows how this algorithm would copy the tree,
assuming a page size of three objects.
   The disadvantage of Moon’s algorithm is that objects may be scanned twice since he
records only a pair of scan pointers, thus forgetting blocks between scan and free that
have already been partially scanned; indeed, Wilson et al. [1991] suggest that around 30%
may be rescanned. They modified this algorithm to provide each page with its own scan
and free pointers, making the work list now a list of partially scanned blocks to complete.
This means that the primary scan does not have to revisit objects on pages already pro-
cessed by a secondary scan.
    When we discussed how to improve the marking loop of a mark-sweep collector in
Section 2.6, we mentioned that Cher et al. [2004] argued that using a stack to guide trac-
ing leads to a depth-first traversal of the graph but cache lines are fetched breadth-first.
A natural question to ask is: can we combine stack-based, depth-first copying with the
first-in, first-out prefetch queue suggested by Cher et al. [2004]? Unfortunately it seems
not, because although first-in, first-out helps the copying loop avoid cache miss stalls, it
separates parents from children since it visits an object to follow its references only when

Algorithm 4.5: Online object reordering

 1    atomic collect():
 2       flip()
 3       initialise(hotList, coldList)
 4       for each fld in Roots
 5          adviceProcess(fld)
 6       repeat
 7          while not isEmpty(hotList)
 8              adviceScan(remove(hotList))
 9          while not isEmpty(coldList)
10              adviceProcess(remove(coldList))
11       until isEmpty(hotList)
12

13    initialise(hotList, coldList):
14       hotList ← empty
15       coldList ← empty
16

17    adviceProcess(fld):
18       fromRef ← *fld
19       if fromRef ̸= null
20          *fld ← forward(fromRef)
21

22    adviceScan(obj):
23       for each fld in Pointers(obj)
24          if isHot(fld)
25             adviceProcess(fld)
26          else
27             add(coldList, fld)

it is removed from the queue, not from the stack.2 Imagine that a string object S is popped
from the stack. Desirably, S should be placed adjacent to its associated character array C
in tospace, as the depth-first algorithm would do. Using the first-in, first-out queue, after
S is popped from the stack, it is added to the queue. Suppose that the queue is full, so the
oldest entry X is removed, copied and its references Y and Z pushed on the stack, as illus-
trated in Figure 4.4. Unfortunately, Y and Z will be removed from the queue and copied
after S but before C.
     The reorganisations above are static: the algorithms pay no attention to the behaviour
of individual applications. However, it is clear that the benefits of layout-reordering schemes
depend on the behaviour of the mutator. Lam et al. [1992] found that both algorithms were
sensitive to the mix and shape of program data structures, giving disappointing perfor-
mance for structures that were not tree-like. Siegwart and Hirzel [2006] also observed that
a parallel hierarchical decomposition collector led to benefits for some benchmarks but
little improvement overall for others. Huang et al. [2004] address this by dynamically pro-
filing the application and trying to copy ‘hot’ fields of objects alongside their parent. Their
online object-reordering scheme and its effect are shown in Algorithm 4.5 and the last row of
Figure 4.2b. The main scanning loop of their algorithm (line 6) processes all hot fields in
its work lists before any cold fields. Piggybacking on the method sampling mechanism of
     2 Tony Printezis, personal communication.

an adaptive dynamic compiler allows these fields to be identified comparatively cheaply
(Huang et al. report less than 2% of total execution time). Their implementation also ac-
commodates changes of behaviour in different program phases by allowing the ‘heat’ of
fields to decay and be resampled. They find that the performance of their system matches
or improves that of static reorderings such as breadth-first.
    Chilimbi and Larus [1998] and Chen et al. [2006] invoke the collector somewhat eagerly
to improve locality in a generational collector. Their mechanism is expensive so it is not
always turned on. Instead, they use changes in allocation rates as their primary trigger
to collection in order to improve locality; changes in data translation lookaside buffer or
Level 2 cache miss rates are used as a secondary trigger. They record object accesses in a
fixed-size, circular buffer (they argue that profiling at the node level rather than the field
level leads to overheads of less than 5%, since most nodes in object-oriented programs are
smaller than 32 bytes). An expensive (but aggressively optimised) read barrier3 operates
during bursty sampling phases to identify hot objects as the mutators load references to
them. Their collector copies hot objects in two phases. First, contemporaneously accessed
objects are copied to a temporary buffer. Then, to improve paging, the collector appends
hot objects to this buffer, using hierarchical decomposition [Wilson et al., 1991]. The orig-
inal locations of copied objects are marked free, and the rearranged group of objects is
moved from the temporary buffer to one end of the heap. The scheme aims to improve
both cache performance and paging behaviour: the benefit of combining both optimisa-
tions was found to be greater than the sum of either applied on its own, and gave an
average improvement in execution time for a range of large C# applications. Although it is
possible that some garbage objects may be preserved, in practice the volume is very small.
    Other authors have also suggested custom, static reordering by object type [Wilson
et al., 1991; Lam et al., 1992], particularly for system data structures. By allowing the order
in which fields are copied to be specified, Novark et al. [2006] reduce the cache miss rate
significantly for certain data structures. Shuf et al. [2002] use off-line profiling to identify
prolific types. The allocator is modified so that, when a parent is created, adjacent space
is left for its children, thus both improving locality and encouraging clustering of objects
with similar lifetimes. This approach may address to some extent the problem identified
on page 55 of combining a first-in, first-out prefetch queue with depth-first copying.

4.3     Issues to consider
Copying collection offers two immediately attractive advantages over non-moving garbage
collectors like mark-sweep: it provides fast allocation and elimination of fragmentation
(other than to satisfy alignment requirements). Simple copying collectors are also easier
to implement than mark-sweep or mark-compact collectors. The trade-off is that copying
collection uses twice as much virtual memory as other collectors in order to match their
frequency of collections.

Allocation
Allocation in a compacted heap is fast because it is simple. In the common case, it only
requires a test against a heap or block limit and that a free pointer be incremented. If a
block-structured rather than a contiguous heap is used, occasionally the test will fail and a
new block must be acquired. The slow path frequency will depend on the ratio of the aver-
age size of objects allocated and the block size. Sequential allocation also works well with
multithreaded applications since each mutator can be given its own local allocation buffer
  3 We discuss barriers in Chapter 11.

in which to allocate without needing to synchronise with other threads. This arrange-
ment is simpler and requires little metadata, in contrast with local allocation schemes for
non-moving collectors where each thread might need its own size class data structures for
segregated-fits allocation.
     The code sequence for such bump pointer allocation is short but, even better, it is well
behaved with respect to the cache as allocation advances linearly through the heap. Al-
though the combination of sequential allocation, typically short object lifetimes and semis-
paces means that the next location to be allocated is likely to be the one least recently used,
the prefetching abilities of modern processors are likely to hide the latency that might oth-
erwise result. If this behaviour conflicts with the operating system’s least recently used
(LRU) page eviction policy to the extent that paging becomes a problem, it is time to re-
consider the configuration of the system. Either it requires more physical memory to run
the application satisfactorily, or another collection policy — maybe one of the generational
collectors we discuss in Chapter 9 — should be used.
     Blackburn et al. [2004a] found that although sequential allocation had an 11% advan-
tage over free-list allocation in a micro-benchmark limit study, allocation itself accounted
for less than 10% of overall running time in real applications. Thus, the difference in cost
between bump pointer allocation and free-list allocation may not be significant. However,
allocation is only part of the picture for the mutator since the cost of creating a new object
is likely to be dominated by its initialisation, certainly in systems that distinguish these
actions. Furthermore, objects share similar life-cycles in many applications. The mutator
creates some semantically related objects at around the same time, uses them, and finally
tends to abandon them all at once. Here, compacted heaps offer good spatial locality, with
related objects typically allocated on the same page and maybe in the same cache line if
they are small. Such a layout is likely to lead to fewer cache misses than if related objects
are allocated from different free-lists.

Space and locality
The immediate disadvantage of semispace copying is the need to maintain a second semi-
space, sometimes called a copy reserve. For a given memory budget and ignoring the data
structures needed by the collector itself, semispace copying provides only half the heap
space of that offered by other whole heap collectors. The consequence is that copying col-
lectors will perform more garbage collection cycles than other collectors. Whether or not
this translates into better or worse performance depends on trade-offs between the muta-
tor and the collector, the characteristics of the application program and the volume of heap
space available.
    Simple asymptotic complexity analyses might prefer copying over mark-sweep collec-
tion. Let M be the total size of the heap and L be the volume of live data. Semispace
collectors must copy, scan and update pointers in live data. Mark-sweep collectors must
similarly trace all the live objects but then sweep the whole heap. Jones [1996] defines the
time complexities for copying and mark-sweep collection as, respectively:
                      tCopy = cL                       tMS = mL + sM
The amount of memory reclaimed by each collector is:
                    mCopy = M/2 − L                        mMS = M − L
Let r = L/M be the proportion of live memory, which we assume to be constant. The
efficiency of an algorithm can be described by its mark/cons ratio, e, the amount of work
done by the collector per unit allocated. The efficiency of these two algorithms is therefore:
                                 2cr                              mr + s
                     eCopy =                              eMS =
                               1 − 2r                             1−r

                      mark/cons (e)
                                               semispace
                                                 copying

                                                                       mark-sweep

                                s
                                          larger heaps           smaller heaps
                                      0                    0.5                          1
                                                                                 live ra o

Figure 4.5: Mark/cons ratios for mark-sweep and copying collection (lower
       is better)

    The mark/cons ratio curves presented in Figure 4.5 show that copying collection can
be made more efficient than mark-sweep collection, provided that the heap is large enough
and r is small enough. However, such a simple analysis ignores several matters. Modern
mark-sweep collectors are likely to use lazy sweeping, thus reducing the constant s and
lowering mark-sweep’s mark/cons ratio. Complexity analyses need to be treated with
some caution since they ignore implementation details, although Hertz and Berger [2005]
confirm experimentally the general shape of the curves (for example, that the cost of mark-
sweep collection is inversely proportional to the size of the heap). However, pragmatic
details are important for real collectors. These are not captured by complexity analyses.
One example is the locality benefit of sequential allocation [Blackburn et al., 2004a].
    So, sequential allocation tends to lay out contemporaneously accessed objects contigu-
ously, which helps to improve the mutator’s cache miss rate. But copying collection then
reorders surviving objects in the heap. Although Cheney-style collectors need no aux-
iliary stack to guide the trace, their breadth-first traversal tends to separate parents and
children. Hierarchical decomposition offers a compromise between paying the costs of a
tracing stack and improving the layout of objects in the heap. However, although careful
reordering has benefits for some programs, it often has negligible effects. Why is this?
Most objects have short lifetimes and do not survive a collection. Moreover, many appli-
cations concentrate accesses, and especially writes, on these young objects [Blackburn and
McKinley, 2003]. Collector traversal policies cannot affect the locality properties of objects
that are never moved.
    Printezis has also pointed out that whether parallel collector threads are used or not
will influence the choice of copying mechanism. It may be simpler to do very fine-grained
load-balancing by work stealing from per-thread stacks as opposed to using a Cheney
queue.4 We discuss these issues in depth in Chapter 14.

Moving objects
Choosing whether to use a copying collector will depend in part on whether it is possible
to move objects and the cost of doing so. In some environments objects cannot be moved.
One reason is that lack of type accuracy means that it would not be safe to modify the
slot holding a reference to a putative object. Another is that a reference to the object has
been passed to unmanaged code (perhaps, as an argument in a system call) that does not
expect the reference to change. Furthermore, the problem of pointer finding can often be
simpler in a mark-sweep context than that of a moving collector: it suffices to find at least
  4 Tony Printezis, personal communication.

one reference to a live object with a non-moving collector. On the other hand, a moving
collector must find and update all references to an evacuated object. As we will see in
Chapter 17, this also makes the problem of concurrent moving collection much harder
than concurrent non-moving collection since all the references to an object must appear to
be updated atomically.
    It is expensive to copy some objects. Although copying even a small object is likely
to be more expensive than marking it, the cost and latency of doing so is often absorbed
by the costs of chasing pointers and discovering type information. On the other hand,
repeatedly copying large, pointer-free objects will lead to poor performance. One solution
is simply not to copy them but instead devolve the management of large objects to a non-
moving collector. Another is to copy them virtually but not physically. This can be done
either by holding such objects on a linked list maintained by the collector, or by allocating
large objects on their own virtual memory pages which can be remapped. We consider
such techniques in Chapters 8 to 10.
