Chapter 5

Reference counting

The algorithms considered so far have all been indirect. Each has traced the graph of live
objects from a set of known roots to identify all live objects. In this chapter, we consider the
last class of fundamental algorithms, reference counting [Collins, 1960]. Rather than tracing
reachable objects and then inferring that all unvisited objects must be garbage, reference
counting operates directly on objects as references are created or destroyed.
    Reference counting maintains a simple invariant: an object is presumed to be live if
and only if the number of references to that object is greater than zero.1 Reference counting
therefore associates a reference count with each object managed; typically this count is stored
as an additional slot in the object’s header. In its most naive implementation, shown in
Algorithm 5.1, reference counts are incremented or decremented as references to objects
are created or destroyed. Procedure Write increments the reference count of the new
target and then decrements the count of the old target. Note that it is called even for
updates of local variables. We also assume it is called to write null into local variables
before each procedure returns. The operations addReference and deleteReference
increment and decrement, respectively, the reference counts of their object argument. Note
that it is essential that the reference counts are adjusted in this order (lines 9–10) to prevent
premature reclamation of the target in the case when the old and the new targets of the
pointer are the same, that is, src[i]=ref. Once a reference count is zero (line 20), the
object can be freed and the reference counts of all its children decremented, which may in
turn lead to their reclamation and so on recursively.
    The Write method in Algorithm 5.1 is an example of a write barrier. For these, the com-
piler emits a short code sequence around the actual pointer write. As we shall see later in
this book, mutators are required to execute barriers in many systems. More precisely, they
are required whenever collectors do not consider the liveness of the entire object graph
atomically with respect to the mutator. Such collectors may execute concurrently, either in
lock-step with the mutator as for reference counting or asynchronously in another thread.
Alternatively, the collector may process different regions of the heap at different frequen-
cies, as do generational collectors. In all these cases, mutator barriers must be executed in
order to preserve the invariants of the collector algorithm.

   1 Reference listing algorithms, commonly used by distributed systems such as Java’s RMI libraries, modify this

invariant so that an object is deemed to be live if and only if the set of clients believed to be holding a reference
to the object is non-empty. This offers certain fault tolerance benefits, for example, set insertion or deletion is
idempotent, unlike counter arithmetic.

5.1    Advantages and disadvantages of reference counting
There are a number of reasons why reference counting might be an attractive option. Mem-
ory management costs are distributed throughout the computation. Potentially, reference
counting can recycle memory as soon as an object becomes garbage (but we shall see below
why this may not always be desirable). Consequently, it may continue to operate satisfac-
torily in a nearly full heap, unlike tracing collectors which need some headroom. Since
reference counting operates directly on the sources and targets of pointers, the locality of
a reference counting algorithm may be no worse than that of its client program. Client
programs can use destructive updates rather than copying objects if they can prove that
an object is not shared. Reference counting can reclaim some memory even if parts of the
system are unavailable: this is particularly useful in distributed systems [Rodrigues and
Jones, 1998]. Simple reference counting can be implemented fairly easily without assis-
tance from or knowledge of the run-time system. In particular, it is not necessary to know
the roots of the program. Reference counting may also facilitate prompt, in-place reuse
of memory (see, for example, Vießmann et al. [2018], Reinking et al. [2021] or Lorenzen
and Leijen [2022]). However, implementing high performance reference counting in the
presence of concurrent mutator threads and cyclic data structures is more complex. Be-
cause high-performance systems depend on high-performance garbage collection, Jibaja
et al. [2011] argue that support for high-performance memory management requires per-
vasive changes throughout a virtual machine implementation but that this discipline is
less burdensome when followed from the beginning rather than trying to retrofit it later.
    For these reasons, reference counting has been adopted for many systems including
language implementations (for example, early versions of Smalltalk and Lisp; Objective-C
and Swift; AWK, Perl, PHP and Python); applications such as Photoshop, Real Networks’
Rhapsody Music Service, Océ printers, scanners and document management systems; as
well as operating systems’ file managers. Libraries to support safe reclamation of objects
are widely available for languages like C++ (unique_ptr and shared_ptr) and Rust
(Box, Rc and Arc) that do not require automatic memory management. Such libraries
may use smart pointers to access objects. Smart pointers typically override constructors
and operators such as assignment, either to enforce unique ownership of objects or to pro-
vide reference counting. Unique pointers (such as unique_ptr in C++) ensure that an ob-
ject has a single ‘owner’. When this owner is destroyed, the object also can be destroyed.
Rust’s ownership concept is based on this principle, adding the notion of being able to
pass ownership on and also to borrow it temporarily. In Rust, pointers are unique by de-
fault, with Box supporting unique pointers to dynamically allocated objects. Many C++
programmers use smart pointers to provide reference counting to manage memory auto-
matically. In the past, libraries such as Boost2 were popular, but as of C++11 unique_ptr
and shared_ptr are part of the standard library, with shared_ptr offering reference
counting semantics. Edelson [1992] argued that smart pointers are sufficiently different
from ordinary pointers to be problematic, or at least non-transparent, replacements for
them. C++11’s unique_ptr and shared_ptr almost entirely overcome such differences
and are intended to replace raw pointers, giving reference counted semantics.
    Unfortunately, there are also a number of disadvantages to reference counting. First, it
imposes a time overhead on the mutator. In contrast to the tracing algorithms we consid-
ered in earlier chapters, Algorithm 5.1 redefines all pointer Read and Write operations
in order to manipulate reference counts. Even non-destructive operations such as itera-
tion require the reference counts of each element in the list to be incremented and then
decremented as a pointer moves across a data structure such as a list. From a performance
point of view, it is particularly undesirable to add overhead to operations that manipulate
  2 The Boost libraries for C++, www.boost.org.

Algorithm 5.1: Simple reference counting

 1   New():
 2      ref ← allocate()
 3      if ref = null
 4          error "Out of memory"
 5      rc(ref) ← 0
 6      return ref
 7

 8   atomic Write(src, i, ref):
 9      addReference(ref)
10      deleteReference(src[i])
11      src[i] ← ref
12

13   addReference(ref):
14      if ref ̸= null
15         rc(ref) ← rc(ref) + 1
16

17   deleteReference(ref):
18      if ref ̸= null
19         rc(ref) ← rc(ref) − 1
20         if rc(ref) = 0
21            for each fld in Pointers(ref)
22                deleteReference(*fld)
23            free(ref)

registers or thread stack slots. For this reason alone, this naive algorithm is impractical
for use as a general purpose, high volume, high performance memory manager. Fortu-
nately, as we shall see, the cost of reference counted pointer manipulations can be reduced
substantially, even to become competitive with high performance tracing collectors.
    Second, both the reference count manipulations and the pointer load or store must be a
single atomic action in order to prevent races between mutator threads which would risk
premature reclamation of objects. It is insufficient to protect the integrity of the reference
count operation alone. For now, we simply assert that actions are atomic, without ex-
plaining how this might be achieved. We reconsider this in Chapter 18 when we examine
reference counting and concurrency in detail. Some smart pointer libraries that provide
reference counting require careful use by the programmer if races are to be avoided. For
example, in the Boost library, concurrent threads can read the same shared_ptr instance
simultaneously, or can modify different shared_ptr instances simultaneously, but the
library enforces atomicity only upon reference count manipulations. The combination of
pointer read or write and reference count increment is not a single atomic action. Thus, the
application programmer must take care to prevent races to update a pointer slot, which
might lead to undefined behaviour.
    Third, naive reference counting turns read-only operations into ones requiring stores
to memory (to update reference counts). Similarly, it requires reading and writing the old
referent of a pointer field when changing that field to refer to a different object. These
writes ‘pollute’ the cache and induce extra memory traffic.
    Fourth, reference counting cannot reclaim cyclic data structures (that is, data structures
that contain references to themselves). Even if such a structure is isolated from the rest of
the object graph — it is unreachable — the reference counts of its components will never

drop to zero. Unfortunately, self-referential structures are common (doubly linked lists,
trees whose nodes hold a back pointer to the root, and so on), although their frequency
varies widely between applications [Bacon and Rajan, 2001]. While it is possible to use
reference counting in ways that break cycles or ignore back-links, these techniques are not
a general purpose solution and must be used with care.
    Fifth, in the worst case, the number of references to an object could be equal to the num-
ber of objects in the heap. This means that the reference count field must be pointer sized,
that is, a whole slot. Given that the average size of nodes in object-oriented languages is
small (for example, Java instance objects are typically 20 to 64 bytes long [Dieckmann and
Hölzle, 1999, 2001; Blackburn et al., 2006b], and Lisp cons cells usually fit into two or three
slots), this overhead can be significant.
    Finally, reference counting may still induce pauses. When the last reference to the head
of a large pointer structure is deleted, reference counting must recursively delete each de-
scendant of the root. Boehm [2004] suggests that thread-safe implementations of reference
counting may even lead to longer maximum pause times than tracing collectors. Weizen-
baum [1969] suggested lazy reference counting: rather than immediately freeing garbage
pointer structures, deleteReference adds an object with a zero reference count to a
to-be-freed list, without destroying its contents. When the object is later acquired by the
allocator, its children can be processed similarly, without recursive freeing. Unfortunately,
this technique allows large garbage structures to be hidden by smaller ones, and hence
increases overall space requirements [Boehm, 2004].
    Let us now see the extent to which we can resolve two of the major problems facing ref-
erence counting: the cost of reference count manipulations and collecting cyclic garbage. It
turns out that common solutions to both of these problems involve a stop-the-world pause.
We mention these here but examine how this requirement can be relaxed in Chapter 18.

5.2    Improving efficiency
Programs may spend a significant amount of execution time on reference counting opera-
tions, especially if those need to be synchronised. For example, Choi et al. [2018] report that
Swift client (respectively, server) programs spend 42% (respectively, 15%) of their execu-
tion time on reference counting operations despite compiler optimisations intended to re-
move unnecessary ones. There are a number of ways in which an optimiser may statically
remove reference counting operations or replace synchronised operations with cheaper,
unsynchronised ones. It can remove paired increments and decrements [Cann and Olde-
hoeft, 1988]. It can eliminate reference count operations on a reference whose lifetime is
completely nested within the lifetime of another reference to the same object. It can replace
synchronised modifications to an object’s reference count with unsynchronised ones if an
escape analysis proves that the object is not shared with other threads. However, it may
be difficult to optimise away reference count operations. Gottesman [2019] observes that
common compiler optimisations may easily defeat an optimiser’s attempt to reconstruct
ownership relations from a soup of reference count increments and decrements resulting
in mis-compiles and semantic disagreements in between optimiser and front-end. To ad-
dress this, the mid-level representation was changed in Swift 5 to use Ownership SSA (Static
Single Assignment) form which imbues def-use edges with ownership information. By de-
fault, Swift 5.7 uses Ownership SSA to discard all automatic reference counting operations
emitted by the compiler front-end and then re-infer in the back-end the minimal set of
reference counted operations needed by the program, taking care only to shrink lifetimes
aggressively when it is certain that no references can escape (for example if a managed
class value is converted to a raw pointer).

    In contrast to static approaches to optimising reference counting, Blackburn and McKin-
ley [2003] define a useful taxonomy of dynamic solutions.
Deferral Deferred reference counting trades fine grained incrementality (the immediate re-
     covery of all garbage) for efficiency. The identification of some garbage objects is
     deferred to a reclamation phase at the end of some period. These schemes eliminate
     some barrier operations.
Coalescing Many reference count adjustments are temporary and hence ‘unnecessary’;
     programmers often remove them by hand. In some special cases, this can also be
     done by the compiler. However, it is also possible to do this more generally at run
     time by tracking only the state of an object at the beginning and end of some period.
     This coalesced reference counting ignores all but the first modification to a field of an
     object in each period.
Buffering Buffered reference counting also defers identification of garbage. However, unlike
     deferred or coalesced reference counting, it buffers all reference count increments
     and decrements for later processing. Only the collector thread is allowed to apply
     reference count modifications. Buffering considers when to apply reference count
     modifications, not whether to.
    One fundamental obstacle to efficiency is that object reference counts are part of the
global state of the program, but operations on (thread) local state are usually more effi-
cient. The three classes of solution above share a common approach to this problem: they
divide execution into periods or epochs. Within an epoch, some or all synchronised refer-
ence counting operations can be either eliminated or replaced by unsynchronised writes
(to thread-local buffers). Identification of garbage is only performed at the end of an
epoch, either with mutator threads halted, or concurrently by a separate collector thread
(or threads). In all cases, changes to local reference count state are not revealed (that is,
applied to the global state using an atomic action) until an epoch boundary.
    In this chapter, we consider two sequential approaches, deferred and coalesced refer-
ence counting. Here, collection epochs are separated by stop-the-world pauses to repair
reference counts. In Chapter 18, we shall see first how buffered reference counting de-
volves responsibility for reference count manipulations to a concurrent thread, and then
how we can coalesce reference counts concurrently.

5.3    Deferred reference counting
Manipulating all reference counts is expensive compared with the cost to the mutator of
simple tracing algorithms. Although, as we shall see in later chapters, generational and
concurrent algorithms also impose a small overhead on the mutator, these are much lower
than the overhead of safely manipulating reference counts. To overwrite a pointer, Write
in Algorithm 5.1 executes a dozen or so instructions (though in some cases the compiler
can statically elide some tests). The reference count adjustments must be atomic operations
and be kept consistent with pointer updates. Furthermore, Write modifies both the old
and new targets of the field in question, possibly polluting the cache with dirty words that
will not be reused soon.
    Most high-performance reference counting systems (for example, those of Shahriyar
et al. [2013] or Zhao et al. [2022a,b]) use deferred reference counting. The overwhelming ma-
jority of pointer loads are to local and temporary variables, that is, to registers or stack
slots. Long ago, Deutsch and Bobrow [1976] showed how to remove reference count ma-
nipulations from these operations by adjusting counts only when pointers are stored into

Algorithm 5.2: Deferred reference counting

 1   New():
 2      ref ← allocate()
 3      if ref = null
 4          collect()
 5          ref ← allocate()
 6          if ref = null
 7             error "Out of memory"
 8      rc(ref) ← 0
 9      add(zct, ref)
10      return ref
11

12   Write(src, i, ref):
13      if src = Roots
14         src[i] ← ref
15      else
16         atomic
17             addReference(ref)
18             remove(zct, ref)
19             deleteReferenceToZCT(src[i])
20             src[i] ← ref
21

22   deleteReferenceToZCT(ref):
23      if ref ̸= null
24         rc(ref) ← rc(ref) − 1
25         if rc(ref) = 0
26            add(zct, ref)                                              /* defer freeing */
27

28   atomic collect():
29      for each fld in Roots                                         /* mark the stacks */
30         addReference(*fld)
31      sweepZCT()
32      for each fld in Roots                                      /* unmark the stacks */
33         deleteReferenceToZCT(*fld)
34

35   sweepZCT():
36      while not isEmpty(zct)
37         ref ← remove(zct)
38         if rc(ref) = 0                                        /* now reclaim garbage */
39            for each fld in Pointers(ref)
40               deleteReference(*fld)
41            free(ref)

                                                stacks
                                  defer        registers
                                                                 RC

                                              RC space

Figure 5.1: Deferred reference counting schematic, showing whether refer-
       ence counting operations on pointer loads or stores should be deferred or
       be performed eagerly. The arrows indicate the source and target of pointers
       loaded or stored.
                   Blackburn and McKinley [2003], doi: 10.1145/949305.949336
              © 2003 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

heap objects. Figure 5.1 shows an abstract view of deferred reference counting in which
operations on heap objects are performed immediately but those involving stacks or reg-
isters are deferred. There is, of course, a cost to pay. If reference count manipulations
on local variables are ignored, then counts will no longer be accurate. It is therefore no
longer safe to reclaim an object just because its reference count is zero. In order to reclaim
any garbage, deferred reference counting must periodically correct counts during stop-
the-world pauses. Fortunately, these pauses are likely to be short compared with those of
tracing collectors, such as mark-sweep [Ungar, 1984].
     Algorithm 5.2 loads object references using the simple, unbarriered implementation of
Read from Chapter 1. Similarly, references can also be written to roots using an unbarri-
ered store (line 14). In contrast, writes to heap objects must be barriered. In this case, the
reference count of the new target is incremented as usual (line 17). However, if decrement-
ing the reference count of the old target causes it to drop to zero, the Write barrier adds
the object whose reference count is zero to a zero count table (ZCT) rather than immediately
reclaiming it (line 26). The zero count table can be implemented in a variety of ways, for
example with a bitmap [Baden, 1983] or a hash table [Deutsch and Bobrow, 1976]. An ob-
ject with a reference count of zero cannot be reclaimed at this point because there might
be an uncounted reference to it from the program stack. Conceptually, the zero count ta-
ble contains objects whose reference counts are zero but may be live. Depending on the
implementation of the zero count table and whether it is desirable to limit its size, we can
also choose to remove the new target from the zero count table when writing a reference
into a heap object, as its true reference count must be positive (line 19).
     However, at some point garbage objects must be collected if the program is not to run
out of memory. Periodically, for example when the allocator fails to return memory to New,
all threads are stopped while each object in the zero count table is scrutinised to determine
whether its true reference count should be zero. An object in the zero count table with
reference count zero can only be live if there are one or more references to it from the roots.
The simplest way to discover this is to scan the roots and ‘mark’ any objects found. Just as
with a tracing collector, this requires either cooperation from the compiler to provide an ac-
curate stack map of addresses that the collector should consider to be references to objects,
or that the call stack be scanned conservatively (we discuss this further in Section 11.2); in
constrast, simple reference counting requires no compiler support. The reference counts
(line 29) of any objects found in the roots scan are incremented. After this, no object ref-
erenced from the stack can have a reference count of zero, so any object with a zero count
must be garbage. We could now sweep the entire heap, as with mark-sweep collection (for
example, Algorithm 2.3), looking for and reclaiming ‘unmarked’ objects with zero refer-
ence counts. However, it is sufficient to confine this search to the zero count table. The

entries in the zero count table are scanned and any objects with zero counts are immedi-
ately processed and freed, in the same way as in the simple Algorithm 5.1. Finally, the
‘mark’ operations must be reversed: the stack is scanned again and the reference counts of
any objects found are decremented (reverted to their previous value). If an object’s refer-
ence count becomes zero, it is reinstated in the zero count table.
    Deferred reference counting removes the cost of manipulating reference counts on local
variables from the mutator. Several, older, studies have suggested that it can reduce the
cost of pointer manipulations by 80% or more [Ungar, 1984; Baden, 1983]. Given the in-
creased importance of locality, we can speculate that its performance advantage over naive
reference counting will be even larger on modern hardware. However, reference count ad-
justments due to object field updates must still be performed eagerly rather than deferred,
and must be atomic. Next, we explore how to replace expensive atomic reference count
manipulations caused by updates to objects’ fields with simple instructions, and how to
reduce the number of modifications necessary.

5.4    Coalesced reference counting
Deferred reference counting addresses the problem of the cost of applying reference count
operations to local variables. This leaves the question of how to reduce the reference count-
ing overhead of writing to objects’ pointer fields. Levanoni and Petrank [1999] observed
that, in any period and for any object field, only the values of the field at the start and the
end of the period need be considered; intermediate operations can be ignored. Thus sev-
eral states of the object can be coalesced to just these two. For example, suppose an object X
has a field f which originally refers to object O0 , and that this field is repeatedly modified
to refer to objects O1 , O2 ,. . . , On . This would incur the reference counting operations

              rc(O0 )--, rc(O1 )++, rc(O1 )-- , rc(O2 )++,. . . , rc(On )++.

    The pairs of intermediate operations (shown boxed) cancel each other and can be omit-
ted. Levanoni and Petrank eliminate them by copying objects to a local log before their first
modification in an epoch. When a pointer slot of a clean object is updated, Algorithm 5.3
logs the object by saving its address and the values of its pointer fields to a local update
buffer (line 5). The modified object is marked as dirty. Note that an initialising store need
not be logged, as the object’s reference fields will be null. Instead, we only need to record
the object as dirty.
    The log procedure attempts to avoid duplicating entries in the thread’s local log by
first appending the original values of the object’s pointer fields to the log (line 11). Next
it checks that src is still not dirty, and only then is the entry committed by writing src to
the log (appendAndCommit), tagged so that it can be recognised as an object entry rather
than a field entry, and the log’s internal cursor is advanced (line 13). The object is marked
dirty by writing a pointer to this log entry in its header. Note that even if a race leads
to records being created in more than one thread’s local buffer, the algorithm guarantees
that all these records will contain identical information, so it does not matter to which
log’s entry the header points. Depending on the processor’s memory consistency model,
this write barrier may not require any synchronisation operations. This algorithm logs all
fields of the object; it is also possible to log individual fields as they are modified, as done
by LXR [Zhao et al., 2022a,b].
    Later, we will discuss how coalesced reference counts can be processed concurrently
with mutator threads, but here we simply stop the world periodically to process the logs.
At the start of each collection cycle, Algorithm 5.4 halts every thread, transfers their up-
date buffers to the collector’s log, and allocates fresh ones. As we noted above, race con-

Algorithm 5.3: Coalesced reference counting: write barrier

 1   me ← myThreadId
 2

 3   Write(src, i, ref):
 4      if not dirty(src)
 5         log(src)
 6      src[i] ← ref
 7

 8   log(src):
 9      for each fld in Pointers(src)
10         if *fld ̸= null
11             append(updates[me], *fld)
12      if not dirty(src)
13         slot ← appendAndCommit(updates[me], src)
14         setDirty(src, slot)
15

16   dirty(src):
17      return logPointer(src) ̸= CLEAN
18

19   setDirty(src, slot)
20      logPointer(src) ← slot                  /* address of entry for src in updates[me] */

ditions mean that an entry for an object may appear in more than one thread’s update
buffer. This is harmless provided the collector only processes each dirty object once. The
processReferenceCounts procedure tests whether an object is still dirty before updat-
ing the reference counts. The counts of the children of an object at the time of the collection
are incremented, and then those of its children before its first modification in this epoch are
decremented (the increments are applied before the decrements in order to avoid adding
unnecessary entries to the zero count table). In a simple system, any object whose refer-
ence count drops to zero could be freed recursively. However, if reference counting on local
variables is deferred, or if for efficiency the algorithm does not guarantee to process all in-
crements before decrements, we simply remember any object whose count has dropped
to zero. The algorithm cleans the object so that it will not be processed again in this cy-
cle. Pointers to an object’s previous children can be found directly from the log entry. Its
current children can be found from the object itself (recall that the log contains a reference
to that object). Notice that there is opportunity for prefetching objects or reference count
fields in both the increment and decrement loops [Paz and Petrank, 2007].
    Let us look at the example in Figure 5.2. Suppose that A was modified in the previous
epoch to swing its pointer from C to D. The old values of the object’s fields (B and C) will
have been recorded in a log which has been passed to the collector (shown on the left of
the figure). The collector will therefore increment those of B and D and decrement the
reference counts of B and C. This retains the original value of B’s reference count since the
pointer from A to B was never modified.
    Thus, through a combination of deferred reference counting and coalescing, much of
reference counting’s overhead on the mutator has been removed. In particular, we have
removed any necessity for mutator threads to employ expensive synchronisation opera-
tions. However, this benefit has come at some cost. We have reintroduced pauses for
garbage collection although we expect these to be shorter than those required for tracing

Algorithm 5.4: Coalesced reference counting: update reference counts

 1   atomic collect():
 2      collectBuffers()
 3      processReferenceCounts()
 4      sweepZCT()
 5

 6   collectBuffers():
 7      collectorLog ← [ ]
 8      for each t in Threads
 9         collectorLog ← collectorLog + updates[t]
10

11   processReferenceCounts():
12      for each entry in collectorLog
13         obj ← objFromLog(entry)
14         if dirty(obj)                                            /* Do not process duplicates */
15            logPointer(obj) ← CLEAN
16            incrementNew(obj)
17            decrementOld(entry)
18

19   decrementOld(entry):
20      for each fld in Pointers(entry)                    /* use the values in the collector’s log */
21         child ← *fld
22         if child ̸= null
23            rc(child) ← rc(child) − 1
24            if rc(child) = 0
25               add(zct, child)
26

27   incrementNew(obj):
28      for each fld in Pointers(obj)                              /* use the values in the object */
29         child ← *fld
30         if child ̸= null
31            rc(child) ← rc(child) + 1

         Collector’s
             log
                                                A

                                                           X

                                 B                     C                         D

Figure 5.2: Coalesced reference counting: if A was modified in the previous
       epoch, for example by overwriting the reference to C with a reference to D,
       A’s reference fields will have been copied to the log. The old referent C can be
       found in the collector’s log and the most recent new referent D can be found
       directly from A.

collection. We have reduced the promptness of collection (since no object is reclaimed until
the end of an epoch) and added space overheads for the buffers and zero count table. Coa-
lesced reference counting may also require the collector to decrement and then increment
the same children of unmodified slots.

5.5    Cyclic reference counting
Because the reference counts of objects making up a cyclic data structure must necessarily
be at least one, reference counting on its own cannot reclaim such structures. However,
cycles are common, created both by application programmers and by the run-time system.
Applications often use doubly linked lists and circular buffers. Object-relation mapping
systems may require that databases know their tables and vice versa. Some real-world
structures are naturally cyclic, such as roads in geographical information systems. Lazy
functional language implementations commonly use cycles to express recursion [Turner,
1979, the Y combinator]. A number of techniques have been proposed to solve the cycle
problem; we review some of these now.
    The simplest approach is to combine reference counting with occasional, backup trac-
ing collection. The hope is that most objects will not be reachable from cycles and hence
will be reclaimed promptly by reference counting; the remaining cyclic structures will be
handled by the tracing collector. This simply reduces the frequency of full, tracing col-
lections. At the language level, Friedman and Wise [1979] observed that cycles can only
be created in pure functional languages by recursive definitions, and hence can be treated
specially provided certain restrictions are observed. Bobrow [1980] required the program-
mer to identify reference counted groups of cells, which are then collected en masse.
    Several authors have suggested distinguishing writes of pointers that close cycles from
those of other pointers [Friedman and Wise, 1979; Brownbridge, 1985; Salkild, 1987; Pepels
et al., 1988; Axford, 1990]. Normal references are denoted strong and others weak. Some lan-
guages offer support for different reference strengths either directly (as in Swift which pro-
vides weak and unowned as well as normal, strong references) or indirectly using special
weak objects to hold weak references (such as Java’s Reference types). Weak references
have several uses (discussed in Chapter 12) but one is to close cycles. The intention is that
a weak reference on its own will not cause its target to be retained. If strong references are
never allowed to form a cycle, then the strong-pointer graph will be amenable to standard
reference counting. However, weak reference systems are fragile and need to be used with
extreme care, especially when managed by reference counting. Programmers using weak
references must at all times retain a clear understanding of the relative lifetimes of referring
objects and their referents, and ensure that the pointer types used, strong or weak, always
reflect this accurately. Incorrect usage may lead to either cycles that cannot be reclaimed
or premature reclamation of live objects.
    Although Brownbridge’s algorithm has been widely cited as an automatic technique
for managing cycles with reference counting, it is unsafe and may reclaim objects pre-
maturely: see Salkild’s counter-example [Jones, 1996, Chapter 6.5]. In brief, Brownbridge
gives each object a strong and a weak reference count. The write barrier checks the strength
of pointers and targets, and weakens any pointer that would close a cycle. Reference dele-
tion may require the strength of pointers to be modified in order to preserve the invari-
ants that all reachable objects are strongly reachable without creating any cycles of strong
references. Salkild [1987] amended the algorithm to make it safe but at the cost of non-
termination in some cases. Pepels et al. [1988] provided a very complex solution but it is
expensive both in terms of space, with double the space overheads of normal reference
counting, and in terms of performance, having twice the cost of standard reference count-
ing in most cases and being exponential in the worst case.

    The most widely adopted automatic mechanisms for handling cycles through reference
counting use a technique called trial deletion. The key observation is that it is not necessary
for a backup tracing collector to visit the whole live object graph. Hence, its attention
can be confined to those parts of the graph where a pointer deletion might have created a
garbage cycle. Note that:
   • in any garbage pointer structure, all reference counts must be due to internal pointers
     (that is, pointers between objects within the structure);
   • garbage cycles can only arise from a pointer deletion that leaves a reference count
     greater than zero.
    Partial tracing algorithms take advantage of these observations by tracing the subgraph
rooted at an object suspected of being garbage. These algorithms trial-delete each reference
encountered by temporarily decrementing reference counts, in effect removing the contri-
bution of these internal pointers. If the reference count of any object remains non-zero,
it must be because there is a pointer to the object from outside the subgraph, and hence
neither the object nor its transitive closure is garbage.
    The Recycler [Bacon et al., 2001; Bacon and Rajan, 2001; Paz et al., 2007] supports con-
current, cyclic, deferred reference counting. In Algorithm 5.5 we show the simpler, syn-
chronous, version deferring the asynchronous collector to Chapter 15. However, we note
for now that the single collector is the only thread that modifies objects’ reference count
fields. Instead, for any object whose reference count should be incremented or decre-
mented, the mutator adds the object’s address and the operation (increment or decrement)
to mutator-local buffers, which are periodically turned over to the collector thread. Ob-
jects are allocated with a reference count of 1, with a corresponding decrement operation
immediately written into the mutation buffer; in this manner, temporary objects never ref-
erenced from the heap can be collected quickly. The cycle collection algorithm operates in
three phases.
  1. The collector traces partial graphs, starting from objects identified as possible mem-
     bers of garbage cycles, decrementing reference counts due to internal pointers (mark-
     Candidates). Objects visited are coloured grey.
  2. The reference count of each object in these subgraphs is checked: if it is non-zero,
     the object must be live due to a reference external to the subgraph being traced, and
     so the effect of the first phase must be undone (scan), recolouring live grey objects
     black. Other grey objects are coloured white.
  3. Finally, any members of the subgraph that are still white must be garbage and are
     reclaimed (collectCandidates).
    In its synchronous mode, the Recycler uses five colours to identify objects. As usual,
black means live (or free) and white is garbage. Grey is now a possible member of a
garbage cycle, and we add the colour purple to indicate objects that are candidates for
roots of garbage cycles.
    Deleting any reference other than the last to an object may isolate a garbage cycle. In
this case, Algorithm 5.5 colours the object purple and adds it to a set of candidate mem-
bers of garbage cycles (line 22). Otherwise, the object is garbage and its reference count
must be zero. Procedure release resets the object’s colour to black, processes its children
recursively and, if it is not a candidate, frees the object. The reclamation of any objects in
the candidates set is postponed to the markCandidates phase. For example, in Fig-
ure 5.3a, some reference to object A has been deleted. A’s reference count was non-zero, so
it has been added to the candidates set.

Algorithm 5.5: The Recycler

 1   New():
 2      ref ← allocate()
 3      if ref = null
 4          collect()                                                 /* the cycle collector */
 5          ref ← allocate()
 6          if ref = null
 7             error "Out of memory"
 8      rc(ref) ← 0
 9      return ref
10

11   addReference(ref):
12      if ref ̸= null
13         rc(ref) ← rc(ref) + 1
14         colour(ref) ← black                             /* cannot be in a garbage cycle */
15

16   deleteReference(ref):
17      if ref ̸= null
18         rc(ref) ← rc(ref) − 1
19         if rc(ref) = 0
20            release(ref)
21         else
22            candidate(ref)                               /* might isolate a garbage cycle */
23

24   release(ref):
25      for each fld in Pointers(ref)
26         deleteReference(fld)
27      colour(ref) ← black                          /* objects on the free−list are black */
28      if not ref in candidates                            /* deal with candidates later */
29         free(ref)
30

31   candidate(ref):                  /* colour as a candidate and add to the set */
32      if colour(ref) ̸= purple
33         colour(ref) ← purple
34         candidates ← candidates ∪ {ref}
35

36   atomic collect():
37      markCandidates()
38      for each ref in candidates
39         scan(ref)
40      collectCandidates()

Algorithm 5.5 (continued): The Recycler

41   markCandidates():
42      for ref in candidates
43         if colour(ref) = purple
44            markGrey(ref)
45         else
46            remove(candidates, ref)
47            if colour(ref) = black && rc(ref) = 0
48               free(ref)
49

50   markGrey(ref):
51      if colour(ref) ̸= grey
52         colour(ref) ← grey
53         for each fld in Pointers(ref)
54            child ← *fld
55            if child ̸= null
56               rc(child) ← rc(child) − 1                             /* trial deletion */
57               markGrey(child)
58

59   scan(ref):
60      if colour(ref) = grey
61         if rc(ref) > 0
62             scanBlack(ref)              /* there must be an external reference */
63         else
64             colour(ref) ← white                        /* looks like garbage. . . */
65             for each fld in Pointers(ref)                     /* . . .so continue */
66                child ← *fld
67                if child ̸= null
68                   scan(child)
69

70   scanBlack(ref):                    /* repair the reference counts of live data */
71      colour(ref) ← black
72      for each fld in Pointers(ref)
73         child ← *fld
74         if child ̸= null
75            rc(child) ← rc(child) + 1                   /* undo the trial deletion */
76            if colour(child) ̸= black
77               scanBlack(child)

Algorithm 5.5 (continued): The Recycler

78   collectCandidates():
79      while not isEmpty(candidates)
80         ref ← remove(candidates)
81         collectWhite(ref)
82

83   collectWhite(ref):
84      if colour(ref) = white && not ref in candidates
85         colour(ref) ← black                   /* free−list objects are black */
86         for each fld in Pointers(ref)
87            child ← *fld
88            if child ̸= null
89               collectWhite(child)
90         free(ref)

     In the first phase of collecting cycles, the markCandidates procedure establishes the
extent of possible garbage structures and removes the effect of internal references from the
counts. It considers every object in the set of garbage candidates. If the object is still
purple (hence, no references to the object have been added since it was added to the set),
its transitive closure is marked grey. Otherwise, it is removed from the set and, if it is
a black object with reference count zero, it is freed. As markGrey traces a reference, the
reference count of its target is decremented. Thus, in Figure 5.3b, the subgraph rooted at A
has been marked grey and the contribution of references internal to the subgraph has been
removed from the reference counts.
     In the second phase of collection, each candidate and its grey transitive closure is
scanned for external references. If a reference count is non-zero, it can only be because
there is a reference to this object from outside the grey subgraph. In this case, the effect
of markGrey is undone by scanBlack: reference counts are incremented and objects are
reverted to black. On the other hand, if the reference count is zero, the object is coloured
white and the scan continues to its children. Note that at this point we cannot say that
a white object is definitely garbage, as it might be revisited later by scanBlack starting
from another object in the subgraph. For example, in Figure 5.3b, objects Y and Z have
zero reference counts but are externally reachable via X. When scan reaches X, which has
a non-zero reference count, it will invoke scanBlack on the grey transitive closure of X,
restoring reference counts, leaving the graph in the state shown in Figure 5.3c.
     Finally, the third, collectWhite phase reclaims white (garbage) objects. The set of
candidates is emptied and the colour of each object inspected. Each white object found
is freed (its colour reset to black) and its children inspected recursively. Note that the algo-
rithm does not process child objects found to be in the candidates set but defers reclaiming
these to a subsequent iteration of the inner loop of collectCandidates in this cycle.
     The asynchronous Recycler algorithm improves over earlier trial deletion algorithms,
such as that of Martinez et al. [1990], which performed the trial deletion eagerly as soon
as a candidate was discovered. Lins [1992] also processed candidates lazily like the Recy-
cler in the hope that candidates will be eliminated by later mutator actions, which might
either remove the last reference so that the object can be freed immediately or add a fresh

                      candidates

                       A                                            X
                           1                    1                       2

                                                2               1
                                            Y               Z
                                      (a) Before markGrey.

                      candidates

                       A                                            X
                           0                    0                       1

                                                0               0
                                            Y               Z
         (b) After markGrey, all objects reachable from a candidate object have been
         marked grey and the effect of references internal to this grey subgraph have been
         removed. Note that X, which is still reachable, has a non-zero reference count.

                      candidates

                       A                                            X
                           0                    0                       1

                                                1               1
                                            Y               Z
         (c) After scan, all reachable objects are black and their reference counts have
         been corrected to reflect live references.

Figure 5.3: Cyclic reference counting. The first field of each object is its refer-
      ence count.

reference to it. Unfortunately, he performed all three phases of the collection cycle sep-
arately on each object, which led to complexity quadratic in the size of the graph in the
worst case. In contrast, the complexity of the Recycler is O( N + E), where N is the num-
ber of nodes and E the number of edges. This seemingly small change made a substantial
difference to performance, reducing the garbage collection time for moderately sized Java
programs from minutes (Lins) to a maximum of a few milliseconds (Recycler).
    Further improvements can be gained by recognising statically that certain classes of
objects, including but not limited to those objects that contain no pointers, can never be
members of cyclic data structures. The Recycler allocates objects of these types as green
rather than black, and never adds them to the candidate set nor traces through them. Ba-
con and Rajan [2001] found that this reduced the size of the candidate set by an order of
magnitude. Figure 5.4 illustrates the full state transition system of the synchronous Recy-
cler, including green objects.

                       purple                 in c,                                                              green
                                                      dec                                 0
             dec > 0                                                                  →                                    ec > 0
                                                            →
                                                                               d   ec                                inc, d
                                                                0

                                de

                                                                                                            w
                                     c>                                                                     ne
                                          0                                                       cl   ic
                                                                                              acy
                       mark                                         black

                                     a rk
                                 m

                                                                            sca
                                                                               nB
                                                                                lac
                                                     ck                            k, c
                                                  Bla                                  olle
                                              scan                                         ctWh
                                                                                               ite
                        grey                                                                                     white
                                                                    scan

Figure 5.4: The synchronous Recycler state transition diagram, showing mu-
       tator and collector operations and the colours of objects
        With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media: Bacon and Rajan [2001],
                                        figure 3, page 214

5.6    Limited-field reference counting
The remaining concern is the space overhead incurred by storing reference counts in object
headers. In theory, the reference count field of an object should be large enough to hold
a pointer-sized value since an object may be referenced by every other object in the heap.
An additional field of this size represents a significant overhead to small objects. However,
only contrived applications will cause counts to grow so large; in practice most objects
have small reference counts. Indeed, most objects are not shared at all and so the space
they use could be reused immediately the pointer to them is deleted [Clark and Green,
1977; Stoye et al., 1984; Hartel, 1988]. In functional languages, this allows objects such as
arrays to be updated in place rather than having to modify a copy of the object. Given
a priori knowledge of the upper bound on reference counts, it would be possible to use a
smaller field for the reference count. Unfortunately, it is common for some objects to be
very popular [Printezis and Garthwaite, 2002].
    However, it is still possible to limit the size of the reference count field provided that
some backup mechanism is occasionally invoked to deal with reference count overflow.
Once a reference count has been incremented to the maximum permissible value, it be-
comes a sticky reference count, not changed by any subsequent pointer updates. The most
extreme option is to use a single bit for the reference count, thus concentrating reference
counting on the common case of objects that are not shared. The bit can either be stored in
the object itself [Wise and Friedman, 1977] or in the pointer [Stoye et al., 1984]. The corol-
lary of limited-field reference counts is that once objects become stuck they can no longer
be reclaimed by reference counting. A backup tracing collector is needed to handle such
objects. As the tracing collector traverses each pointer, it can restore the correct reference
counts (wherever this is no greater than the sticky value); Wise [1993a] shows that, with
some effort, a mark-compact or copying collector can also restore uniqueness information.
Such a backup tracing collector would be needed to reclaim garbage cycles in any case.
    Griffin et al. [2005] devised a scheme to tag pointers in the stack to avoid incrementing
reference counts more than once for objects with multiple references in the stack. See
Chapter 20 on page 467 for details.

5.7    Issues to consider
Reference counting is attractive for the promptness with which it reclaims garbage objects
and its good locality properties. Simple reference counting can reclaim the space occupied
by an object as soon as the last pointer to that object is removed. Its operation only involves
the targets of old and new pointers read or written, unlike tracing collection which visits
every live object in the heap. However, these strengths are also the weaknesses of simple
reference counting. Because it cannot reclaim an object until the last pointer to that object
has been removed, it cannot reclaim cycles of garbage. Reference counting taxes every
pointer read and write operation and thus imposes a much larger tax on throughput than
tracing does. Furthermore, multithreaded applications require the manipulation of refer-
ence counts and updating of pointers to be expensively synchronised. This tight coupling
of mutator actions and memory manager risks some fragility, especially if ‘unnecessary’
reference count updates are optimised away by hand. Finally, reference counts increase
the sizes of objects.

The environment
Despite these concerns, it would be wrong to dismiss reference counting without further
thought. Certainly, its drawbacks make simple reference counting uncompetitive as a gen-
eral purpose memory management component of a virtual machine, especially if the ma-
jority of objects managed are small, cycles are common and the rate of pointer mutation is
high. However, there are environments which are favourable to reference counting. Ref-
erence counting can play well in a mixed ecology where the lifetimes of most objects are
sufficiently simple to be managed explicitly. It can be restricted to managing a smaller
number of resources with more complex owner relationships. Often such resources will
be large, in which case the overhead for an additional reference count field in the header
will be negligible. Data such as bitmaps for images and so on will not contain any point-
ers, so the problem of reclaiming cyclic structures does not arise. Furthermore, reference
counting can be implemented as part of a library rather than being baked into the lan-
guage’s run-time system. It can therefore give the programmer complete control over its
use, allowing her to make the decision between performance overhead and guarantees of
safety. Nevertheless, it is essential that reference counting be used carefully. In particu-
lar, the programmer must ensure that races between pointer modifications and reference
count updates are avoided. If reference counting is implemented through smart pointers,
he must also be aware that the semantics of pointers and smart pointers differ. As Edelson
[1992] wrote, “They are smart, but they are not pointers.”

Advanced solutions
Sophisticated reference counting algorithms can offer solutions to many of the problems
faced by naive reference counting but, paradoxically, these algorithms often introduce be-
haviours similar to those of stop-the-world tracing collectors. We examine this duality
further in the next chapter.
    Garbage cycles can be reclaimed by a backup, tracing collector or by using the trial dele-
tion algorithms we discussed in Section 5.5. In both cases, this requires mutator threads to
be suspended while we reclaim cyclic data (although we show how these stop-the-world
pauses can be removed in later chapters).
    Although the worst case requires reference count fields to be almost as large as pointer
fields, most applications only hold a few references to most objects. Often, it is possible
for the reference count to hijack a few bits from an existing header word (for example,

one used for object hashing or for locks). However, it is common for a very few objects to
be heavily referenced. If limited-field reference counting is used, these objects will either
leak — which may not be a serious problem if they are few in number or have very long
lifetimes — or must be reclaimed by a backup tracing collector. Note, however, that in
comparing the space overhead of reference counting and, say, mark-sweep collection it
is not sufficient simply to measure the cost of the reference count fields. In order not to
thrash, tracing collectors require some headroom in the heap. If the application is given
a heap of, say, 20% larger than its maximum volume of live data, then at least 10% of the
heap will be ‘wasted’ on average. This fraction may be similar to the overhead of reference
counting (depending on the average size of objects it manages).
    The throughput overhead of reference counting can be addressed by omitting to count
some pointer manipulations and by reducing the cost of others. Deferred reference count-
ing ignores mutator operations on local variables. This allows the counts of objects reach-
able from roots to be lower than their true value, and hence it prevents their prompt
reclamation (since a reference count of zero no longer necessarily means that the object
is garbage). Coalesced reference counting accounts for the state of an object only at the
beginning and end of an epoch: it ignores pointer manipulations in between. In one sense,
this automates the behaviour of programmers who often optimise away temporary ad-
justments to reference counts (for example, to an iterator as it traverses a list). However,
once again, one consequence of deferred and coalesced reference counting is to reintroduce
stop-the-world pauses during which reference counts are corrected. The overall effect is
somewhat similar to generational collection, discussed in Chapter 9.
    As well as removing some reference counting operations, both deferred and coalesced
reference counting reduce the synchronisation cost of other operations. Deferred reference
counting does so simply by omitting to manipulate reference counts on local variables.
Coalesced reference counting does not need synchronisation because races are benign: at
worst, the same values might be written to the logs of two different threads. However,
both solutions add space overhead to the cost of reference counting, either to store the
zero count table or to store update logs.
    Shahriyar et al. [2012] combine several of these optimisations in a reference counting
system for Java that is competitive with a high-performance mark-sweep collector. Be-
cause an extra 32-bit header word would increase space consumption and hence incur a
time overhead both for garbage collection and overall, they steal bits in an existing header
word for a sticky reference count. In a detailed study of reference counting options, they
found that 3 bits was sufficient for the vast majority of objects: the reference count fields of
only 0.65% of objects from the DaCapo benchmarks overflow, although overflowed objects
were popular, attracting 23% of reference count increments and decrements. Overflowed
reference counts that become stuck with a limited-field reference count were either ignored
or restored by occasional backup tracing collections: both techniques improved on stan-
dard reference counting.
    It is common for the overwhelming majority of new objects to have short lifetimes.
We discuss this further in Chapter 9. Shahriyar et al. take advantage of this to avoid a
significant fraction of expensive freeing operations in their deferred, coalescing reference
counter. First, unlike the Recycler [Bacon and Rajan, 2001], they do not log new objects
but set a ‘new’ bit in the object’s header. The object will only be added to a modification
buffer if it is encountered when the collector processes increments. Second, they allocate
new objects as dead, thus removing the need for a decrement when freeing short-lived
objects. Overall, the combination of limited bits for the reference count, lazy modification
buffer insertions and allocating new objects as dead reduced the average execution time of
their benchmarks by 24% compared with an already optimised reference counting scheme
Blackburn and McKinley [2003] (which we discuss in Chapter 10). Zhao et al. [2022a,b]

extend these ideas in their high performance reference counting collector, LXR , which
has been shown to offer excellent throughput and latency, especially in constrained heaps,
and lower total CPU cycles than some concurrent tracing collectors. We discuss LXR in
Chapter 18.
    A further attraction of these advanced reference counting techniques is that they scale
well with large heaps. Their cost is only proportional to the number of pointer writes
made, and not to the volume of live data. As we shall see in Chapter 10, hybrid collec-
tors are possible, combining tracing collection for short-lived, heavily mutated data with
reference counting for longer-lived, more stable data.
    In the next chapter, we compare all four forms of collection we have examined so far:
mark-sweep, mark-compact, copying and reference counting. We then consider a remark-
able abstraction of tracing and advanced reference counting collection that reveals that
they are surprisingly similar in many ways.
