Chapter 6

Comparing garbage collectors

In the preceding chapters, we presented four different styles of garbage collection. In this
chapter, we compare them in more detail. We examine the collectors in two different ways.
First, we consider criteria by which we may assess the algorithms, and the strengths and
weaknesses of the different approaches in different circumstances. We then present ab-
stractions of tracing and reference counting algorithms due to Bacon et al. [2004]. These
abstractions reveal that while the algorithms exhibit superficial differences they also bear
a deep and remarkable similarity.
    It is common to ask: which is the best garbage collector to use? However, the temp-
tation to provide a simple answer needs to be resisted. First, what does ‘best’ mean? Do
we want the collector that provides the application with the best throughput, or do we
want the shortest latencies? Is space utilisation important? Or is a compromise that com-
bines these desirable properties required? Second, it is clear that, even if a single metric
is chosen, the ranking of different collectors will vary between different applications. For
example, in a study of twenty Java benchmarks and six different collectors, Fitzgerald and
Tarditi [2000] found that for each collector there was at least one benchmark that would
have been at least 15% faster with a more appropriate collector. And furthermore, not
only do programs tend to run faster given larger heaps, but also the relative performance
of collectors varies according to the amount of heap space available. To complicate mat-
ters yet further, excessively large heaps may disperse temporally related objects, leading
to worsened locality that may slow down applications.

6.1    Throughput
The first item on many users’ wish lists is likely to be overall application throughput. This
might be the primary goal for a ‘batch’ application or for a web server where pauses might
be tolerable or obscured by aspects of the system such as network delays. Although it is
important that garbage collector actions be performed as quickly as possible, employing a
faster collector does not necessarily mean that a computation will execute faster. In a well-
configured system, garbage collection should only account for a small fraction of overall
execution time. If the price to be paid for faster collection is a larger tax on mutator opera-
tions, then it is quite possible for the application’s execution time to become longer rather
than shorter. The cost to the mutator may be explicit or implicit. Explicit actions include
read and write barrier actions, such as those that reference counting requires. However, the
performance of the mutator may also be affected implicitly, for example because a copy-
ing collector has rearranged objects in such a way as to affect cache behaviour adversely,

or because a reference count decrement has touched a cold object. It is also important
to avoid wherever possible any need to synchronise operations. Unfortunately, reference
count modifications must be synchronised in order not to miss updates. Deferred and
coalesced reference counting can eliminate much of these synchronisation costs.
    One can consider the algorithmic complexity of different algorithms. For mark-sweep
collection, we would need to include the cost of the tracing (mark) and the sweep phases,
whereas the cost of copying collection only depends on tracing. Tracing requires visiting
every live object, whereas sweeping requires visiting every object (live and dead). It is
tempting to assume that the cost of mark-sweep collection must therefore necessarily be
greater than copying collection. However, the number of instructions executed to visit an
object for mark-sweep tracing is fewer than those for copying tracing. Locality plays a
significant part here as well. We saw in Section 2.6 how prefetching techniques could be
used to hide cache misses. However, it is an open question as to whether such techniques
can be applied to copying collection without losing the benefits to the mutator of depth-
first copying. In either of these tracing collectors, the cost of chasing pointers is likely to
dominate. Furthermore, if marking is combined with lazy sweeping, we obtain the greatest
benefit in the same circumstances that copying performs best: when the proportion of live
data in the heap is small.

6.2    Pause time and latency
The next item for many users is the extent to which garbage collection interrupts program
execution. Low pause times are important but insufficient on their own, as many very
short pauses clustered together may still be disruptive. Interactive applications and others
such as transaction processors need to avoid delays that may cause backlogs of work to
build up. For such applications, latency is likely to be a better metric. The tracing collec-
tors considered so far have all been stop-the-world: all mutator threads must be brought to
a halt before the collector runs to completion. Garbage collection pause times in early sys-
tems were legendary but, even on modern hardware, stop-the-world collectors may pause
very large applications for over a second. The immediate attraction of reference counting
is that it should avoid such pauses, instead distributing the costs of memory management
throughout the program. However, as we have seen, this benefit is not realised in high
performance reference counting systems. First, the removal of the last reference to a large
pointer structure leads to recursive reference count modifications and freeing of compo-
nents. Fortunately, reference count modifications on garbage objects are not contended,
though they may cause contention on the cache lines containing the objects. More impor-
tantly, we saw that deferred and coalesced reference counting, the most effective ways to
improve reference counting performance, both reintroduce a stop-the-world pause to rec-
oncile reference counts and reclaim garbage objects in the zero count table. They also delay
reclaiming objects, reducing promptness. As we shall see in Section 6.6, high performance
reference counting and tracing schemes are not so different as they might first appear.

6.3    Space
Memory footprint is important if there are tight physical constraints on memory, if appli-
cations are very large, or in order to allow applications to scale well. All garbage collection
algorithms incur space overheads. Several factors contribute to this overhead. Algorithms
may pay a per-object penalty, for example for reference count fields. Semispace copying
collectors need additional heap space for a copy reserve; to be safe, this needs to be as

large as the volume of data currently allocated, unless a fall-back mechanism is used (for
example, mark-compact collection). Non-moving collectors face the problem of fragmen-
tation, reducing the amount of heap usable to the application. It is important not to ignore
the costs of non-heap, metadata space. Tracing collectors may require marking stacks,
mark bitmaps or other auxiliary data structures. Any non-compacting memory manager,
including explicit managers, will use space for their own data structures, such as segre-
gated free-lists and so on. Finally, if a tracing or a deferred reference counting collector
is not to thrash by collecting too frequently, it requires sufficient room for garbage in the
heap. Systems are typically configured to use a heap anything from 30% to 200% or 300%
larger than the minimum required by the program. Many systems also allow the heap
to expand when necessary, for example in order to avoid thrashing the collector. Sareen
and Blackburn [2022] suggest that a garbage collected heap about 25% to 50% larger than
that required by an explicitly managed heap is needed to achieve comparable application
performance, corroborating earlier results of Hertz et al. [2005].
     In contrast, simple reference counting frees objects as soon as they become unlinked
from the graph of live objects. Apart from the obvious advantage of preventing the ac-
cumulation of garbage in the heap, this may offer other potential benefits. Space is likely
to be reused shortly after it is freed, which may improve cache performance. It may also
be possible in some circumstances for the compiler to detect when an object becomes free,
and to reuse it immediately, without recycling it through the memory manager.
     It is desirable for collectors to be not only complete (to reclaim all dead objects eventu-
ally) but also to be prompt, that is, to reclaim all dead objects at each collection cycle. The
basic tracing collectors presented in earlier chapters achieve this, but at the cost of tracing
all live objects at every collection. However, modern high-performance garbage collectors
typically trade promptness for performance, allowing some garbage to float in the heap
from one collection to a subsequent one. Reference counting faces the additional problem
of being incomplete; specifically, it is unable to reclaim cyclic garbage structures without
recourse to tracing.

6.4    Implementation
Garbage collection algorithms are difficult to implement correctly, and concurrent algo-
rithms notoriously so. The interface between the collector and the compiler is critical.
Errors made by the collector often manifest themselves long afterwards (maybe many col-
lections afterwards), and then typically as a mutator attempts to follow a reference that
is no longer valid. It is important, therefore, that garbage collectors be constructed to be
robust as well as fast. Blackburn et al. [2004a] have shown that this performance-critical
system component can be designed with respect for good software engineering practices
of modularity and composability, leading to maintainable code. Model checking is also
a useful and easy to adopt technique that, while it may not prove the correctness of an
implementation, helps increase confidence in an algorithm (see, for example, Vechev [2007],
Ugawa et al. [2017, 2018], Xu et al. [2022] or Yang and Wrigstad [2022]).
    One advantage of simple tracing collectors is that the interface between the collector
and the mutator is simple: when the allocator exhausts memory, the collector is called.
The chief source of complexity in this interface is determining the roots of collection, in-
cluding global variables, and references held in registers and stack slots. We discuss this
in more detail in Chapter 11. However, we note here that the task facing copying and
compacting collectors is more complex than that facing non-moving collectors. A moving
collector must identify every root and update the reference accordingly, whereas a non-
moving collector need only identify at least one reference to each live object, and never

needs to change the value of a pointer. So-called conservative collectors [Boehm and Weiser,
1988] can reclaim memory without accurate knowledge of mutator stack or indeed object
layouts. Instead, they make intelligent (but safe, conservative) guesses about whether a
value really is a reference. Because non-moving collectors do not update references, the
risk of misidentifying a value as a heap pointer is confined to introducing a space leak: the
value itself will not be corrupted. A full discussion of conservative garbage collection can
be found in Jones [1996, Chapters 9 and 10].
    Reference counting has both the advantages and disadvantages of being tightly cou-
pled to the mutator. The advantages are that reference counting can be implemented in a
library, making it possible for the programmer to decide selectively which objects should
be managed by reference counting and which should be managed explicitly. The disad-
vantages are that this coupling introduces the processing overheads discussed above and
that it is essential that all reference count manipulations are correct.
    The performance of any modern language that makes heavy use of dynamically allo-
cated data is heavily dependent on the memory manager. The critical actions typically
include allocation, mutator updates including barriers, and the garbage collector’s inner
loops. Wherever possible, the code sequences for these critical actions need to be inlined,
but this has to be done carefully to avoid exploding the size of the generated code. If
the processor’s instruction cache is sufficiently large and the code expansion is sufficiently
small (in older systems with much smaller caches, Steenkiste [1989] suggested less than
30%), this blowup may have negligible effect on performance. Otherwise, it will be nec-
essary to distinguish in these actions the common case which needs to be small enough
to be inlined (the ‘fast path’), whilst calling out to a procedure for the less common ‘slow
path’ [Blackburn and McKinley, 2002]. There are two lessons to be learnt here. The output
from the compiler matters and it is essential to examine the assembler code produced. The
effect on the caches also has a major impact on performance.

6.5    Adaptive systems
Commercial systems often offer the user a choice of garbage collectors, each of which
comes with a large number of tuning options. To complicate matters further, the tun-
ing knobs provided with these collectors tend not to be independent of one another. A
number of researchers have suggested having systems adapt to the environment at hand.
The Java run-time developed by Soman et al. [2004] adapts dynamically by switching col-
lectors at run time, according to heap size available. Their system either requires off-line
profiling runs to annotate programs with the best collector/heap-size combination, or it
can switch based on comparing the current space usage of the program with the maxi-
mum heap available. Singer et al. [2007a], in contrast, apply machine learning techniques
to predict the best collector from static properties of the program (and thus only require
a single training run). Ergonomic tuning1 attempts to tune the HotSpot collector’s perfor-
mance against user-supplied throughput and maximum pause time goals, adjusting the
size of spaces within the heap accordingly.
    The best, and possibly the only, advice that we can suggest to developers is, know your
application. Measure its behaviour, and the size and lifetime distributions of the objects
it uses. Then experiment with the different collector configurations that are on offer. Un-
fortunately, this needs to be done with real data sets. While synthetic and toy benchmarks
can assist the development of new collectors by making it easier to understand the detailed
effect of changes and algorithms, they may also mislead.
  1 https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/gctuning/ergonomics.html

6.6      A unified theory of garbage collection
In the preceding chapters, we considered two styles of collection: direct, reference count-
ing and indirect, tracing collection. Bacon et al. [2004] show that these collectors share
remarkable similarities. Their abstract framework allows us to express a wide variety of
different collectors in a way that highlights precisely where they are similar and where
they differ.

Abstract garbage collection
In place of concrete data structures, the following abstract framework makes use of sim-
ple abstract data structures whose implementations can vary. We start by observing that
garbage collection can be expressed as a fixed-point computation that assigns reference
counts ρ(n) to nodes n ∈ Nodes. Reference counts include contributions from the root
set and incoming edges from nodes with non-zero reference counts:

    ∀ref ∈ Nodes :
    ρ(ref) = {fld ∈ Roots : *fld = ref}                                                                         (6.1)
                 +     {fld ∈ Pointers(n) : n ∈ Nodes ∧ ρ(n) > 0 ∧ *fld = ref}

Having assigned reference counts, nodes with a non-zero count are retained and the rest
should be reclaimed. Reference counts need not be precise, but may simply be a safe ap-
proximation of the true value. Abstract garbage collection algorithms compute such fixed-
points using a work list W of objects to be processed. When W is empty, these algorithms
terminate. In the following, W is a multiset, since every entry in W represents a distinct
source for each reference.

Tracing garbage collection
The abstraction casts tracing collection as a form of reference counting. Abstract tracing
collection is illustrated by Algorithm 6.1, which starts with the reference counts of all nodes
being zero. At the end of each collection cycle, sweepTracing resets the count of all nodes
to zero, and New initialises new nodes with a zero reference count. The collectTracing
procedure accumulates all non-null root pointers using rootsTracing and passes them
to scanTracing as the work list W.
    Collection proceeds as we would expect by tracing the object graph to discover all
the nodes reachable from the roots. The procedure scanTracing accomplishes this by
tracing elements from the work list, reconstructing the reference count of each node, by
incrementing its reference count each time it is encountered (recall how we suggested in
Section 5.6 that a tracing collector could be used to correct sticky reference counts). When
a reachable node src is discovered for the first time (when ρ(src) is set to 1, line 11), the
collector recurses through all the out-edges of src by scanning its fields and adding the
(pointers to) child nodes found in those fields to the work list W.2
    Termination of the while loop yields all the live nodes, each of which has a non-zero
reference count equal to the number of its in-edges. The sweepTracing procedure then
frees unused nodes and resets the reference counts for the next round of collection. Note
that a practical implementation of tracing can use a single-bit value for each node’s refer-
ence count, in other words a mark bit rather than a full-sized reference count, to record
   2 Alternatively, the object could be added to the log in order to trade the size of the log for improved cache per-

formance in the tracing loop (see Section 2.6), but this does not match so well the reference counting abstraction
of Algorithm 6.2.

Algorithm 6.1: Abstract tracing garbage collection

 1   atomic collectTracing():
 2      W ← []
 3      rootsTracing(W )
 4      scanTracing(W )
 5      sweepTracing()
 6

 7   scanTracing(W ):
 8      while not isEmpty(W )
 9         src ← remove(W )
10         ρ(src) ← ρ(src) + 1                                              /* shade src */
11         if ρ(src) = 1                                       /* src was white, now grey */
12            for each fld in Pointers(src)
13                ref ← *fld
14                if ref ̸= null
15                   W ← W + [ref]
16

17   sweepTracing():
18      for each node in Nodes
19         if ρ(node) = 0                                                 /* node is white */
20            free(node)
21         else                                                             /* node is black */
22            ρ(node) ← 0                                            /* reset node to white */
23

24   New():
25      ref ← allocate()
26      if ref = null
27          collectTracing()
28          ref ← allocate()
29          if ref = null
30             error "Out of memory"
31      ρ(ref) ← 0                                                          /* node is white */
32      return ref
33

34   rootsTracing( R):
35      for each fld in Roots
36         ref ← *fld
37         if ref ̸= null
38            R ← R + [ref]

whether the node has already been visited. The mark bit is thus a coarse approximation of
the true reference count.
   The tracing collector computes the least fixed-point solution to Equation 6.1: the refer-
ence counts on the nodes are the lowest counts that satisfy it.
   We can interpret garbage collection algorithms in terms of the tricolour abstraction
discussed in Section 2.2. In Algorithm 6.1, nodes with reference count 0 are white, while
nodes with non-zero reference count are black. The transition of a node from white via
grey to black occurs as that node is first traced and then scanned. Thus, we can recast the

abstract tracing algorithm as partitioning the nodes into two sets, black being reachable
and white being garbage.

Reference counting garbage collection
The abstract reference counting collection Algorithm 6.2 shows reference count operations
being buffered by the mutator’s inc and dec procedures rather than performed immedi-
ately, in order to highlight the similarity with tracing. This buffering technique turns out to
be very practical for multithreaded applications; we consider it further in Chapter 18. This
logging of actions also shares similarities with coalesced reference counting, discussed in
Section 5.4. The garbage collector, collectCounting, performs the deferred increments
I with applyIncrements and the deferred decrements D with scanCounting.
    Mutation, using the Write procedure, stores a new destination reference dst into a
field src[i]. In doing so, it buffers an increment for the new destination, inc(dst) and
a decrement for the old referent, dec(src[i]), before storing the new destination to the
field, src[i]←dst.
    Each collection begins by applying all deferred increments to bring them up to date.
The deferred decrements are applied in the next phase. The scanCounting procedure
begins with reference counts that over-estimate the true counts. Thus, it must decrement
the counts of nodes in the work list as it encounters them. Any source node whose count,
ρ(src), is decremented to zero in this phase is treated as garbage, and its child nodes are
added to the work list. Finally, the procedure sweepCounting frees the garbage nodes.
    The tracing and reference counting algorithms are identical but for minor differences.
Each has a scan procedure: the scanTracing collector uses reference count increments
whereas the scanCounting collector uses decrements. In both cases the recursion condi-
tion checks for a zero reference count. Each has a sweep procedure that frees the space oc-
cupied by garbage nodes. In fact, the outline structures of the first 32 lines in Algorithm 6.1
and Algorithm 6.2 are identical. Deferred reference counting, which defers counting refer-
ences from the roots, is similarly captured by this framework (see Algorithm 6.3).
    Finally, we noted earlier that computing reference counts is tricky when it comes to
cycles in the object graph. The trivial object graph in Figure 6.1 shows a simple isolated
cycle, where assuming A has reference count zero allows B also to have reference count
zero (since only source nodes with a non-zero count contribute to the reference counts
of their destinations). But there is a chicken-and-egg problem here, since the reference
counts of A and B are mutually dependent. It is just as feasible for us to claim that A
has reference count 1, because of its reference from B, leading us to claim that B also has
reference count 1.
    This seeming anomaly arises generally for fixed-point computations, where there may
be several different feasible solutions. In Figure 6.1 we have the case that Nodes = {A, B}
and Roots = {}. There are two fixed-point solutions of Equation 6.1 for this simple graph:
a least fixed-point ρ(A) = ρ(B) = 0 and a greatest fixed-point ρ(A) = ρ(B) = 1. Tracing
collectors compute the least fixed-point, whereas reference counting collectors compute
the greatest, so they cannot (by themselves) reclaim cyclic garbage. The difference be-
tween these two solutions is precisely the set of objects reachable only from garbage cy-
cles. We saw in Section 5.5 that reference counting algorithms can use partial tracing to
reclaim garbage cycles. They do so by starting from the greatest fixed-point solution and
contracting the set of unreclaimed objects to the least fixed-point solution.

Algorithm 6.2: Abstract reference counting garbage collection

 1   initialise():
 2      I ← []
 3      D ← []
 4

 5   atomic collectCounting( I,D ):
 6      applyIncrements( I )
 7      scanCounting( D )
 8      sweepCounting()
 9

10   scanCounting(W ):
11      while not isEmpty(W )
12         src ← remove(W )
13         ρ(src) ← ρ(src) − 1
14         if ρ(src) = 0
15            for each fld in Pointers(src)
16                ref ← *fld
17                if ref ̸= null
18                   W ← W + [ref]
19

20   sweepCounting():
21      for each node in Nodes
22         if ρ(node) = 0
23            free(node)
24

25   New():
26      ref ← allocate()
27      if ref = null
28          collectCounting( I,D )
29          ref ← allocate()
30          if ref = null
31             error "Out of memory"
32      ρ(ref) ← 0
33      return ref
34

35   dec(ref):
36      if ref ̸= null
37         D ← D + [ref]
38

39   inc(ref):
40      if ref ̸= null
41         I ← I + [ref]
42

43   atomic Write(src, i, dst):
44      inc(dst)
45      dec(src[i])
46      src[i] ← dst
47

48   applyIncrements( I ):
49      while not isEmpty( I )
50         ref ← remove( I )
51         ρ(ref) ← ρ(ref) + 1

Algorithm 6.3: Abstract deferred reference counting garbage collection

 1   initialise():
 2      I ← []
 3      D ← []
 4

 5   atomic collectDrc( I,D ):
 6      rootsTracing( I )
 7      applyIncrements( I )
 8      scanCounting( D )
 9      sweepCounting()
10      rootsTracing( D )
11      applyDecrements( D )
12

13   New():
14      ref ← allocate()
15      if ref = null
16          collectDrc( I, D )
17          ref ← allocate()
18          if ref = null
19             error "Out of memory"
20      ρ(ref) ← 0
21      return ref
22

23   atomic Write(src, i, dst):
24      if src ̸= Roots
25         inc(dst)
26         dec(src[i])
27      src[i] ← dst
28

29   applyDecrements( D ):
30      while not isEmpty( D )
31         ref ← remove( D )
32         ρ(ref) ← ρ(ref) − 1

                          A                    B
                               ρ                   ρ

Figure 6.1: A simple cycle
Taylor & Francis
Taylor & Francis Group
http://taylorandfrancis.com
