Chapter 9

Generational garbage collection

The goal of a collector is to reclaim the space occupied by dead objects. Tracing collectors
(and copying collectors in particular) are most efficient if the space they manage contains
few live objects. On the other hand, long-lived objects are handled poorly if the collector
processes them repeatedly, either marking and sweeping, or copying them again and again
from one semispace to another. We noted in Chapter 3 that long-lived objects tend to
accumulate in the bottom of a heap managed by a mark-compact collector, and that some
collectors avoid compacting this dense prefix. While this eliminates the cost of relocating
these objects, they must still be traced and all references they contain must be updated.
    Generational collectors extend this idea by not considering the oldest objects whenever
possible. By concentrating reclamation effort on the youngest objects in order to exploit
the weak generational hypothesis that most objects die young, they hope to maximise yield
(recovered space) while minimising effort. Generational collectors segregate objects by
age into generations, typically physically distinct areas of the heap. Younger generations
are collected in preference to older ones, and objects that survive long enough are promoted
(or tenured) from the generation being collected to an older one.
    Most generational collectors manage younger generations by copying. If, as expected,
few objects are live in the generation being collected, then the mark/cons ratio between
the volume of data processed by the collector and the volume allocated for that collection
will be low. The time taken to collect the youngest generation (or nursery) will in general
depend on its size. By tuning its size, we can control the expected pause times for collection
of a generation. Young generation pause times for a well-configured collector (running an
application that conforms to the weak generational hypothesis) are typically of the order
of tens to hundreds of microseconds on current hardware. Provided the interval between
collections is sufficient, such a collector will be unobtrusive to many applications.
    Occasionally a generational collector must collect the whole heap, for example when
the allocator runs out of space and the collector estimates that insufficient space would be
recovered by collecting only the younger generations. Generational collection therefore
only improves expected pause times, not the worst case. On its own, it is not sufficient for
real-time systems. We consider the requirements for garbage collection in a hard real-time
environment and how to achieve them in Chapter 19.
    Generational collection can also improve throughput by avoiding repeatedly process-
ing long-lived objects. However, there are costs to pay. No garbage in an old generation
can be reclaimed by collection of younger generations only: collection of long-lived objects
that become garbage is not prompt. In order to be able to collect one generation without
collecting others, generational collectors impose a bookkeeping overhead on mutators in
order to track references that span generations, an overhead hoped to be small compared to

9.1. EXAMPLE                                                                               118

                                 R

                                                                         remset
                                         S                     U

                old

                        N                    P

                                                               V

                                     Q

                young

Figure 9.1: Inter-generational pointers. If live objects in the young generation
       are to be preserved without tracing the whole heap, a mechanism and a data
       structure are needed to remember objects S and U in the old generation that
       hold references to objects in the young generation.

the benefits of generational collection. Tuning generational collectors to meet throughput
and pause-time goals simultaneously is a subtle art.

9.1    Example
Figure 9.1 shows a simple example of generational collection. This collector is using two
generations. Objects are created in the young generation. At each minor collection (or nurs-
ery collection), objects in the young generation are promoted to the old generation if they
are sufficiently old. Before the first collection, the young generation in this example con-
tains four objects, N, P, Q and V, and the old generation three objects, R, S and U. R and N
are reachable from outside the generational space; maybe some roots point to them. The
collector is about to collect the young generation. Suppose that N, P and V were allocated
some time ago but Q was only created shortly before the collector was invoked. The ques-
tion of which objects should be promoted raises important issues.
    A generational collector will promote objects it discovers from the young generation
to the old one, provided they are old enough. This decision requires that it has a way of
measuring time and a mechanism for recording ages. In our example, no objects in the young
generation other than N are referenced by the roots, but P and Q are also clearly live since
they are reachable from the roots via R and S. Most generational collectors do not examine
the whole heap, but only trace the generation(s) being collected. Since the old generation
is not to be traced here, a generational system must record inter-generational pointers such as
the one from S to P in order that the collector may discover P and Q.
    Such inter-generational pointers can arise in two ways. First, the mutator creates a
pointer that requires tracking whenever it writes a pointer to an object in a generation G1
into a field of an object in a generation G2 that will be collected later than G1 . Second, the
collector itself may create inter-generational pointers when it promotes an object. In the
example, the collector will create such a pointer if it promotes P but not Q. In both cases,
the inter-generational pointer can be detected with a write barrier. The mutator requires
a barrier on pointer writes that records whether a pointer between generations has been
written. A generational collector needs a similar copy write barrier to detect any inter-
generational references created by promotion. In the example, the remembered set (remset)
9.2. MEASURING TIME                                                                        119

records the location of any objects (or fields) that may contain an inter-generational pointer
of interest to the garbage collector, in this case S and U.
    Unfortunately, treating the source of inter-generational pointers as roots for a minor col-
lection exacerbates the problem of floating garbage. Minor collections are frequent but do
not reclaim garbage in the old generation, such as U. Worse, U holds an inter-generational
pointer so must be considered a root for the young generation. This nepotism will lead
to the young garbage child V of the old garbage object U being promoted rather than re-
claimed, thus further reducing the space available for live objects in the older generation.

9.2    Measuring time
Before objects can be segregated by their age, we need to decide how time is to be mea-
sured. There are two choices: bytes allocated or seconds elapsed. Wall-clock time is useful
for understanding a system’s external behaviour. How long does it run? What are the
pause times for garbage collection and how are they distributed? Answers to these ques-
tions determine whether a system is fit for purpose: will it complete its task in sufficient
time and will it be sufficiently responsive? One requirement might be that it does not
disturb an interactive human user. Another requirement might be to meet a hard real-
time guarantee (say, in an embedded system) or a soft one (where occasionally missing a
deadline is not disastrous but missing many is). On the other hand, internally, object life-
times are better measured by the number of bytes of heap space allocated between their
birth and their death. Space-allocated is a largely machine-independent measure, although
clearly a system with 64-bit addresses or integers will use more space than a 32-bit one.
Bytes-allocated also directly measures the pressure placed upon the memory manager; it
is closely related to the frequency with which the collector must be called.
    Unfortunately, measuring time in terms of bytes allocated is tricky in multithreaded
systems (where there are multiple application or system threads). A simple global measure
of the volume of allocation may inflate the lifetime of an object, since the counter will
include allocation by threads unrelated to the object in question [Jones and Ryder, 2008].
    In practice generational collectors often measure time in terms of how many collections
an object has survived, because this is more convenient to record and requires fewer bits,
but the collections survived is appropriately considered to be an approximate proxy for
actual age in terms of bytes allocated.

9.3    Generational hypotheses
The weak generational hypothesis, that most objects die young, appears to be widely valid,
regardless of programming paradigm or implementation language. Foderaro and Fateman
[1981] found that, for a computer algebra system written in MacLisp, 98% of the volume
of data recovered by a collection had been allocated since the previous one. Zorn [1989]
reported that between 50% and 90% of Common Lisp objects survive less than 10 kilobytes
of allocation. The story is similar for functional languages. For Haskell, between 75% and
95% of heap data died before they were 10 kilobytes old and only 5% lived longer than
1 megabyte [Sansom and Peyton Jones, 1993]. Appel [1992] observed that Standard ML/NJ
reclaimed 98% of any given generation at each collection, and Stefanović and Moss [1994]
found that only 2% to 8% of allocated data survived the 100-kilobyte threshold.
    It also holds for many programs written in object-oriented languages. Ungar [1986]
found that less than 7% of Smalltalk objects lived beyond 140 kilobytes. Dieckmann and
9.4. GENERATIONS AND HEAP LAYOUT                                                            120

Hölzle [1999] reported that the volume of Java objects in the SPECjvm98 benchmark suite
surviving 100 kilobytes varied between 1% and 40%, and that less than 21% lived beyond
1 megabyte although the proportion varied significantly from one application to another.
Blackburn et al. [2006b] found that on average less than 9% of objects allocated by the
SPECjvm98 and DaCapo benchmark suites escaped from a 4-megabyte nursery, although
there was wide variation between benchmarks; note that this is an upper bound on the
volume of objects living longer than 4 megabytes since some escapees may only have been
allocated shortly before the nursery was collected. Jones and Ryder [2008] found bimodal
lifetime distributions common in Java applications; between 65% and 96% of DaCapo ob-
jects survived no longer than 64 kilobytes, with 3% to 16% being immortal or living longer
than 4 megabytes. Even in imperative languages without automatic memory management
support, the lifetimes of many objects are short. Barrett and Zorn [1993] reported that more
than 50% of allocated data died within 10 kilobytes and less than 10% survived 32 kilobytes
in allocation-intensive C programs.
    On the other hand, there is much less evidence for the strong generational hypothesis that,
even for objects that are not newly created, younger objects will have a lower survival
rate than older ones [Hayes, 1991]. Simple models like the weak generational hypothesis
account adequately in many programs for the behaviour of objects overall. However, once
the shortest-lived objects are discounted, objects’ demographics over a longer timescale are
more complex. Object lifetimes are not random. They commonly live in clumps and die
all at the same time, because programs operate in phases [Dieckmann and Hölzle, 1999;
Jones and Ryder, 2008]. A significant number of objects may never die. The lifetime of
objects may be correlated with their size, although opinion has differed on this [Caudill
and Wirfs-Brock, 1986; Ungar and Jackson, 1988; Barrett and Zorn, 1993]. However, as we
saw above, there are other reasons why we might want to treat large objects specially.

9.4    Generations and heap layout
A wide variety of strategies have been used to organise generations. Collectors may use
two or more generations, which may be segregated physically or logically. Each genera-
tion may be bounded in size, or the size of one space may be traded against that of another.
The structure within a generation may be flat or it may comprise a number of age-based sub-
spaces, called steps or buckets. Generations may also hold their own large object subspaces.
Each generation may be managed by a different algorithm.
    The primary goals of generational garbage collection are reduced pause times and im-
proved throughput. Assuming that the youngest generation is processed by copying col-
lection, expected pause times depend largely on the volume of data that survives a minor
collection of that generation, which in turn depends on the size of the generation. How-
ever, if the size of the nursery is too small, collection will be fast but little memory will be
reclaimed as the objects in the nursery will have had insufficient time to die. This will have
many undesirable consequences.
    First, young generation collections will be too frequent. As well as its copying cost
proportional to the volume of surviving objects — which will be higher since objects have
had less time to die — each collection must also bear the cost of stopping threads and
scanning their stacks.
    Second, the older generation will fill too fast and then it too will have to be collected.
High promotion rates will cause time-consuming older generation or full heap collections
to take place too frequently. In addition, premature promotion will increase the incidence
of nepotism, as ‘tenured’ garbage objects in the old generation preserve their offspring in
9.5. MULTIPLE GENERATIONS                                                                  121

the young generation, artificially inflating the survival rate as those dead children will also
be promoted.
    Third, there is considerable evidence that newly created objects are modified more fre-
quently than older ones. If these young objects are promoted prematurely, their high mu-
tation rate will put further pressure on the mutator’s write barrier; this is particularly
undesirable if the cost of the write barrier is high. Any transfer of overheads between
mutator and collector needs careful evaluation with realistic workloads. Typically, the col-
lector will account for a much smaller proportion of execution time than the mutator in
any well configured system. For example, suppose a write barrier comprises just a few
instructions in its fast path yet accounts for 5% of overall execution time; suppose further
that the collector accounts for 10% of overall running time. It would be quite easy for an
alternative write barrier implementation to double the cost of the barrier, thus adding 5%
to overall execution time. To recover this, garbage collection time must be reduced by 50%,
which would be hard to do.
    Finally, by promoting objects the program’s working set may be diluted. Generational
organisation is a balancing act between keeping minor collections as short as possible,
minimising the number of minor and the much more expensive full, major collections, and
avoiding passing too much of the cost of memory management to the mutator. We now
look at how this can be achieved.

9.5    Multiple generations
Adding further generations is one solution to the dilemma of how to preserve short pause
times for nursery collections without incurring excessively frequent full heap collections,
because the oldest generation has filled too soon. The role of the intermediate generations
is to filter out any objects that have survived collection of the youngest generation but do
not live much longer. If a garbage collector promotes all live objects en masse from the
youngest generation, the survivors will include the most recently allocated objects despite
the expectation that most of these will die very soon. By using multiple generations, the
size of the youngest generation can be kept small enough to meet expected pause time re-
quirements without increasing the volume of objects dying in the oldest generation shortly
after their promotion.
    Using multiple generations has a number of drawbacks. Most systems will collect all
younger generations when any older generation is collected. This offers the benefit that
pointers need to be tracked in only one direction: old to young, which occur less fre-
quently than young to old. Although the time taken to collect an intermediate generation
will be less than that required to collect the full heap, pause times will be longer than
those for nursery collections. Multiple generation collectors are also more complex to im-
plement and may introduce additional overheads to the collector’s tracing loop, as this
performance critical code must now distinguish between multiple generations rather than
just two (which can often be accomplished with a single check against an address, maybe
a compile-time constant). Increasing the number of generations will tend to increase the
number of inter-generational pointers created, which in turn may increase the pressure on
the mutator’s write barrier, depending on implementation. It will also increase the size of
the root set for younger generations since objects have been promoted that would not have
been if some of the space used for the intermediate generations had been used to increase
the size of the young generation.
    Although many early generational collectors for Smalltalk and Lisp offered multiple
generations, most modern generational collectors for object-oriented systems provide just

two. Even where collectors provide more than two generations, such as those for func-
tional languages where allocation and death rates are prodigiously high, often only two
generations are used by default [Marlow et al., 2008]. Instead, mechanisms within genera-
tions, especially the youngest generation, can be used to control promotion rates.

9.6    Age recording

En masse promotion
Age recording and promotion policy are tightly coupled. Multiple generations provide an
imprecise way of recording objects’ ages. Figure 9.2 shows four ways in which a young
generation can be structured to control object promotion. We discuss each of these in
turn. The simplest arrangement is for each generation except the oldest to be implemented
as a single semispace (see Figure 9.2a). When that generation is collected, all surviving
objects are promoted en masse to the next. This structure has the advantages of simplicity
and optimal utilisation of the memory devoted to the young generation. There is neither
any need to record per-object ages nor is there any necessity for copy reserve space in
each generation (except for the last if indeed it is managed by copying). The generational
collectors used by the MMTk memory manager in the Jikes RVM Java virtual machine use
en masse promotion in this way [Blackburn et al., 2004b]. Both the Android Runtime (ART)
and Webkit’s Riptide [Pizlo, 2017] use variations of en masse promotion for generational
mark-sweep collection that use sticky mark bits (originally introduced for a conservative
generational collector [Demers et al., 1990]). Here, minor collections simply leave the mark
bits set. Thus a marked object is implicitly also an old one, and the write barrier records a
marked object into the remembered set the first time it is updated to refer to an unmarked
(and thus young) object. A major collection simply resets the mark bits and discards the
remembered set before starting to mark. However, Zorn [1993] has suggested that en masse
promotion of every live object (in a Lisp system) may lead to promotion rates 50% to 100%
higher than can be achieved by requiring objects to survive more than one minor collection
before they are promoted.
    Figure 9.3, due to Wilson and Moher [1989b], illustrates the survival rates from the
youngest generation that might be obtained by delaying promotion for one or two collec-
tions. The curves show the fraction of objects that survive a future scavenge if they were
allocated at time t, assuming that most objects die young. The closer an object is born
to a collection, the more likely it is to survive that collection. Let us focus on the area of
the graph between scavenges n and n + 1. Curve (b) shows the proportion of objects that
will survive one scavenge: most objects will die before the next collection (the data in the
light grey area). The data in the black area below curve (c) will survive two scavenges.
If the policy is to promote en masse all objects that survive the collection, then the data
in the dark grey and black areas below curve (b) will be promoted. However, if promo-
tion is restricted to those objects that survive two collections, then only the data in the
black area below curve (c) will be tenured. By requiring a copy count greater than one,
the very youngest objects (which we can expect to die soon) are denied tenure, and the
promotion rate is substantially reduced. In principal, increasing the copy count for pro-
motion is likely to pay diminishing returns [Ungar, 1984; Shaw, 1988; Ungar and Jackson,
1988]; Wilson [1989] suggested that it may be necessary to increase the count by a factor
of four or more to reduce the number of remaining survivors by half. However, the user-
configurable tenuring thresholds for the HotSpot Java virtual machine’s modern collectors
typically lie between 7 and 15 copies.
                                                                                                                                  9.6. AGE RECORDING
Young
Old

        (a)                                     (b)                                      (c)                                (d)

Figure 9.2: Semispace organisation in a generational collector. Dark grey indicates newly allocated data, light
        grey copied or promoted data. In each case, the x-axis is time and the y-axis is the volume of allocation. (a) en
        masse promotion; (b) aging semispaces (records per space age); (c) aging semispaces (records per object age);
        (d) survivor spaces promotion (records per object age).
                                                Jones [1996]. Reprinted by permission.

                                                            HWM
          1

    Surviving frac on

                                                        never copied

                                        (a)                       (b)                          (c)

                                                                         count = 1

                                                                         count = 2
     0
  scavenge n-1                                 scavenge n                   scavenge n+1                 scavenge n+2
                                                                  Time

Figure 9.3: Survival rates with a copy count of 1 or 2. The curves show the
                        fraction of objects that will survive a future collection if they were born at
                        time x. Curve (b) shows the proportion that will survive one collection and
                        curve (c) the proportion that will survive two. The coloured areas show the
                        proportions of objects that will not be copied or will be promoted (copied)
                        under different copy count regimes.
                                     Wilson and Moher [1989b], doi: 10.1145/74877.74882
                             © 1989 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

Aging semispaces
Promotion can be delayed by structuring a generation into two or more aging spaces. This
allows objects to be copied between the fromspace and tospace an arbitrary number of
times within the generation before they are promoted. In the origonal Lieberman and
Hewitt generational collector [1983], a generation is collected several times before all sur-
vivors are eventually promoted en masse. In terms of the aging semispaces of Figure 9.2b,
either all live objects in fromspace are evacuated to tospace within this generation or all
are promoted to the next generation, depending on the age of the generation as a whole.
While this arrangement allows the older members of the generation time to die, the very
youngest will still be promoted, possibly prematurely.
    Sun’s ExactVM1 also implemented the younger of two generations as a pair of semis-
paces (see Figure 9.2c) but controlled promotion of an individual object by stealing five
bits from one of two header words to record its age. In this case, individual live objects
can either be evacuated to tospace or promoted to the next generation. While this throttles
the promotion of the youngest objects, it adds a test and an addition operation to the work
done to process live objects in the young generation.
    Bucket brigade and step systems allow a somewhat finer discrimination between object
ages without maintaining per-object ages. Here, a generation is divided into a number of
subspaces and objects are advanced from one bucket or step to the next at each collection.
Some step systems advance all surviving objects from one step to the next at each collec-
tion: live objects from the oldest step are promoted to the next generation. Here, an n-step
system guarantees that objects will not reach the next generation until they have survived
  1 Later called the Sun Microsystems Laboratories Virtual Machine for Research; for details see White and Garth-

waite [1998].

                                                                       New data
                                                                     Copied data

                                    New

                                    Aging                                            Young
                                                                       Aging
     Young                                                                         genera on
   genera on
                  New
                                                         New

                  Aging
                                                        Aging

                                                                                      Old
      Old                                                                          genera on
   genera on

                                                                                   Time

Figure 9.4: Shaw’s bucket brigade system. Objects are copied within the
      young generation from a creation space to an aging semispace. By placing
      the aging semispace adjacent to the old generation at even numbered collec-
      tions, objects can be promoted to the old generation simply by moving the
      boundary between generations.
                            Jones [1996]. Reprinted by permission.

n scavenges. Glasgow Haskell allows an arbitrary number of steps in each generation (al-
though the default is two in the young generation and one in others), as did the UMass
GC Toolkit [Hudson et al., 1991]. Shaw [1988] further divides each step into a pair of semis-
paces in his bucket brigade scheme. Survivors are copied between each pair of semispaces
b times before advancing to the next step. Thus, the two-bucket scheme guarantees that
objects will not reach the next generation until they have survived between 2b and 2b − 1
scavenges. Shaw arranged his scheme to simplify promotion. Figure 9.4 shows an in-
stance of his scheme with two buckets: n = 3 so objects are copied up to three times within
a bucket before being evacuated to the aging bucket or promoted. Because Shaw’s gener-
ations are contiguous, he can merge the aging bucket with the old generation by delaying
the promotion step until the oldest bucket’s tospace is adjacent to the old generation. At
this point the bucket is promoted by adjusting the boundary between the generations. The
aging spaces of Figure 9.2c have some similarities with a two-bucket scheme but pay the
cost of manipulating age bits in the headers of survivors.
    It is important to understand the differences between steps and generations. Both
segregate objects by age, but different generations are collected at different frequencies
whereas all the steps of a generation are collected at the same time. Generations also differ
in how pointers that span spaces are treated. Because one generation may be collected later
than another, it is essential to track pointers from an older generation to a younger one. On
the other hand, there is no need to track inter-step pointers. By using steps in the youngest
generation (where most mutation occurs), and by reducing premature collection, the load
on the write barrier can be reduced while also controlling promotion, without need for
per-object age records.

                                                                       New data
                                                                     Copied data

                 Crea on                                                                   bucket 0
                  space
                                                                                        high
                                                                                        water
                                                                                        mark

      Younger
     Genera on
                                                                                           bucket 1
               Aging
             semispaces

       Next
     Genera on

                                                                             Time

Figure 9.5: High water marks. Objects are copied from a fixed creation space
       to an aging semispace within a younger generation and then promoted to
       an older generation. Although all survivors in an aging semispace are pro-
       moted, by adjusting a ‘high water mark’, we can choose to copy or promote
       an object in the creation space simply through an address comparison.
                    Wilson and Moher [1989b], doi: 10.1145/74877.74882
            © 1989 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

Survivor spaces and flexibility
All the semispace organisations described above are wasteful of space since they reserve
half the space in the generation for copying. Ungar [1984] organised the young generation
as one large creation space (often called eden) and two smaller buckets or survivor semispaces
(see Figure 9.2d). As usual, objects are allocated in eden, which is scavenged alongside
the survivor fromspace at each minor collection. All live eden objects are promoted to the
survivor tospace. Live objects in survivor fromspace are either evacuated to tospace within
the young generation or promoted to the next generation, depending on their age. This
organisation can improve space utilisation because the eden region is very much larger
than the two semispaces. For example, the HotSpot Java virtual machine has a default
eden versus survivor space ratio of 8:1, thus using a copy reserve of 6.25% of the young
generation. HotSpot’s Ergonomics promotion policy does not impose a fixed age limit for
promotion but instead attempts to keep the survivor space half empty. In contrast, the
other semispace schemes waste half of the nursery space on copy reserve.
    The Opportunistic garbage collector [Wilson and Moher, 1989b] used a bucket brigade
system with the space parsimony of survivor spaces and some flexibility in promotion
age. The age at which objects are promoted can be varied down to the granularity of an
individual object without the overhead of having to store or manipulate each object’s age.
As before, the young generation is divided into a creation space and a pair of aging spaces.
The aging spaces are not semispaces but simply act as steps. At each minor collection,
survivors from the creation space are evacuated to one of the aging spaces; survivors of
the other aging space are promoted. With just this organisation, promoted objects would
have a copy count of two. However, Wilson and Moher observe that objects are placed
9.7. ADAPTING TO PROGRAM BEHAVIOUR                                                        127

in the creation space in allocation order. By drawing a high water mark across creation
space, younger objects (above the line in Figure 9.5) can be distinguished from older ones
by a simple address comparison. Younger members of the creation space are treated as
members of bucket 0. Older members and all of the aging space become bucket 1; survivors
of this bucket are promoted.
    This scheme limits the promotion age to a maximum of two minor collections, and so
does not offer as wide a range of promotion age as those that explicitly store ages in objects
or associate them with spaces (such as the semispace organisations we considered earlier).
However, any non-integral promotion threshold between one and two can be selected, and
modified at any time, including during scavenges. We can see the effect in Figure 9.3. Any
data in the dark grey or black regions to the left of the dashed white high water mark line
will be promoted at their first collection. Those to the right of the high water mark line
will be promoted if they are in the black area below curve (c), or evacuated to die later in
the aging space if they are in the grey area above the curve. Wilson and Moher used this
scheme with three generations for the byte-coded Scheme-48; it was also used in Standard
ML with up to 14 generations [Reppy, 1993].

9.7    Adapting to program behaviour
The Opportunistic collector is an example of a garbage collector that can adapt its promo-
tion policy as a program runs. It provides a particularly fine-grained and simple mech-
anism. Adaptation is needed because objects’ lifetime demographics are neither random
nor stationary. Instead, real programs (unlike toy ones or synthetic benchmarks) tend to
operate in phases. There are a wide range of common patterns of behaviour. A set of
live objects may gradually accumulate and then die all at once. Alternatively, its size may
reach a plateau after which the objects live for a long time. Ungar and Jackson [1988] cite
the example of objects born in a clump that slowly diminishes, “rather like a pig that has
been swallowed by a python.” Demographics that do not adhere strictly to the weak gen-
erational hypothesis can cause problems for generational collectors. If a large volume of
data lives for sufficient time to reach an older generation and then dies, performance will
suffer. To deal with this, Ungar and Jackson have argued for flexible mechanisms that
control tenuring [1988; 1992].
    It is useful to be able to adapt garbage collectors in general to the mutator’s behaviour,
for example to reduce expected pause time or to improve overall throughput. The sim-
plest scheduling mechanism is to invoke the collector only when the allocator runs out of
space, but a generational memory manager can control pause times by adjusting the size
of the youngest generation: smaller nurseries reduce the volume of objects that must be
scavenged by young generation collection. The size of the space also affects the rate of
promotion from one generation to another. If a space is too small to give young objects
sufficient time to die, then the promotion rate will be higher. Conversely, if the nursery is
very large, the interval between collections will be greater and a smaller fraction of objects
will survive to reach the older generation.

Appel-style garbage collection
Appel [1989a] introduced an adaptive generational layout for Standard ML that gives as
much room as possible to the young generation for a given memory budget, rather than
using fixed-size spaces. This scheme is designed for environments where infant mortality
is high: typically only 2% of ML’s young generation survived a collection. The heap is
divided into three regions: the old generation, a copy reserve and the young generation
9.7. ADAPTING TO PROGRAM BEHAVIOUR                                                                128

            old                   copy reserve               young                      free

                                     equal                                 equal
       (a) Before a minor collection, the copy reserve must be at least as large as the young
       generation.

            old      old'              copy reserve              young                     free

                                          equal                               equal
       (b) At a minor collection, survivors are copied into the copy reserve, extending the
       old generation. The copy reserve and young generation are reduced but still of
       equal size.

                            old                       old'               copy reserve

                       equal                                               equal
       (c) After a minor collection and before a major collection. Only objects in the oldest
       region, old, will be evacuated into the copy reserve. After the evacuation, all live old
       objects can be moved to the beginning of the heap.

Figure 9.6: Appel’s simple generational collector. Grey areas are empty.

(see Figure 9.6a). Nursery collections promote all young survivors en masse to the end
of the old generation (Figure 9.6b). After the collection, any space not needed for old
generation objects is split equally to create the copy reserve and a new young generation.
If the space allocatable to the young generation falls below some threshold, the full heap
is collected.
    As in any scheme managed by copying, Appel must ensure that the copy reserve is
sufficient to accommodate the worst case, that all old and young objects are live. The most
conservative way is to ensure that old + young ≤ reserve. However, Appel can initiate full
heap collections less frequently, only requiring that old ≤ reserve ∧ young ≤ reserve for
safety, arguing as follows. Before a minor collection, the reserve is sufficient even if all
young objects survive. Immediately after a minor collection, all newly promoted objects
in old′ are live: they do not need to be moved. The reserve is sufficient to accommodate
all previously promoted objects in old (Figure 9.6c). Following the scavenge of old, all
surviving data (now at the top of the heap) can be block moved to the bottom of the heap.
We note that in this collect-twice approach any cycle of dead objects that lies partly in the
nursery and partly in the old generation will be preserved. However, it will be reclaimed
during the next full collection since it is then contained entirely in the old generation.
    The entire generational universe in Appel was contiguous, but Appel-style collectors
can also be implemented in block-structured heaps, which avoids the necessity of sliding
the live data to the start of the heap after a major collection. Shrinking nurseries can also
be used in conjunction with an old generation managed by a non-moving algorithm, such
as mark-sweep.
    The advantage of Appel-style collection is that by dynamically adapting the size of
the copy reserve it offers good memory utilisation and reduces the number of collections
needed compared with configurations that use en masse promotion and fix the size of the
young generation. However, some caution is necessary to avoid thrashing the collector.
9.7. ADAPTING TO PROGRAM BEHAVIOUR                                                         129

Benchmarks that have high allocation rates but promote little data from the young genera-
tion are common: indeed this was one of the motivations for Appel’s design. This can lead
to the situation where the space allotted to the nursery shrinks to become so small that it
leads to overly frequent minor collections but never enough data is promoted to trigger
a major collection. To combat this, the old generation should be collected whenever the
young generation’s size falls below a minimum.

Feedback-controlled promotion
Other schemes for controlling promotion rate are more directly related to pause time goals.
Demographic feedback-mediated tenuring [Ungar and Jackson, 1988, 1992] attempts to smooth
out long pauses incurred by bursts of promotion of objects that die soon after promotion.
The volume of objects promoted at one collection is used as a predictor for the length
of the next collection, and to throttle or accelerate promotion. The excess of survivors
above a desired maximum becomes an index into a table indicating the age threshold for
promotion that should be used at the next collection. Although this mechanism can control
promotion rates, it cannot demote objects from an older to a younger generation. Barrett
and Zorn [1995] vary a threatening boundary between two generations in both directions.
The cost is that they must track more pointers as they cannot predict where the inter-
generational boundary will lie.
    The HotSpot family of collectors introduced Ergonomics,2 an adaptive mechanism for
resizing generations based on user provided goals, in JDK 1.5.0. Ergonomics configures a
collector to preferentially meet one of two soft goals — maximum pause time and through-
put — rather than attempting to provide hard real-time guarantees. Once the preferred
goal is met, the collector will target the other. In order to achieve the pause time goal, the
collector measures the average pause times so far, weighted towards more recent pauses.
If this average plus its variance is greater that the maximum pause time goal specified, the
collector will adjust heap and space sizes in order to try to meet this goal. The collector
monitors the throughput goal by considering the time spent inside and outside collecting
garbage. If the ratio of collection time to mutator time is exceeded, the collector may in-
crease the size of the heap and the generations, the latter in proportion to the time taken to
collect each generation. Once it has met the pause time and throughput goals, the collector
will start to reduce sizes until one of the goals cannot be met (invariably the throughput
goal). By default, sizes are increased more aggressively than they are decreased.
    Vengerov [2009] offers an analytical model for the throughput of HotSpot. From this
model he derives a practical algorithm for tuning the collector by adjusting the relative
sizes of HotSpot’s two generations and the promotion threshold, the number of collections
that a young object must survive before it is promoted. He makes an important observa-
tion that it is insufficient to consider whether to adjust the promotion threshold simply on
the basis of whether it would reduce the number of objects promoted. Instead, it is essen-
tial also to consider the ratio of free space in the old generation after a major collection to
the volume promoted into it at each minor collection. His ThruMax algorithm provides
a co-evolutionary framework for alternately adjusting the size of the young generation
and the promotion threshold. In brief, ThruMax is invoked after the first major collection
and once the volume of data in HotSpot’s survivor spaces reaches a steady state (between
75% and 90% of the young generation’s survivor space for two consecutive minor collec-
tions). ThruMax first increases the nursery size S until it reaches the neighbourhood of
an optimum value (discovered by observing that S has been decreased and so it is proba-
bly oscillating around this value). Then, ThruMax adjusts the tenuring threshold until the
  2 https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/gctuning/ergonomics.html
9.8. INTER-GENERATIONAL POINTERS                                                                        130

model shows that a further change would decrease throughput. After this, a new episode
of adjustments is begun provided that there is no pressure to decrease S and sufficient
minor collections are expected before the next major collection.
    Overall, sophisticated collectors like HotSpot present the user with a large number of
tuning knobs, which are likely to be interdependent.

9.8     Inter-generational pointers
A generation’s roots must be discovered before it can be collected. As we saw in the ex-
ample in Figure 9.1, the roots for a generation consist not only of pointer values held in
registers, stacks and globals but also any references to objects in this generation from ob-
jects in other parts of the heap that are not being collected at the same time. These typically
include older generations and spaces outside the generational heap, such as large object
spaces and spaces that are never collected, including those for immortal objects and pos-
sibly code. As we noted above, inter-generational pointers are created in just three ways,
by initialising writes as an object is created, by other mutator updates to pointer slots and
when objects are moved to different generations. In general such pointers must be detected
as they are created and recorded so that they can be used as roots when a generation is col-
lected. We shall call any pointer that must be recorded an interesting pointer.
    An interesting case of objects outside the generational heap are objects in the boot image:
those objects present when the system starts. A generational system can handle them in
at least three ways: it can trace through the boot image objects, which has the benefit of
not retaining objects only reachable from boot image objects that have become unreach-
able; it can scan the boot image objects to find references from them into the generational
heap; or it can remember the interesting pointers that reside in boot image objects. Trac-
ing can be expensive, and might only be applied during full collections. Thus it would
be applied in conjunction with scanning or remembered sets. Scanning has the virtue of
not requiring a write barrier on updates to boot image objects, but the down side that the
collector must consider more fields to find the interesting pointers. If used in conjunction
with tracing, then after a trace the collector should zero the fields of unreachable boot im-
age objects, to prevent misinterpretation of pointers that may refer to old garbage now
reclaimed. Remembered sets have their usual virtues and costs, and also do not require
zeroing of unreachable boot image objects’ fields.

Remembered sets
The data structure used to record inter-generational pointers is called a remembered set (rem-
set).3 Remembered sets record the location of possible sources of pointers (for example, U
and the second slot of S in the example) from one space of the heap to another. The source
rather than the target of an interesting pointer is recorded for two reasons. It allows a
moving collector to update the source field with the new address of an object that has
been copied or promoted. A source field may be updated more than once between succes-
sive collections, so remembering the source ensures that the collector only processes the
object that is referenced by the field at the time of the collection, and not the targets of
any obsolete pointers. Thus, the remembered set for any generation holds those locations
at which a potentially interesting pointer to an object in this generation has been stored.
Remembered set implementations vary in the precision with which they record these lo-
cations. The choice of precision is a trade-off between overhead on the mutator, space for
   3 Our terminology differs from that of Jones [1996] who distinguished card table schemes from other remem-

bered set implementations.
9.8. INTER-GENERATIONAL POINTERS                                                           131

the remembered sets and the collector’s cost of processing them. Note that the term re-
membered ‘set’ is sometimes a misnomer because an implementation may allow duplicate
entries (and hence be a multiset).
    Clearly, it is important to detect and record as few pointers as possible. Pointer writes
by the collector as it moves objects are easily identified. Pointer stores by the mutator can
be detected by a software write barrier, emitted by the compiler at each pointer store. This
may not be possible if an uncooperative compiler is used. In this case, the locations where
writes have occurred can often be determined from the operating system’s virtual memory
manager.
    The prevalence of pointer stores will vary between different programming languages
and their implementations. From a static analysis of a suite of SPUR Lisp programs, Zorn
[1990] found the frequency of pointer stores to be 13% to 15%, although Appel found a
lower static frequency of 3% for Lisp [1987] and a dynamic, run-time frequency of 1% for
ML [1989a]. State-based languages can be expected to have a higher incidence of destruc-
tive pointer writes. Java programs vary widely in terms of the frequency of pointer stores:
for example, Dieckmann and Hölzle [1999] found that between 6% and 70% of heap ac-
cesses were stores (the latter was an outlier, the next highest was 46%). But even in pure
functional languages like Haskell, the lazy evaluation mechanism will destructively up-
date a very great number of thunks.

Pointer direction
Fortunately, not all stores need to be detected or recorded. Some languages (such as im-
plementations of ML) store procedure activation records in the heap. If these frames are
scanned as part of the root set at every collection, the pointer slots they contain can be dis-
covered by the techniques we discuss later in Chapter 11. If stack writes can be identified
as such by the compiler, then no barrier need be emitted on writes to these stack frames.
Furthermore, many stores will refer to objects in the same partition. Although such stores
will probably be detected, the pointers are not interesting from a generational point of
view and need not be recorded.
    If we impose a discipline on the order in which generations are collected, then the num-
ber of inter-generational pointers that need to be recorded can be reduced further. By guar-
anteeing that younger generations will be collected whenever an older one is, young-to-old
pointers need not be recorded (for example, the pointer in N in Figure 9.1). Many pointer
writes are initialising stores to newly created objects — Zorn [1990] estimated that 90%
to 95% of Lisp pointer stores were initialising (and that of the remaining non-initialising
stores two-thirds were to objects in the young generation). By definition, these pointers
must refer to older objects. Unfortunately, many languages separate the allocation of ob-
jects from the initialisation of their fields, making it hard to separate the non-initialising
stores that may create old-young pointers. Other languages provide more support for the
compiler to identify pointer stores that do not require a write barrier. For example, the ma-
jority of pointer writes in a pure, lazy functional language like Haskell will refer to older
objects; old-new pointers can only arise when a thunk (a function applied to its arguments)
is evaluated and overwritten with a pointer value. ML, a strict language with side effects,
requires the programmer to annotate mutable variables explicitly; writes to these objects
are the only source of old-to-young references.
    Object-oriented languages like Java present a more complex scene. Here the program-
ming paradigm centres on updating objects’ states, which naturally leads to old-young
pointers being more frequent. Nevertheless, many programmers write in a somewhat
functional style, eschewing side effects, and for many applications the overwhelming ma-
jority of pointer stores will be to initialise objects in the young generation. However, Black-
9.9. SPACE MANAGEMENT                                                                       132

burn et al. [2006b] demonstrate that there is considerable variation in behaviour not only
between applications but also within individual ones. Their report strikingly contrasts
pointer stores — in terms of their direction and distance (between the time the source and
target objects were created) — and pointers discovered in the graph. One cause of these
differences is that there may be many writes to the same location: this has implications for
how remembered sets are implemented.
    Different pointer filtering will be necessary in heaps with multiple independently col-
lected spaces. For example, a collector may apply heuristics to decide which space to
scavenge with the intention of prioritising those spaces containing the smallest volume of
live objects. In this case, the write barrier must remember pointers in both directions, al-
though if the policy decision is made always to collect the young generation at the same
time, we can ignore writes to the nursery (which we expect to be prevalent). Because this
design is likely to increase the number of pointers to be remembered, it is best used with
an implementation where the size of the remembered set does not depend on the number
of pointers remembered. We discuss implementation of write barriers and remembered
sets in Chapter 11.

9.9    Space management
Young generations are usually managed by evacuation, either copying surviving objects
to a fresh semispace in the same generation or to a space in an older generation. Young
generation collections are expected to be frequent and brief, on the assumption of few
survivors and hence little to trace. Collections of older generations, on the other hand,
are expected to be infrequent, but when they do occur, they are expensive as all younger
generations must also be collected unless we are willing to pay the cost of a bidirectional
write barrier. Commonly, a collection of the oldest generation will also collect all other
spaces in the heap except any immortal spaces or the boot image, although references held
in these spaces must be used as roots and may be updated. A full heap collection will not
use remembered sets (except for locations in the immortal space or boot image, and even
these are unnecessary if those spaces are scanned).
     A wider range of strategies can be used to manage the oldest generation. One possibil-
ity is semispace copying, but this may not be the best choice. It requires a copy reserve of
half the generational heap, and so limits the room available for its own fromspace and to
younger generations, thus increasing the frequency of collections at all levels. It also leads
to long-lived data being moved repeatedly. Mark-sweep collection offers better utilisation
of memory, especially in small heaps [Blackburn et al., 2004a]. The argument against free-
list allocation has been that it is slower than sequential allocation and its locality is not so
predictable. But this is more a problem for object creation, where allocation rates are high,
allocation order provides good spatial locality for young objects [Blackburn et al., 2004a].
The drawback of mark-sweep collection is that it is non-moving and may eventually de-
grade as the old generation fragments. The solution is to run an additional compacting
pass over the old generation, not necessarily every time but certainly when fragmentation
is damaging performance. Compaction can also treat very long-lived data specially. As we
noted in Chapter 3, these will tend to end up compacted into a ‘dense prefix’ at the bottom
of the old generation. The HotSpot mark-compact collector, for example, avoids moving
this sediment at the cost of some (user-specified) degree of fragmentation.
     Generational collectors almost always distinguish generations by physical segregation.
This requires younger generations to be managed by copying collection. A copying collec-
tor such as Appel’s conservatively requires copy reserve space equal to the size of genera-
tion being collected as all objects may survive in the worst case. However, in practice most
9.10. OLDER-FIRST GARBAGE COLLECTION                                                      133

                old          copied

                                                            young
                                 (a) Objects copied or marked

                old          copied             reserve

                                                                     young
                                (b) Marked objects compacted

Figure 9.7: Switching between copying and marking the young generation.
       (a) The copy reserve is full. Black objects from the young generation have
       been copied into the old generation. Grey objects have been marked but not
       copied. All other new objects are dead. (b) The compaction pass has slid the
       grey objects into the old generation.

objects do not survive a young generation collection. However, some collectors do not seg-
regate generations. We mentioned above that the Android Runtime (ART) and Webkit’s
Riptide [Pizlo, 2017] collectors manage all objects in-place, with mark-sweep collection.
    Better space utilisation can be obtained with a smaller copy reserve and switching from
copying to compacting collection whenever the reserve is too small [McGachey and Hosk-
ing, 2006]. Here, the collector must be able to switch between copying and marking on
the fly because it will discover that the copy reserve is too small only during a collection.
Figure 9.7a shows the state of the heap once all survivors have been identified: copied ob-
jects are shown in black and the remaining live young objects are marked grey. The next
step is to compact the marked objects to one end of the nursery (Figure 9.7b); as usual, this
takes several passes. Unfortunately, compaction will destroy the forwarding addresses left
in the black objects in the young generation. McGachey and Hosking solve this problem
by requiring the first pass over the grey young generation objects to fix up references to
copied objects. Next, they move the marked objects with Jonkers’s sliding compactor (see
Section 3.3 in Chapter 3) because this threaded algorithm does not require additional space
in object headers. A better solution might be to adapt Compressor for this purpose (dis-
cussed in Section 3.4), since it neither requires extra space in object headers nor overwrites
any part of live objects. With a copy reserve of 10% of the heap, they gained improvements
in performance of 4% on average — but sometimes up to 20% — over MMTk collectors that
manage the old generation by either copying or mark-sweep collection.

9.10     Older-first garbage collection
Generational garbage collection has proved to be a highly effective way of managing short-
lived objects for a wide range of applications. However, as we saw in Section 9.7, longer-
lived objects may be more problematic. Generational collectors operate by collecting a
youngest prefix of the set of objects in the heap and ignoring other objects. This prefix may
be one or more generations depending on whether a collection is a nursery collection, an
intermediate collection (in a configuration that uses more than two generations) or a full
heap collection. Adaptive techniques that control the promotion of objects can be thought
of as ways of varying the age boundary of the young (to be collected) prefix in order to
give young objects more time to die. However, generational garbage collection is but one
9.10. OLDER-FIRST GARBAGE COLLECTION                                                       134

       k              j                  1                                         steps

                          allocate

            window

       oldest                                                                   youngest

Figure 9.8: Renewal-Older-First garbage collection. At each collection, the
       objects least recently collected are scavenged and survivors are placed after
       the youngest objects.

design that avoids collecting the whole heap (we look at schemes outside an age-based
context in the next chapter). Possibilities for age-based collection include the following.
Youngest-only (generational) collection: Here, the collector condemns only the youngest
    objects in the heap.
Oldest-only collection: Similarly, we could imagine a collector that only considered the
     oldest objects in the heap, that is, those that have had the longest opportunity to
     die. However, it is unlikely that such a strategy would be effective as it would spend
     much of its time repeatedly processing immortal or very long-lived objects. We noted
     earlier that some collectors deliberately avoid processing this ancient sediment for
     precisely this reason.
Older-first collection: The collector aims to focus effort on middle-aged objects. It gives the
     youngest objects sufficient time to die but reduces the time spent considering very
     long-lived objects (although these are examined from time to time).
Older-first collection presents two challenges: how to identify those objects considered to
be ‘older’ and the increased complexity of managing pointers into the condemned set since
interesting pointers may point in either direction (oldest to older, or youngest to older). In
the rest of this section, we consider two different solutions to these problems.

Renewal-Older-First garbage collection. One approach is to consider the ‘age’ of an ob-
ject to be the time since it was created or last collected, whichever is most recent [Clinger
and Hansen, 1997; Hansen, 2000; Hansen and Clinger, 2002]. Renewal-Older-First always
collects the ‘oldest’ prefix of the heap. To simplify remembered set management, the heap
is divided into k equally sized steps. Allocation is always into the lowest-numbered empty
step. When the heap is full, the oldest k − j steps (the grey window in Figure 9.8) are con-
demned, and any survivors are evacuated to a copy reserve at the youngest end of the heap
(the black region in the figure). Thus, survivors are ‘re-newed’ and the youngest steps j to 1
are now the oldest. In the figure, the heap advances rightwards through virtual address
space. This simplifies the write barrier: only pointers from right to left in the figure, and
9.10. OLDER-FIRST GARBAGE COLLECTION                                                          135

                                                                        allocate

                  window

       oldest                                                                      youngest

Figure 9.9: Deferred-Older-First garbage collection. A middle-aged window
       of the heap is selected for collection. Survivors are placed after the survivors
       of the previous collection. The goal is that the collector will discover a sweet
       spot, where the survival rate is very low and the window advances very
       slowly.

whose source is an address larger than j, need to be remembered by the mutator. Although
this arrangement might be feasible for some programs in a 64-bit address space, it would
soon exhaust a 32-bit address space. In this case, Renewal-Older-First must renumber all
the steps in preparation for the next cycle, and its write barrier must filter pointers by com-
paring the step numbers of the source and targets; this requires table lookups rather than
simple address comparisons. A second potential disadvantage of Renewal-Older-First is
that it does not preserve the order of objects in the heap by their true ages but irreversibly
mixes them. Although Hansen filters out many pointers in the Larceny implementation of
Scheme by adding a standard generational nursery (and using Renewal-Older-First only
to manage the old generation), his remembered sets are large.

Deferred-Older-First garbage collection. The alternative does preserve the true age or-
der of objects in the heap [Stefanović, 1999; Stefanović et al., 1999]. Deferred-Older-First
slides a fixed-size collection window (the grey region in Figure 9.9) from the oldest to the
youngest end of the heap. When the heap is full, the window is collected, ignoring any
older or younger objects (the white regions). Any survivors (the black region) are moved
to immediately after the oldest region of the heap, and any space freed is added to the
youngest (rightmost) end of the heap. The next collection window is immediately to the
right (younger end) of the survivors. The intuition behind Deferred-Older-First is that it
will seek out a sweet spot in the heap where the collection window finds few survivors. At
this point, the collector’s mark/cons ratio will be low and the window will only move very
slowly (as in the lower rows of the figure). However, at some point the window will reach
the youngest end of the heap, where the collector must reset it to the oldest end of the heap.
Although objects are stored in true-age order, Deferred-Older-First requires a more com-
plicated write barrier. The mutator’s write barrier must remember all pointers from the
oldest region into either the collection window or the youngest region and all young-old
9.11. BELTWAY                                                                            136

pointers (except those whose source is in the condemned window). Similarly, the collec-
tor’s copy write barrier must remember all pointers from survivors to other regions and
all young survivor-old survivor pointers. Once again, Deferred-Older-First collectors typi-
cally divide the heap into blocks; they associate a ‘time of death’ with each block (ensuring
that blocks older than the collection window have a higher time of death than younger
ones). Barriers can be implemented through block time-of-death comparisons and care is
needed to handle time-of-death overflow [Stefanović et al., 2002].
    Although Deferred-Older-First was found to improve over other generational schemes
on maximum pause time, like Renewal-Older-First it too needed to track more pointers.
It appears that in smaller address spaces older-first algorithms have difficulty competing
with the best of other schemes because of the cost of the more complex write barrier for
remembering in older-first heap layouts. However, in larger address spaces, such as for 64
bits, its write barrier is much simplified and it may be more competitive.

9.11     Beltway
In this chapter we have looked at a wide range of designs for age-based collection. Five
key insights have shaped most of these.
   • “Most objects die young”: the weak generational hypothesis [Ungar, 1984].
   • As a corollary, generational collectors avoid repeatedly collecting old objects.
   • Response times have been improved by exploiting incrementality. Generational col-
     lectors commonly use small nurseries; other techniques such as the Mature Object
     Space (often called the ‘Train’) collector [Hudson and Moss, 1992] also bound the
     size of spaces collected.
   • Small nurseries managed by sequential allocators improve data locality [Blackburn
     et al., 2004a].
   • Objects need sufficient time to die.
The Beltway garbage collection framework [Blackburn et al., 2002] combines all these in-
sights. It can be configured to behave as any other region-based copying collector. The
Beltway unit of collection is called an increment. Increments can be grouped into queues,
called belts. In Figure 9.10 each row represents a belt with increments shown as ‘trays’ on
each belt. Increments on a belt are collected independently first-in, first-out, as also are
belts, although typically the increment selected for collection is the oldest non-empty in-
crement on the youngest belt. A promotion policy dictates the destination of objects that
survive a collection: they may be copied to another increment on the same belt or they
may be promoted to an increment on a higher belt. Note that Beltway is not just another
generational collector and belts are not generations. A generational collector would collect
all increments on a belt; Beltway collects each increment independently.
     Figure 9.10 shows examples of existing and new collectors. A simple semispace col-
lector comprises a single belt with two increments (Figure 9.10a): each increment is half
of the heap. All survivors from the first increment (fromspace) on the belt are copied to
the second (tospace) increment. Generational collectors use a belt per generation. Fixed-
size nursery collectors limit the size of belt 0 increment (Figure 9.10b) whereas Appel-style
collectors allow both increments to grow to consume all usable memory (Figure 9.10c).
Aging semispaces can be modelled by increasing the number of increments on belt 0
(Figure 9.10d). However, unlike the aging semispace discussed in Section 9.6, this de-
sign trades increased space for reduced collection time: unreachable objects in the second
9.11. BELTWAY                                                                                              137

                                                                                 survivors
         survivors                  allocate            1
                                                                                                allocate

                                                        0
         (a) Semispaces                                     (b) Fixed-nursery generational

                        survivors                                   survivors
    1                               allocate            1                       survivors
                                                                                                allocate

    0                                                   0

        (c) Appel-style generational                        (d) Aging semispaces

                                         allocate
                     survivors                                              survivors           allocate

        (e) Renewal-Older-First                             (f) Deferred-Older-First

                                                        2
            survivors                                           survivors
    1                                                   1

                                     allocate                                                allocate
    0                                                   0
        (g) Beltway.X.X                                     (h) Beltway.X.X.100

Figure 9.10: Beltway can be configured as any copying collector. Each figure
        shows the increment used for allocation, the increment to be collected and
        the increment to which survivors will be copied for each configuration.
                      Blackburn et al. [2002], doi: 10.1145/512529.512548
             © 2002 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

increment are not reclaimed in this collection cycle. Renewal-Older-First and Deferred-
Older-First can also be modelled. Figure 9.10e shows clearly how objects of different ages
are mixed by Renewal-Older-First collectors. Deferred-Older-First collectors use two belts,
whose roles are flipped when the collection window reaches the youngest end of the first
belt. Blackburn et al. also used the Beltway framework to introduce new copying col-
lection algorithms. Beltway.X.X (Figure 9.10g) adds incrementality to an Appel-style col-
lector: when belt 1 is full, it collects only the first increment. In this configuration X is
the maximum size of the increment as a fraction of usable memory: thus, Beltway.100.100
corresponds to a standard Appel-style generational collector. If X < 100, Beltway.X.X
is not guaranteed to be complete since garbage cycles may span belt 1 increments. Belt-
way.X.X.100 provides completeness by adding a third belt that contains only one incre-
ment, which is allowed to grow sufficiently large to hold the whole heap.
    Assuming that every configuration collects only oldest increments on youngest belts
implies that Beltway’s write barrier needs to remember references from older to younger
belts and younger to older increments on the same belt. If we number belts upwards
from 0 (youngest) and increments in each belt in the order in which they are created, an
9.12. ANALYTIC SUPPORT FOR GENERATIONAL COLLECTION                                             138

increment can be identified by the pair ⟨b, i ⟩ where b is its belt number and i its creation
order in belt b. In that numbering a pointer from ⟨bi , i ⟩ to ⟨b j , j⟩ is interesting in the case
when b j < bi ∨ (b j = bi ∧ i < j. However, the collector can associate a unique small
number ni with each increment i such that a pointer from i to j is interesting exactly when
n j < ni . It may need to renumber occasionally, such as when fresh increments are added
to belts. A typical implementation breaks up the address space using frames, assigning
each increment a disjoint set of frames. In a large address space it may be possible to lay
increments out such that direct address comparisons work rather than having to map to
increment numbers first, similar to such layouts for older-first algorithms.
    The performance of Beltway collectors is sensitive to their configuration. The layout of
belts in the heap and the implementation of write barriers is crucially important, not only
to determine whether pointers need to be remembered but also to decide whether objects
need to be copied and if so, where to.

9.12     Analytic support for generational collection
Generational collectors handle short-lived objects well but most do not manage longer-
lived ones optimally. There are two problems. First, collection of garbage in older gener-
ations is almost never prompt. The mostly reference counting LXR collector [Zhao et al.,
2022a,b] is the only collector of which we are aware that promptly reclaims (non-cyclic)
garbage in the old generation. We discuss LXR in Chapter 18. No tracing collectors as yet
schedule old generation collection as soon as possible after the death of significant vol-
umes of old objects. Second, long-lived objects must be copied from the young generation
to the old generation. Most collectors that are concerned about objects dying soon after
they reach an older generation require objects to have been copied several times before
they are promoted. This copying is wasted work: it would be better if long-lived objects
were directly allocated or pretenured into the generation that they will eventually reach.
    Several researchers have tackled this problem by analysing the lifetime distributions
of objects allocated by particular points in a program. Sometimes this can be done by the
virtual machine implementer who may know that certain virtual machine data structures
are permanent, or that certain libraries or code objects cannot or at least are unlikely to be
unloaded. Pretenuring of these objects can be baked into the virtual machine.
    Researchers have also used profiling to identify longevity. Cheng et al. [1998] recorded
which allocation sites consistently created objects that were promoted. Blackburn et al.
[2001; 2007] used lifetime metrics that compared the longevity of objects allocated at a par-
ticular program point with some fraction of the program’s largest heap footprint in order
to discriminate between short-lived, long-lived and immortal objects. Both techniques ne-
cessitated the time-consuming gathering of off-line traces. This information was then used
to optimise the code so that new objects were allocated in the most appropriate generation
or the immortal space. Some pretenuring decisions may be specific to a single program, al-
though Blackburn et al. computed generic advice for allocation sites used by all programs
(that is, those in the boot image or library code). The effectiveness of such generic advice
makes the necessary profiling more reasonable.
    In contrast, the approach used by Marion et al. [2007] is generic and provides true pre-
diction rather than self-prediction: they obtain pretenuring advice by syntactic compari-
son of programs’ micro-patterns [Gil and Maman, 2005] against a pre-existing knowledge
bank (derived by using machine learning techniques on a large set of program traces to
predict lifetimes from micro-patterns). Harris [2000] and Jump et al. [2004] obtain modest
9.13. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                  139

performance improvements by pretenuring through online sampling. All these approaches
obtained most benefit from the identification of those program points which allocated ob-
jects that tended to be immortal rather than those that were simply long-lived. Gains for
medium-lived objects were modest.
    Guyer and McKinley [2004] sought to co-locate connected objects, on the basis that they
are likely to share similar lifetimes. They combined a compiler analysis which identifies the
object to which a new object might be connected with a specialised allocator which places
the new object in the same space as the connectee. The analysis is neither required to be
sound nor did it rely on a site tending to allocate objects with similar lifetimes. As well as
reducing copying and obtaining significant reductions in collection time, co-location also
reduced pressure on the write barrier.
    Generational collectors for lazy functional languages require write barriers only on up-
dates to suspended computations (or thunks) as all other stores must refer to younger
objects. Thunks are updated at most once; all other objects are immutable. In a step-based
generational collector, Marlow et al. [2008] take advantage of this observation to promote
an object eagerly to the same generation or step as an object referring to it: ideally this
would be to the oldest from which the target is reachable. Even for mutable objects, no
write to a newly created object can be interesting. Zee and Rinard [2002] used a static anal-
ysis for Java to eliminate write barriers on these objects, obtaining small improvements in
overall execution time for some programs.

9.13     Issues to consider
Generational garbage collection has proved to be a highly effective organisation, offering
significant performance improvements for a wide range of applications. By limiting the
size of the youngest generation, and concentrating collection effort on that generation,
expected pause times can be reduced to a point where they are usually unnoticeable in
many environments. This tactic can also increase overall throughput in two ways. First,
it reduces the frequency with which long-lived data is processed, and thereby not only
reduces processing effort but also gives older objects more time to die (so that they need not
be traced at all). Second, generational collectors usually allocate young objects sequentially
in a nursery area. Sequential allocation obtains cache locality benefits because the memory
consumption pattern is predictable and, furthermore, with generational collectors most
writes are made to the youngest objects.
    Generational collection is not a universal panacea, however. Its effectiveness depends
strongly on the lifetime demographics of the application program. The cost of more fre-
quent collections of the nursery and of write barriers must be amortised by obtaining a
much better than average pay-back from collecting young generations. If object mortality
statistics are not heavily skewed in favour of the young generation — in other words, if
the overwhelming majority of objects do not die young — then generational collection will
not be an appropriate solution.
    Furthermore, generational collection only improves expected pause times; eventually
the collector must collect the full heap, and generational collection on its own cannot solve
the problem of the worst-case pause time, which may be excessive for large heaps. Conse-
quently, generational collection cannot provide the guarantees required for hard real-time
collection where deadlines must always be met.
    It is simpler to implement generational collection if the collector can move objects in
order to segregate young and old objects. Physical segregation not only offers the locality
9.13. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                    140

benefits noted above, but can also offer more efficient space tests, needed by the write
barrier or while tracing a young generation. Nevertheless, objects can also be segregated
virtually, maybe by the value of a bit in their header or in a bitmap.
    Generational collectors raise many tuning questions, both for the implementer and for
the end user. Not only are there a wide variety of design choices but also any given gen-
erational collector needs careful configuration to match a given application. Generational
collectors offer many more tuning parameters than the simple choice of heap size.
    The first implementation decision is likely to be whether to offer more than two gen-
erations. The choice depends largely upon the anticipated lifetime distributions of the
applications that the collector is expected to support. If a significant fraction of objects are
expected to survive the young generation but to die shortly after promotion to an older
generation, then the addition of intermediate generations may be worthwhile. However,
in our experience, most systems offer only two generations plus an immortal generation, at
least as the default configuration. The problem that the use of multiple generations seeks
to solve is that of premature promotion, and there are other ways to deal with this.
    In the first place, promotion rate depends on the size of the young generation: larger
nurseries allow objects more time to die. Some generational collectors may allow the user
to set a fixed size for the youngest generation. Others allow the young generation to ex-
pand on demand until it fills all of the heap except that required by other spaces (including
the old generation and any necessary reserve for copying). More sophisticated collectors
may vary the young generation size in order to meet particular throughput of pause time
goals, making resizing decisions based on profiling the collector’s behaviour.
    Second, promotion can be limited by controlling the age at which objects are tenured.
One approach is en masse promotion in which all survivors of the generation being col-
lected are evacuated to an older generation. This is the simplest promotion to implement,
since the remembered set for the young generation can be discarded after collection. Al-
ternatively, a collector may require an object to survive more than one collection before
being promoted. In this case, we need a mechanism to record object ages. Either some bits
in the header of each object in the younger generations must be used to hold its age, or
the generation must be divided into subspaces each of which holds objects of a particular
age, or both. Common configurations include step-based schemes and eden plus survivor
semispaces. In all cases, the subspaces of a generation are collected together.
    Finally, it is often possible to avoid having to promote certain objects. Many collectors
reserve an immortal space for objects that will survive until the end of the program. Often
these objects can be recognised either at the time the collector is built or by the compiler.
Such objects might include the collector’s own data structures or objects representing the
code being executed (assuming that it will not be necessary to unload code).
    Promotion rates may also affect the cost of the write barrier and size of remembered
sets. Higher rates may lead to more inter-generational pointers that must be recorded.
Whether or not this affects the performance of the write barrier depends on its imple-
mentation, a subject considered in more detail in Section 11.8. Write barriers may record
pointer writes unconditionally or they may filter out writes of no interest to the collector.
The space requirements for card tables are independent of the number of writes recorded,
in contrast to remembered sets implemented as sequential store buffers or hash tables.
    The frequency with which write barriers are invoked also depends on whether genera-
tions can be collected independently. Independent collection requires all inter-generational
pointers to be recorded. However, if we are prepared to give up this flexibility in favour
of collecting all younger generations whenever an older one is collected, then the write
barrier only needs to record old-young pointers, which we can expect to be far fewer. The
number of pointers recorded also depends on whether we record the field or the object into
which a pointer is written. For card tables, the choice is likely to be irrelevant. However,
9.14. ABSTRACT GENERATIONAL GARBAGE COLLECTION                                                141

Algorithm 9.1: Abstract generational garbage collection: collector routines

 1   atomic collectNursery( I ):
 2      rootsNursery( I )
 3      scanNursery( I )
 4      sweepNursery()
 5

 6   scanNursery(W ):
 7      while not isEmpty(W )
 8         src ← remove(W )
 9         ρ(src) ← ρ(src) + 1                                                 /* shade src */
10         if ρ(src) = 1                                          /* src was white, now grey */
11            for each fld in Pointers(src)
12                ref ← *fld
13                if ref in Nursery
14                   W ← W + [ref]
15

16   sweepNursery():
17      while not isEmpty(Nursery)
18         node ← remove(Nursery)                                       /* en masse promotion */
19         if ρ(node) = 0                                                      /* node is white */
20            free(node)
21

22   rootsNursery( I ):
23      for each fld ∈ Roots
24         ref ← *fld
25         if ref ̸= null && ref ∈ Nursery
26            I ← I + [ref]

by noting in the object whether it has already been recorded as a possible source of an
inter-generational pointer, we can reduce the size of the remembered set if we use object
remembering rather than field remembering.
    The different mechanisms used by the mutator to record the possible sources of inter-
generational pointers affect the cost of collection. Although less precise recording mech-
anisms may reduce the cost of the write barrier, they are likely to increase the amount
of work done by the collector. Field-recording with sequential store buffers may be the
most precise mechanism, although the buffer may contain duplicate entries. Both ob-
ject-recording and card tables require the collector to scan the object or card to find any
inter-generational pointers.
    In conclusion, generations are but one way of partitioning the heap to improve garbage
collection. In the next chapter, we look at other partitioning methods.

9.14     Abstract generational garbage collection
    Finally, let us see how the abstract collection framework we introduced in Section 6.6
can be applied to generational collection. Recall that Bacon et al. [2004] cast abstract tracing
as a form of reference counting, incrementing the count of each object as it is marked. An
abstract representation of a conventional, two-generation, en masse promotion, nursery
collection algorithm is shown in Algorithm 9.1.
9.14. ABSTRACT GENERATIONAL GARBAGE COLLECTION                                              142

Algorithm 9.1 (continued): Abstract generational garbage collection: mutator routines

27     New():
28        ref ← allocate()
29        if ref = null
30            collectNursery( I )
31            ref ← allocate()
32            if ref = null
33               collect()               /* tracing, counting, or other full−heap GC */
34               ref ← allocate()
35               if ref = null
36                  error "Out of memory"
37        ρ(ref) ← 0                                                   /* node is black */
38        Nursery ← Nursery ∪ {ref}                             /* allocate in nursery */
39        return ref
40

41     incNursery(node):
42        if node in Nursery
43           I ← I + [node]
44

45     decNursery(node):
46        if node in Nursery
47           I ← I − [node]
48

49     Write(src, i, ref):
50        if src ̸= Roots && src ̸∈ Nursery
51           incNursery(ref)
52           decNursery(src[i])
53        src[i] ← ref

    For analogy to the previous abstract collection algorithms, this algorithm maintains a
multiset I of ‘deferred’ reference count increments to nursery objects. Recall that a remem-
bered set is a set of fields that together include all references from the older generation(s)
to the nursery. The multiset I contains exactly the nursery references from those locations,
which is why decNursery removes elements from the multiset: a (possibly) remembered
slot is being overwritten. The result is that if a nursery object n appears in I, then n will be
retained by the generational collector. The number of times n appears in I is n’s reference
count, not counting references from the nursery or roots. A tracing algorithm summarises
in a single mark bit the truth of n ∈ I.
    When collectNursery is invoked, multiset I is the set of non-zero reference counts,
restricted to the nursery, only counting references from old objects. It is the complement
of deferred reference counting’s zero count table. After adding references from roots to the
nursery (rootsNursery), the nursery is traced from I (scanNursery) and is then swept,
removing survivors from Nursery, which implicitly adds them to the older generation,
and freeing unreachable nursery objects, that is, those whose abstract reference count is
zero. Note that the statement in line 18 performs en masse promotion of all the live nursery
objects: it would be straightforward to modify this to model other promotion policies.
